United Nations

S/PV.5942

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5942nd meeting
Wednesday, 23 July 2008, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Du Xiacong
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Trambajolo
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2008/466)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-43530 (E)

*0843530*

S/PV.5942

I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
table.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Somalia (S/2008/466)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jengeli
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Ahmed Jama Jengeli, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa requesting that the Security Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Ramtame
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2008/466.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. I
now give him the floor.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: This is my third
presentation to the Security Council since taking office
more than nine months ago. During my first
presentation, on 17 December 2007 (see S/PV.5805), I
proposed three options to the Council to address the
Somali crisis. The first option was to continue business
as usual, with massive assistance, including
humanitarian aid, as we have done for the past 18
years. During the past 10 years, the official amount of
assistance given to Somalia has been in the vicinity of
$6 billion to $8 billion. That approach has helped to
save millions of lives and should be commended and
pursued. However, its side effects cannot be ignored,
and it cannot be expected to bring lasting peace. Today,
more than 3 million Somalis live in exile and more
than 800,000 are displaced, and the violence continues.
The second option was to withdraw from a
country where we have yet to make a significant
difference. I know that it is difficult. Therefore, I
advanced a third approach to try something different:
simultaneous political and security action.
The Transitional Federal Government, the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) and
civil society organizations agreed, at the invitation of
the United Nations, to attend the Djibouti talks, which
were designed to bring Somalis together to end almost
two decades of violence. On 9 June 2008, the
internationally
recognized
Transitional
Federal
Government and the ARS, which was considered
extremist while in power in Mogadishu in 2006, signed
the Djibouti agreement. Members of both groups are
now here in this Chamber as representatives of a future
stable Somalia. The Djibouti agreement was witnessed
by a number of observer States and international

08-43530

S/PV.5942

organizations, including France, the United Kingdom,
the United States, the African Union, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the European Union, as well as by the
host countries and representatives of Governments
accredited to Somalia.
The working visit of the Security Council to
Djibouti at the opening of the discussions was one of
the most important contributions to the successful
conclusion of the Djibouti agreement. The Council
delegation, led by the Permanent Representatives of
the United Kingdom and South Africa, made a decisive
impact on the negotiations and on participants and
observers during the two-day-long exchange with
Somali representatives. I am grateful to the Security
Council, and so are the Somalis. Everyone called on
them to come up with a peace agreement, and the
Somalis successfully delivered on that. They deserve
the full support of the international community.
In all peace processes, some individuals or
groups always begin by rejecting agreements. Effective
implementation of the agreement should be an
incentive to bring more Somalis on board and to give
them a chance to contribute to the rebirth of their
country. In that context, I would like to propose that
the Council make a strong public expression of its
support for the Djibouti agreement and call on Member
States to give it a chance to be implemented rapidly.
For their part, the Somalis have started working
together, and today the ball is in the court of the
international community. We need to act quickly.
The agreement will not bring peace overnight —
no agreement has ever done so — especially if spoilers
and freelance mediators, as I stated to the Council in
my presentation last December, continue meddling. For
a long time, violence has been pervasive in Somalia,
and it will continue for a while. However, the
agreement provides an opportunity to marginalize and
eventually stop such violence. At the same time, a
review of those on the Security Council sanctions list
should help to recognize the role of those individuals
who have decided to change their behaviour and to
support peace.
Our priority should be to stay the course and
follow through on the implementation of the Djibouti
agreement. Such a development should provide security
for humanitarian programmes — in particular, naval
escorts for the World Food Programme, which brings

08-43530

80 per cent of its food aid to Somalia by sea.
Unfortunately, those vital escorts — initiated by France
and then conducted by Denmark and the Netherlands —
have recently ceased. I sympathize with the Somali
nationals who constitute more than 95 per cent of aid
workers in south and central Somalia. They risk their
lives daily and have, all too often, been the innocent
victims of targeted killings. With international
determination, as shown in Kosovo and elsewhere, the
individuals carrying out these terrible deeds should not
be given a chance to prevail.
The international community must unite and
show solidarity with the Somali people. It would be a
terrible mistake to allow certain individuals to gamble
with the future of Somalia and the entire Horn of
Africa. Violence can easily spread across international
borders. The continued neglect of Somalia poses a
threat to international peace.
Today, our choices for bringing peace to Somalia
are limited, but the time has come to make a final
decision. The African Union Mission in Somalia has
been doing an excellent job under extremely difficult
conditions. The Council could consider re-hatting that
force if that could provide the needed capabilities.
Another option would be an international stabilization
force, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s letter of
20 September 2007 to the President of the Security
Council (S/2007/762), who at that time was the
representative of France. A third credible possibility for
the Security Council would be the establishment of a
United Nations peacekeeping force. Given that the
Somalis have suffered for so long, and given the current
favourable political context following the Djibouti
agreement, it seems to me that it is time for the Security
Council to take bold, decisive and fast action.
The President: I thank Mr. Ould Abdallah for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union.
Mr. Lamamra: I would like first to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the high office of President of the Security Council,
and I equally congratulate and thank your predecessor
for a job well done.
It is a great honour and privilege for me to
address the Council on the subject of Somalia, and I

3

S/PV.5942

wish to commend you, Sir, on your initiative to
organize this meeting, which we believe will boost the
renewed momentum we are witnessing in the
mobilization of world attention. Allow me also to
restate our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his commitment and support and to commend his
Special Representative, our colleague and friend
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for his relentless efforts on
the ground.
The presence in the Council today of an
integrated Somali delegation led by the Foreign
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government, and
including some leaders of the Alliance for the
Re-liberation of Somalia, is a very positive and strong
indicator of their willingness to work towards the
restoration of lasting peace and reconciliation in their
country. It is also a clear message that should reassure
the Security Council and the international community
that Somalia is ready to receive and to lend its full
cooperation to a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
We urge the Council to fully take into account the
implications of this very important act of unity aimed
at achieving peace and security in Somalia and the
region as a whole.
We note with satisfaction the growing
mobilization with regard to the situation in Somalia as
recognition of the window of opportunity created
following the progress made by the Somalis
themselves, in particular the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government and other stakeholders, towards
the stabilization of the situation in their country and in
furtherance of dialogue and reconciliation among all
Somalis.
Those efforts culminated, first, in the convening
of the National Reconciliation Congress in July and
August
2007,
which
made
a
number
of
recommendations aimed at promoting an all-inclusive
political process. That was further reinforced by the
efforts of Special Representative Ould Abdallah and
supported by the African Union through the convening
of the intra-Somalia talks, which resulted in the
Djibouti agreement of 9 June 2008 between the
Transitional Federal Government and the Alliance for
the Re-liberation of Somalia.
As the Council is aware, during its meeting held
at the level of heads of State and Government on the
margins of the most recent summit of the African
Union, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, the Peace and

4

Security Council welcomed the new prospects for
lasting peace and reconciliation in Somalia and called
for support and cooperation for the implementation of
the Djibouti agreement. We are pleased to note that
other leaders and elements of the opposition in Somalia
are recognizing and joining the agreement as a viable
means towards finding a lasting solution to their
differences. The agreement indeed provides for the
establishment of two key committees — a joint
security committee and a high-level committee — to
both prepare for the consolidation of the ongoing
political process and considerably to improve the
security situation in the country. The implementation of
that provision is currently under way, and the African
Union is actively collaborating with the United Nations
Special Representative in implementing it and other
important elements of the agreement.
I would like to underscore the fact that the
resolve of the Somali parties to commit themselves to
key proposals, including the restoration of mutual trust
and confidence, with the objective of ending the
conflict, provides the appropriate opportunity for the
international community, in particular the United
Nations and the African Union, to further assist in the
peace process. The African Union, which is currently
on the ground through the African Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and other good offices of the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission,
is prepared to use all necessary means within its
capacity to assist the parties, in collaboration with the
United Nations and other members of the international
community, towards an effective cessation of hostilities
on the ground.
Despite all the sacrifices of its leaders and
elements, AMISOM is unable to fulfil its mandate
because
its
strength
is
obviously
grossly
incommensurate with the scope of the real challenges
on the ground. The Mission faces a severe lack of
funding and logistical support. According to United
Nations one-year standard estimates, its budget
amounts to more than $800,000 for its logistics and
financial and technical components. It is therefore
crucial to beef up the Mission in order for it to reach its
authorized strength of 8,000 troops, from the current
level of 2,600, which constitutes only about 30 per cent
of its total authorized strength.
In that regard, the African Union is embarking on
a new troop-generation exercise amongst its members,
and I wish to take this opportunity to express our deep

08-43530

S/PV.5942

appreciation to the Governments of Burundi and
Uganda for their continued commitment to the
realization of lasting peace and reconciliation among
all Somalis. I would also like to reiterate the request of
the Chairperson of the Commission of the African
Union for assistance for the Mission. While
acknowledging the response of the Secretary-General
to that request, I should like to reiterate our call for
greater support for AMISOM from all other partners.
I wish at this juncture to draw the attention of the
Council to developments on the ground, which offer a
window of opportunity that is without precedent in the
past 18 years. I therefore wish to renew the previous
calls of the African Union for a United Nations
takeover of AMISOM, a development that is also
clearly wished for by the Somalis themselves as
expressed in the Djibouti agreement, in order to
achieve an accelerated end to the ongoing hostilities. In
any case, AMISOM stands ready to be ultimately
included in the international stabilization force
provided for in the Djibouti agreement.
In my interaction with the Security Council
delegation during its visit to Djibouti, I had the
opportunity to suggest for further consideration the
need for a strong naval component in the design of the
concept of operations for the United Nations
peacekeeping mission for Somalia, particularly at the
early stages of the mission. That suggestion is informed
by experience on the ground thus far. A mission with a
strong naval component would also be a significant
safeguard against ground attacks on the mission and
would thus enhance the security of both the personnel
of the mission and its equipment. Improved security at
the maritime borders of Somalia would in turn spread a
positive multiplier effect inwards to the rest of the
country. That would be one way by which the security
process would impact the political and humanitarian
efforts, as has been recommended by Special
Representative Ould Abdallah, whose focus on the need
for the international community to act decisively and to
act now I fully share.
Notwithstanding the difficult history of the past
involvement of the United Nations in Somalia, we call
on the Security Council to crown its consideration of
the situation at this crucial stage with a resolution
enabling the United Nations and the international
community to deploy a robust mission and thus fully
seize the current opportunity for the restoration of
lasting peace and security in the country. We are all

08-43530

aware that any unnecessary delays may give room to
spoilers to undermine our efforts and turn this
auspicious occasion to build a better future for Somalia
and the region into a lost opportunity. We must not —
the Council must not — allow that to happen.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ali Ahmed Jama Jengeli, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
Mr. Jengeli (Somalia): It is my pleasure to
participate in this Security Council discussion on the
situation in Somalia. In that connection, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting.
We would like also to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for their dedication and
tireless efforts for peace and stability in Somalia.
Similarly, we also want to thank the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for their efforts.
The Security Council was first seized of the
situation in Somalia in early 1992. Since then, there
have been meetings, reports and fact-finding missions
on Somalia. Today, it is not my intention to repeat the
resolutions and deliberations of the past. However, by
way of emphasis, I would like to concentrate on two
important issues, namely, the security and
reconciliation aspect and the humanitarian situation.
With regard to the issue of security and
reconciliation, I would like to refer, as my learned
friends who spoke earlier did, to the recent meeting
which took place in Djibouti between the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the opposition Alliance
(ARS). As the Council is aware, and with its support
and encouragement, a peace and reconciliation
agreement has been reached and initialled by the TFG
and the opposition Alliance. As envisaged, the
agreement will be duly signed by the TFG and the
Alliance in Saudi Arabia very soon. Both the
Transitional Federal Parliament of Somalia and the
Central Committee of the ARS have endorsed the
agreement. Once the agreement is signed we will
proceed to its implementation, and the various
committees, especially the security and political
committees, will be expected to function.
In the meantime, we are in a period of
consolidation and expansion. Both parties have
embarked on widening awareness of the agreement so
that all stakeholders and civil society are informed and

5

S/PV.5942

enabled to give full backing to its implementation
when it goes into effect.
We wish to stress that the TFG is fully committed
to implementing its obligations under the agreement.
We also expect the opposition Alliance to demonstrate
genuine commitment to the implementation of the
agreement, and indeed we are hopeful in this respect.
In this context, we hope that we are all in
agreement that if the Security Council authorizes the
deployment of a United Nations international
stabilization force without delay, we will have ample
reason to believe that the 17-year agony of the Somali
people will draw to an end and that the world will be a
better and more peaceful place.
We wish to point out here that, in our view, a
force of around 26,000 personnel to stabilize Somalia,
envisaged under a previous report, may not be
necessary or feasible. Rather, we believe that a much
smaller force under a United Nations mandate and with
United Nations funding could do a good job under
reasonable circumstances. Moreover, we believe that
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
force that is already deployed in Somalia should be the
nucleus of any future United Nations international
stabilization force or peacekeeping force.
But, in the end, the Security Council may wish to
decide on the actual size of any agreed force. We want
to be on record in reiterating our resolve to do all we
can to provide a climate conducive to the deployment
and proper functioning of a stabilization force.
I would now like to turn to the issue of
humanitarian assistance. Based on the information that
we have, a substantial amount of assistance is required
in the coming months. But we recognize, at the outset,
that there is a very close linkage between security and
reconciliation
and
humanitarian
needs.
An
improvement in the security situation will definitely
have a positive impact on the humanitarian situation
and vice versa.
Therefore, the strategic direction of our future
efforts should focus on the political and security fronts
so that a more stable and secure environment is created

6

for emergency humanitarian and other operations.
Moreover, the window of opportunity that currently
exists on the political front should be taken advantage
of in order to save millions of Somalis from the utter
devastation of conflict, drought and other man-made
and natural calamities.
In this respect, I would like to reiterate our
sadness and sorrow at the deliberate killings and
abductions of humanitarian workers, who are doing
heroic work under difficult and demanding conditions.
Our Government and people will, as a matter of
priority, pursue these criminal elements so as to bring
them to justice.
I wish to appeal to the Security Council to address
in a forthright and urgent manner the issue of impunity
for crimes committed against the Somali people. Indeed,
the Somali people are grateful for the tentative steps
that the Council have already taken in that direction.
But much more needs to be done in this regard.
In conclusion, we have good reason to be positive
and optimistic about the future of Somalia. A lot
depends on the people of Somalia and their leaders.
Also, a lot depends on the quality, relevance, quantity
and timeliness of the assistance provided by the
Security Council and the international community. We
very much hope that the idea of an adequate United
Nations stabilization force will receive a major push
forward at this meeting of the Security Council.
We very much look forward to the day when we
can secure stability and peace in Somalia so that the
major task of rehabilitating, reconstructing and
developing Somalia can begin in earnest. Indeed, the
decisions that will be made here in the coming weeks
will have a profound impact on that becoming a reality.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I would like to invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the matter.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

08-43530
