S/PV.8874

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8874th meeting

Wednesday, 6 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons (S/2021/839)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-27630 (E)
*2127630*

Small arms

S/PV.8874

the reports of the Secretary-General on this critical
issue, including the most recent one. Let me highlight
a few points from the report. I will start with the focus
of today’s discussion, namely, the need to address the
threats posed by illicit flows of small arms and light
weapons in contexts of peace operations.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms
and light weapons (S/2021/839)
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs; Mr. Badreldin Elamin
Abdelgadir, Executive Secretary of the Regional Centre
on Small Arms in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of
Africa and Bordering States; and Mr. David Lochhead,
Senior Researcher at Small Arms Survey.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/839, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: At the outset, allow me to
express my gratitude to Kenya for convening this very
important meeting, and for giving me the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the occasion of the
release of the Secretary-General’s biennial report to the
Council on small arms and light weapons (S/2021/839).
I applaud the Security Council’s commitment to
address the issue of small arms and light weapons on
a regular basis. This is the third time that I personally
brief the Council on this agenda item, but the biennial
consideration of small arms began 12 years ago with
a 2007 presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/24). Since
then, the Security Council has continued to recognize
that the illicit flow and excessive accumulation of small
arms and light weapons compromise the effectiveness
of its ability to discharge its primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security.
It was in that context that the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to report on small
arms on a biennial basis beginning in 2008. Since that
request, there have been seven reports of the SecretaryGeneral on this topic. It is important to acknowledge
that there are common themes that run throughout all
2/25

06/10/2021

The misuse, illicit transfer and destabilizing
accumulation of small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition remains a defining factor in
undermining peace and security at the national,
regional and global levels and has deeply aggravated
situations for vulnerable populations already suffering
from conflict. In contexts where United Nations peace
operations have been mandated, illicit flows and the
easy availability of arms can exacerbate and sustain
conflict dynamics, render arms embargoes ineffective,
endanger peacekeepers, humanitarian workers and
local populations and complicate the implementation of
peace agreements.
Hence, I commend the Council’s increasing
consideration of the issue of small arms in its work,
including the inclusion of arms-related provisions in
recent peace operations mandates in Abyei, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Haiti, Libya, Mali, Somalia, the Sudan, South
Sudan and Yemen.
The growing number of resolutions that take into
account weapons and ammunition management and
control measures for small arms and light weapons
control is indicative of the role of the United Nations
in supporting the control of those weapons in order to
build and sustain peace.
I encourage the Security Council to also integrate
weapons and ammunition management considerations
in its work on conflict prevention. Inadequately
maintained stockpiles of weapons and ammunition
constitute serious humanitarian hazards and are a
known source of weapons diversion that negatively
impacts peace and security beyond conflict and postconflict settings.
Internationally recognized tools such as the Modular
Small-arms-control Implementation Compendium
(MOSAIC)and the International Ammunition Technical
Guidelines are increasingly being used by States for
effective weapons and ammunition management. That
was underscored in the publication Aide-Mémoire:
Options for Reflecting Weapons and Ammunition
Management in Decisions of the Security Council.
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

The Aide-Mémoire was specifically developed
by the Office for Disarmament Affairs to assist the
Security Council in accurately and comprehensively
reflecting state-of-the-art practices related to weapons
and ammunition management in relevant Council
decisions. The Aide-Mémoire has just been updated,
and the second edition is now publicly available.
Also of importance to the Security Council are
the illicit transfers of small arms and light weapons
in the context of arms embargo violations, which
remain concerning.
I also note the Council’s efforts to support States in
the strengthening of national security services through
adjustments to relevant arms embargoes. Such efforts
have provided an opportunity to introduce weapons
and ammunition management-related commitments
and measures that can address potential risks of arms
diversion by security services, as well as illicit arms
proliferation and misuse.
Another welcome development is the Security
Council’s employment of weapons and ammunition
management as part of the benchmark assessments of
arms embargoes. It is important to note that available
standards and guidelines must be applied in such
contexts to further improve national and regional
implementation and enforcement of embargoes.
I would like to encourage the Security Council
to fully integrate considerations of weapons and
ammunition into its work on both country-specific
and thematic discussions. That includes addressing
the arms-crime-terrorism nexus as one interrelated
and multifaceted security threat that requires
complementary approaches and responses.
Small arms control measures — in particular the
development and implementation of border security
and management strategies, efforts to detect and seize
parts and components of weapons and ammunition,
enhanced stockpile management and the fight against
the illicit manufacture of weapons — are effective
tools to disrupt the supply of illicit small arms and light
weapons to terrorists.
Another dimension to consider is the nexus between
sustainable development and small arms, which is
firmly anchored in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Global leadership, including that of the
Security Council, will be vital to the Decade of Action
and can support capacity-building efforts among States

S/PV. 8874

to gather information and report on the number of
seized and collected small arms and light weapons.
That would allow better tracking of the progress on
Sustainable Development Goal indicator 16.4.2 with a
view to achieving a significant reduction in illicit arms
flows by 2030.
Thematic discussions on issues such as children in
armed conflict and the women and peace and security
agenda are also important opportunities to reflect on
convergence with small arms-related issues as part of
the Security Council’s programme of work. Children
continue to bear the brunt of armed conflict, often
enabled and prolonged by the widespread availability
of weapons. All small arms and light weapons control
initiatives should therefore be carried out with due
attention to their potential impacts on children’s rights,
and vice versa.
Conventional arms control, including small arms
and light weapons control measures, is relevant to
all four pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda — participation, protection, prevention and
relief and recovery — including in contexts of conflictrelated sexual violence. The Security Council can
further strengthen that convergence by integrating the
collection and analysis of sex- and age-disaggregated
data on small arms and light weapons in related
mandates, support civil society organizations,
especially women’s organization, and encourage States
to streamline national action plans in order to ensure
a more active exchange of information among focal
points for those respective portfolios.
In addition, there are new and emerging themes
related to small arms and light weapons and their
ammunition that warrant the attention of the Security
Council and Member States. New and emerging
technologies on illicit trafficking and the production of
small arms, light weapons, their parts and components
and ammunition may pose novel challenges and
opportunities to the effectiveness of small arms
control measures and should therefore be seriously
considered in both global policy discussions and
operational programming.
Moreover, States have continued to express concern
over the illicit reactivation of poorly deactivated small
arms. In response to that growing threat, the United
Nations has issued specific guidance in a dedicated
MOSAIC module.

21-276303/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

In additon, we are seeing a shift in weapons
purchases, in particular their parts and components,
through the darknet and through online platforms,
resulting in a significant increase in the use of postal
and courier services to traffic those items, making
detection and criminal investigations of these illicit
transfers more difficult. The early adoption of measures
to address those emerging challenges would ensure that
small arms control remains effective and responds to
these new realities.
States, civil society and relevant expert
organizations are also encouraged to consider how
climate change affects the use of conventional weapons
and how conventional arms availability and use affect
climate-related security risks. A growing number of
States have advocated for concrete, more consistent
action to address the potential impact on peace and
security posed by climate change, including how it
might facilitate illicit weapons flows.
In his Agenda for Disarmament, the SecretaryGeneral laid out his priorities for the impacts of the
destabilizing accumulation, illicit transfer and misuse
of small arms and light weapons. That includes
advancing country-level approaches to small arms
problems, integrating arms into conflict prevention and
management, managing poorly maintained stockpiles
and rethinking unconstrained military spending. All
that requires a deeper institutional understanding of
small arms problems and challenges, as well as creative
and comprehensive solutions to address them.
In line with the Secretary-General’s priorities
and with a view to providing effective, efficient and
coherent United Nations assistance, two concrete
initiatives have been launched. First, partners of the
United Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms
are developing system-wide guidance on country-level
approaches to integrate small arms control into the
common country analysis and sustainable development
frameworks, in line with the guiding principle of
national ownership. In addition, the Saving Lives
Entity is now operational as an immediate response
facility within the Peacebuilding Fund and has begun
the allocation of grants to catalyse more comprehensive
approaches to small arms control and armed violence
reduction efforts in several countries.
Considerable efforts have been undertaken at
the global, regional, subregional and national levels
in support of small arms and light weapons control,
4/25

06/10/2021

including in the framework of the Programme of Action
on Small Arms and Light Weapons and its International
Tracing Instrument. Let me highlight in particular the
outcome of the seventh Biennial Meeting of States
on the Programme of Action, which was chaired by
Kenya, and the Firearms Protocol to the United Nations
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime, as
well as the Arms Trade Treaty.
The United Nations will continue to advocate
for the universalization of the Firearms Protocol and
the Arms Trade Treaty and the full and effective
implementation of politically binding instruments,
such as the Programme of Action on Small Arms and
the International Tracing Instrument.
In the regional context, the United Nations will
support the implementation of the decision by the
African Union Commission to extend until 2030 the
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns
in Africa, including the voluntary surrender of illicitly
owned weapons by civilians under the September
Africa Amnesty Month programme.
In that regard, I also welcome the efforts made in
the establishment and the implementation of regional
policy frameworks and strategies on small arms, among
them the Western Balkans road map, the Caribbean
road map and the five-year plan of implementation
of the Economic Community of West African States
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons. Those
mechanisms reflect regional realities, priorities and
ownership and direct the work of the Regional Centres
in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Asia
and the Pacific.
I would like to conclude my briefing today by
reiterating the need for mainstreaming small arms
and light weapons considerations across the work of
the Security Council and highlight a recommendation
from the Secretary-General’s report that is particularly
pertinent to today’s discussion.
Wherever a mission is mandated to provide support
to the host State and competent national authorities in
the processing of recovered weapons and the treatment
of ammunition recovered from the illicit sphere,
the Security Council is encouraged to consider the
establishment or designation of a dedicated component,
unit or cell within the mission. That would enable
United Nations peace operations to be substantially
more involved in supporting the systematic collection,
centralization and analysis of small arms-related
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

data and ensure evidence-based policymaking and
programming on the ground. I hope the Security
Council will consider such measures to further maintain
international peace and security.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdelgadir.
Mr. Abdelgadir: First and foremost, I thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to this meeting.
Allow me to begin by giving Security Council
members a brief history on the Regional Centre on
Small Arms. Concerned with the persistent problem
of the proliferation of illicit arms and light weapons,
the Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of Illicit
Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons in
the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa was
signed by 10 countries on 15 March 2000. That political
declaration set in motion the signing of a legally
binding instrument — the Nairobi Protocol for the
Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms and
Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of
Africa and Bordering States.
Convinced that a regional institution with the sole
mandate of fighting against small arms proliferation
was required to coordinate the implementation of the
Nairobi Protocol, the Regional Centre on Small Arms
was established in 2005. The success and expertise
of the Centre’s regional approach are demonstrated
through results achieved on small arms management
and control interventions, including but not limited to
the following.
National institutions for small arms management
and control have been established at member State
level. The Centre has accordingly developed guidelines
for the establishment and functioning of national
institutions responsible for small arms management
and control.
Small arms national action plans have been
developed to guide the implementation of small arms
interventions and as tools for resource mobilization.
The marking of firearms and electronic record
keeping have been planned and coordinated to facilitate
identification and reliable tracing. The Centre has
distributed 71 marking machines to member States, and
firearms marking is ongoing in 11 of its member States.

S/PV. 8874

The collection, recording and eventual destruction
of excess and obsolete firearms have been planned and
coordinated. The Centre has to date supported member
States in destroying over 400,000 firearms and over
3,000 tons of unexploded ordnance.
Training sessions on weapons and ammunitions
management have been planned and executed. The
Centre has graduated 22 regional instructors and 35
national instructors and trained over 800 personnel in
weapons and ammunitions management best practices.
Safe storage initiatives for Government stockpiles
have been planned and executed. The Centre has
constructed six permanent armouries and distributed
six containerized armouries, 1,600 safe storage steel
boxes and 230 gun racks.
“Heart and mind” disarmament awareness
campaigns have been planned and undertaken, as we
are well aware that almost 70 per cent of small arms are
in the hands of civilians. A weapons and ammunition
management practitioner’s handbook has also been
developed in three languages — English, French
and Swahili.
Furthermore, the Regional Centre on Small Arms
has developed model legislation to guide member States
in harmonizing small arms legislation in line with
regional and international instruments on small arms.
Efforts have been made to coordinate cross-border
joint simultaneous initiatives to curb cross-border
trafficking in weapons and related products. Member
States are being encouraged to plan and execute public
education and awareness campaigns for “hearts and
minds” disarmament.
At this juncture, allow me to thank our development
partners — especially the Governments of the United
States, Germany, the Netherlands and Japan, the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Arms
Trade Treaty secretariat, the African Development
Bank and the European Union — which have supported
the Regional Centre on Small Arms financially in the
fight against small arms proliferation.
There are many drivers of the proliferation of illicit
weapons in our region. Those include, first of all, weak
legislative and policy frameworks in many countries
where legislation on arms management and control is
outdated and not harmonized with the current realities
and existing small arms instruments. Secondly, weak
physical security and poor management of State-held

21-276305/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

weapons can result in their diversion. Thirdly,
internal political dynamics that involve a struggle for
political power without following legal means and bad
governance may facilitate a politically motivated supply
of arms. Fourthly, ungoverned spaces drive demand
for illicit small arms and light weapons by individuals
to guard their lives and properties. A fifth driver is
economic marginalization, which may facilitate youth
radicalization and violent extremism and thereby fuel
demand for illegal weapons.
As a result of those reasons, over the past two
decades the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa
have experienced some of the most dangerous armed
conflicts in Africa. For example, armed conflicts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic, Burundi, South Sudan, Somalia and
the Sudan further illustrate how illicit weapons serve as
a catalyst in conflicts and fragile situations.
Seven of the 13 current global peacekeeping
operations are being conducted in Africa, five of
which are in our subregion, in South Sudan, the
Central African Republic, Somalia, the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In fact, when we
discuss peace operations, we already know that we are
talking about a situation involving illicit armaments.
Therefore, a strengthened fight against the proliferation
of illicit weapons in its totality would go a long way in
reducing the need for peace operations.
Allow me to briefly address four guiding questions.
The first question concerns the trends in the illicit
circulation, proliferation and misuse of small arms
in the context of peace operations and the impact of
those trends in shaping the mandates of the Security
Council. There is no doubt that there is an increasing
trend of the illicit circulation and misuse of small arms
in the context of peace operations. Before peacekeepers
are deployed, illicit small arms and light weapons
are already circulating in conflict-affected areas.
We should be seeking out the sources of those illicit
weapons before deployment, so that the mandates
of United Nations missions include undertaking
interventions aimed at cutting off the sources of illicit
firearms. While weapons obtained from peacekeepers
may represent a relatively small part of those held by
armed groups, further diversions could be reduced
by improved weapons management and control in
peacekeeping operation missions.
6/25

06/10/2021

The second question concerns the specific
measures that the Security Council can take to prevent
weapons in the possession of peacekeepers from falling
into the hands of illicit armed groups, including in
relation to its work on arms embargos, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector reform
and countering terrorism. The measures to be taken
by the Security Council revolve around the concept
of arms management and control in peacekeeping
operations. Arms management and control, whether in
conflict-affected or fragile situations or not, has three
major objectives, namely, to improve physical security
to curb diversion, to improve safety to reduce the risk
of unintended explosions, and accountability to know
exact numbers for the easy detection of leakage and to
take appropriate action.
Therefore, before and during the deployment of
peacekeepers, we suggest the following measures:
training in weapons and ammunitions management
before the deployment of peacekeepers; the marking
and electronic record-keeping of all weapons to be
used in the mission before deployment; continued
accountability measures for all mission stockpiles;
the effective management or destruction of all small
arms and light weapons collected during disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; and
continued awareness-raising among the general public
in conflict areas on the negative effects of small
arms proliferation.
The third question concerns how United Nations
peace operations can support enhanced weapons
and ammunition management, the existing tools
and mechanisms that are available to that end and
whether there are gaps that need addressing. As I have
already said, enhanced weapons and ammunitions
management is all about interventions that are
aimed at curbing diversion. While technical support
from United Nations peace operations to local law
enforcement agencies is paramount to enhance weapons
management, the inclusion of weapons management
components during predeployment training for troops
is highly recommended.
The tools and mechanisms are already in place.
At the international level, we have the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons and the Arms
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

Trade Treaty. At the continental level, we have the
Bamako declaration and the African Union Silencing
the Guns in Africa initiative, while at the subregional
level we have the Nairobi Protocol.
The major gaps to be addressed include the
need to domesticate the existing small arms control
instruments within national legislation and making
available adequate human and financial resources
to implement them. Above all, there is a need to
coordinate all the efforts by the different stakeholders
spearheaded by the national institutions responsible for
small arms management and control. In that regard,
expertise and experience can be exploited to spearhead
the fight against small arms proliferation on the
African continent.
The fourth question concerns which regional
or global mechanisms can be developed and/or
strengthened to shore up the control of small arms
and light weapons in conflict-affected situations. The
management of small arms and light weapons calls for
the actual implementation of the existing mechanisms
globally at the United Nations level, continentally at
the African Union level and regionally at the level of
the Regional Centre on Small Arms in the Great Lakes
Region, the Horn of Africa and Bordering States. The
mechanisms exist, but they face challenges.
It is important to recognize that small arms
proliferation is a development issue. There is a need
for enhanced coordination among stakeholders to
avoid duplication and for adequate funding for small
arms management and control intervention. Arms
control programming is not a stand-alone issue; it is
closely linked to poverty reduction and the Sustainable
Development Goals. Therefore, it is vital to package
arms control interventions within wider development
programming, as there is a nexus between sustainable
development and security.
Despite the threats posed by climate change and
the coronavirus disease pandemic, let us not forget
that arms proliferation is a worse catalyst that can
bring communities and economies to a standstill.
Peace operations involve full-blown conflict with
formal warring parties, but small arms proliferation
goes beyond that context to lower-level transnational
organized armed crime, which affects human security.
That is why it is important to support the Regional
Centre in carrying out its mandate. The opportunity of
having a fully-fledged intergovernmental organization

S/PV. 8874

whose sole mandate concerns the fight against small
arms proliferation, as a specialized agency, should be
exploited by the Security Council.
In conclusion, arms proliferation therefore covers
their production, transfer, possession and use without
authorization of a competent authority. Let it suffice
to note that it remains the catalyst of armed conflicts
in Africa. The fight against weapons trafficking and
misuse cannot be won in boardrooms but requires
concrete and practical interventions that address the
drivers of the proliferation of weapons.
The President: I thank Mr. Abdelgadir for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lochhead and request
that he speak for less than five minutes, or seven
minutes at the very most.
Mr. Lochhead: It is a great honour to brief the
Security Council today on behalf of the Small Arms
Survey. My thanks go specifically to Kenya for
inviting us to contribute to this important discussion.
Having personally spent 15 years in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, I can say that the unchecked
proliferation of arms, ammunition and explosives poses
one of the greatest challenges to peacekeeping today.
I would like to dedicate this statement to the memory
of a former colleague and friend, Captain Christophe
Tangaou Massamaesso of the Togolese armed forces,
who was killed in action by small arms fire in August
2017 while deployed in central Mali with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Christophe was killed
while responding to a complex terrorist attack against
a United Nations base, as part of a quick-reaction force.
He died valiantly leading troops from the front, leaving
behind a wife and three children.
In 2018, I chaired the Board of Inquiry into
the circumstances surrounding Christoph’s death.
Weapons and ammunition analysis showed us that the
attack that killed him was linked materially to three
other attacks, including against the MINUSMA base in
Timbuktu and at a café in neighbouring Burkina Faso,
which in total killed 28 people in a 24-hour period.
Arms, ammunition and explosives constitute important
evidence that can contribute to justice for such crimes
in line with resolution 2589 (2021), thereby promoting
accountability for the killing of, and acts of violence
against, United Nations peacekeepers.

21-276307/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

I will skip ahead quickly, as I do not have much
time left. The Council seeks to understand trends in the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their
ammunition. I will try to summarize the main lessons
based on research very briefly.
First, the availability of arms to non-State armed
groups, criminals and terrorists in peacekeeping
contexts is often a product of historical regional
conflict. Legacy weapons continue to circulate and
fuel new types of violence. Where large-scale transfers
of lethal material in violation of arms embargoes
occur, weapons rarely remain within the confines of
recipient States. In some peacekeeping operations, the
inflow of arms, ammunition and explosives takes place
largely through the ant trade from former and current
conflict zones.
Where the Department of Peace Operations (DPO)
is deployed in asymmetrical conflict contexts, like
Mali, the diversion of commercial explosives and
legacy ordnance items has had a devastating effect,
with improvised explosive devices (IEDs) accounting
for almost 60 per cent of United Nations fatalities from
malicious acts within MINUSMA — the balance of the
killings having been carried out with small arms and
light weapons. Battlefield capture by non-State armed
groups and terrorist groups also provisions the illicit
market and enables attacks against United Nations
peacekeepers and creates protection-of-civilians crises

06/10/2021

While mandates have frequently prioritized physical
security, stockpile management and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and have
supported national small arms commissions, they are
necessary but not sufficient to address arms flows
within active conflict contexts. In addition, not all
peacekeeping operations are under United Nations
arms embargoes. It is therefore important to identify
solutions for both embargo and non-embargo contexts.
Missions require strong mandates to monitor,
identify and disrupt flows of illicit arms and
ammunition into the areas in which they operate, and
they require political support in their efforts to do that,
which would allow missions to prevent armed violence
from escalating and new armed actors from emerging,
while creating space for the stabilization of fragile and
conflict-affected States.
Secondly, in States and regions where the illegal use
of small arms and light weapons has reached chronic
and destabilizing proportions, direct interventions
and operations to reduce flows are important. That
is particularly important in situations in which the
peacekeeping operation itself is targeted with weapons,
ammunition and IEDs.

Small Arms Survey’s ongoing work on the diversion
of IED components across the Sahel has highlighted
how the diversion of commercial explosives fuels the
artisanal mining sector, as well as provisions bombbuilding networks across the subregion, requiring a
coordinated regional approach.

Lastly, missions could be clear about whose
responsibility it is within a peacekeeping operation
to identify and disrupt flows. That work requires a
whole-of-mission effort, with clear benchmarks and
reporting requirements. The Council has asked about
preventing losses and connections with security sector
reform (SSR), DDR and countering terrorism. The
DPO weapons and ammunition management policy and
the Effective Weapons and Ammunition Management
in a Changing Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Context handbook, as well as
mission-specific standard operating procedures, have
gone a long way towards addressing the policy gaps
identified by the Survey’s project on losses from
peacekeeping operations resulting from the surrender,
or capture, of weapons of troop-contributing countries
(TCCs), negligence, poor storage and/or corrupt
practices. I believe that the handling of recovered
weapons requires special attention, and, if applied
systematically down to the battalion level, the DPO
weapons and ammunition management policy will help
to address that.

The Council seeks to understand how those
trends and dynamics shape peacekeeping mandates.

Preventing illicit arms trafficking in conflict
zones, including to terrorists, as called for in resolution

Force-multiplying
technologies,
including
drones, armoured vehicles, night vision, encrypted
communications and thermal optics, procured by
States often make their way rapidly from the time
of importation into the hands of terrorists and pose
direct threats to United Nations forces, personnel and
assets. The capture or looting of massive stockpiles in
contexts, such as Libya or Afghanistan, can contribute
to the destabilization of adjacent areas for decades to
come. Craft-produced firearms, sporting firearms and
their ammunition also allow for the easy emergence of
vigilante and self-defence groups.

8/25

21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

2370 (2017), requires specific mandates, support from
mission leadership, a whole-of-mission approach,
dedicated capabilities, sensors, analytical tools and
human resources, in particular in areas where the State
has no presence. Border security-related programming
is also critical.
The hardening of defences, improved predeployment
training and more robust postures by peacekeepers
operating in non-permissive environments mean that
TCCs will now respond quite robustly to terrorists,
bandits and non-State armed groups in ways for which
peacekeepers in more permissive environments might
not have historically been prepared, trained or equipped.
Peacekeepers in the harshest and most dangerous duty
stations are losing weapons only through combat
losses, complex attacks and IED strikes, and that is
only after responding in self-defence and sometimes
losing personnel. It is critical that missions facing
emerging IED threats — for example, such as in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of Congo — take advantage of the hard-won mission
adaptation experiences of a mission like MINUSMA.
Additional programmatic safeguards are also
required for security sector reform (SSR) and DDR
programming, which can unintentionally stimulate
illicit arms procurement and the proliferation of armed
groups seeking to meet eligibility criteria in order to
access payrolls and benefits through integration or
DDR processes. That is particularly acute where peace
processes are stalled or implementation is delayed,
highlighting the linkage among arms control, SSR,
DDR and mediation.
The Security Council has asked about weapons
and ammunition management and existing tools and
mechanisms. Gaps remain where the intention is not
only to manage arms in the context of programmatic
activities and caseloads but also to prevent trafficking
and proliferation where civilians are being targeted
or conflict is escalating. The lack of a regional remit
is a significant blind spot within some peacekeeping
operations that do not have a specific arms embargo
or border monitoring mandates. Peacekeeping
operations should consider developing mechanisms to
reach out and collaborate with neighbouring States to
prevent proliferation.
The creation of illicit arms monitoring mandates
and cells within missions is also important, and the
development of weapons intelligence capabilities

S/PV. 8874

within all contingents would help to provide a
whole-of-mission report approach and develop a
common operating picture, in line with the 2019 policy
on peacekeeping-intelligence.
DPO should also consider taking advantage of
significant innovations in the available technology to
conduct that work efficiently and effectively. Networked
geoanalytics tools can now be applied to understand
arms trafficking networks and inform operational
planning by the force, United Nations Police (UNPOL)
and national partners. That is in line with the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative by developing innovative,
data-driven and technology-enabled peacekeeping.
By mainstreaming arms and ammunition analysis,
peacekeeping human-rights-division missions can also
collect important evidence supporting attributions for
violence and violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Improved
information-sharing on arms and ammunition among
human rights investigations, commissions of inquiry
and international criminal mechanisms can also
enhance capabilities.
Similarly, accountability for attacks against, and
the killing of, peacekeepers requires robust evidence
collection to the highest evidentiary standards. Since
such incidents often occur in areas where the State has
no presence, the State often cannot be relied upon to
investigate such crimes, and it is often incumbent on
the United Nations to do so.
The Security Council has asked about regional
or global mechanisms to strengthen arms control in
conflict-related situations. Research shows us that
we need to strengthen regional and global countertrafficking approaches, informed by baseline research
and data collection. Peacekeeping operations have
struggled to respond to the multifaceted regional
phenomenon of arms, ammunition and explosives
proliferation, while implementing what is typically
a national mandate. The lack of a regional mandate
has put peace operations and local communities at
risk of attack, failed to put up sufficient barriers to
hostile actors’ access to illicit weapons and made
stability elusive.
Peacekeeping
operations
should
consider
developing protocols to feed into global law enforcement
and customs operations supported by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the
World Customs Organization and INTERPOL, as well

21-276309/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

06/10/2021

as the work of arms-embargo-monitoring expert panels,
through the adoption of new data-sharing platforms.

States with advanced technology in disrupting
destabilizing illicit crime and conflict-related flows.

Precedents exist for cross-border arms monitoring
mandates, and current good practice exists for peace
operations to share arms-trafficking information on a
regional basis, as called for in resolution 2020 (2011).
Such initiatives all point to the way forward and are
in line with the strategy on the digital transformation
of peacekeeping.

Technology will paint a picture of trafficking
dynamics over time only by acting as a sensor to detect
diversion and related illicit flows. Analysis must inform
actions, programming and operations if such flows are
to be disrupted, both by peacekeepers and by national
actors. What can therefore complement improved
detection and understanding?

In summary, our research suggests that the
following key elements could help peacekeeping
operations to mitigate the dangers associated with arms,
ammunition and explosives proliferation. Missions
could, first, conceptualize improved peacekeepingoperation counter-proliferation mandates and concepts
of operations to actively prevent destabilizing inflows of
lethal material; second, ensure that mission leadership
is aware and supportive of arms control initiatives and
that it integrates counter-proliferation-related analysis
into mediation, SSR, DDR and peace processes; third,
improve the weapons-intelligence capabilities of troopcontributors, UNPOL and other relevant sections
and the collection of data and evidence across the
mission; fourth, develop a workstream within DPO
strategy on digital transformation, focusing on how
emerging technology and big data can be harnessed for
the good by peacekeeping operations to reduce arms
flows; fifth, develop, field-test and adopt advanced
collection tools for peacekeepers to identify and
trace illicit materials and manage evidence; sixth,
negotiate new data-sharing platforms and protocols
among peacekeeping operations, panels of experts and
Member States, as called for in resolution 2020 (2011),
and interface with the operations of key international
partners, such as UNODC, INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization; seventh, mainstream arms and
ammunition analysis in human rights investigations
and ensure information-sharing with international
investigation and justice mechanisms, including those
focused on the targeting and killing of peacekeepers;
eighth, support baseline research within and outside the
mission area in order to inform regional approaches and
engagement with regional bodies and industry actors
in order to create barriers to trafficking; and, ninth,
conceptualize regional approaches and light-footprint
support mandates that work with States on a regional
basis to improve trafficking intelligence-sharing
and inform national and regional responses to arms,
ammunition and explosives proliferation.

As missions draw down, others are conceived in
order to respond to emerging threats to international
peace and security. The Security Council could have
an important role in conceptualizing both improved
counter-proliferation mandates and future lightfootprint regional counter-proliferation support
operations that would be cost effective and support

With that combination of innovations and
improvements, peacekeeping operations would be
well placed and have significant front-line assets to
contribute to reaching SDG target 16.4, the SecretaryGeneral’s disarmament agenda and Silencing the Guns.
I believe that placing counter-proliferation back into
a central role within peacekeeping operations would

New technology could amplify and simplify the
collection, analysis and sharing of illicit arms- and
ammunition-related data, empowering law enforcement
and customs officials and providing a global picture
of such flows. The United Nations could consider
contributing to the development of that technology in
partnership with the private sector and in support of
Member States. Such tools and platforms could also be
used in conjunction with new reporting mechanisms
to inform the Security Council about global trends in
illicit trafficking.
Without such tools, platforms and reporting
mechanisms, Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16,
which calls for a reduction in arms flows and measures
the tracing of illicit weapons, will be unreachable
because there will be no baseline against which to
measure trends in illicit proliferation. The digital
transformation of peacekeeping can directly support
progress on Goal 16 and the Secretary-General’s
disarmament agenda Securing Our Common Future:
An Agenda for Disarmament, as well as the African
Union’s Silencing the Guns initiative, by developing
new, field-focused initiatives that identify and prevent
dangerous inflows.

10/25

21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

improve mandate implementation and protection
outcomes and protect United Nations staff. Let the
sacrifices of our fallen peacekeepers encourage our
collective action on this issue.
The President: I thank Mr. Lochhead for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu,
Mr. Abdelgadir and Mr. Lochhead for their
informative briefings.
It is worrisome that armed conflicts in 2020
resulted in 27 per cent of civilian deaths by small arms
and light weapons, as compared to 24 per cent by heavy
weapons and other explosive munitions.
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
many regions in the world continues to fuel, prolong and
exacerbate armed conflicts. It hampers peace efforts,
conflict recovery and socioeconomic development.
The illicit trade in and the misuse of small arms and
light weapons, mines and explosive devices remain
major threats to essential infrastructure, civilians,
humanitarian workers and the safety and security of
peacekeepers. They could undermine the effectiveness
of the mandates of Council-authorized missions to
maintain international peace and security.
In the context of today’s discussion, I would like
to stress the following points. First, combating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons requires
the joint efforts of all concerned parties. States bear
the primary responsibility for strengthening national
efforts, including cooperating with one another to curb
this scourge.
Regional, subregional and international organizations
play an important role in supporting Member States
in implementing relevant international frameworks
related to General Assembly and the Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2117 (2013) and
2220 (2015).
It is commendable that progress and positive
momentum have been achieved in this field by some
regional and subregional initiatives, such as the
Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative and the road
map for a sustainable solution to the illegal possession,
misuse and trafficking of small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition in the Western Balkans by 2024.

S/PV. 8874

Secondly, in the Security Council, the issue of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons should be
addressed in a contextual manner in the light of the
scale and scope of the threat it poses. We commend the
efforts of 9 out of 12 current peacekeeping missions,
which are mandated to address the issue of the control
and management of small arms and light weapons. We
call for further support for these missions to better
assist their host countries in their peace processes and
post-conflict reconstruction in relation to controlling
and managing small arms and light weapons.
Thirdly, in post-conflict situations, it is necessary
to continue efforts aimed at combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and to strictly control and
manage such weapons, including through appropriate
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures and security sector reform processes. National
efforts in this regard need international support to
prevent armed violence and the recurrence of conflicts.
Last but not least, we reiterate our call for
addressing the root causes of conflict, including
neglect of international law and inequality, and we call
for promoting cultural, peace, tolerance and friendship
among all peoples and nations. At the same time, we
reaffirm the right of the State to acquire, manufacture,
transfer and retain small arms and light weapons for
their self-defence and security needs.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank High Representative Nakamitsu,
Mr. Badreldin Elamin Abdelgadir and Mr. Lochhead
for their briefings.
I also express our appreciation to Kenya for today’s
timely meeting on small arms and light weapons, which
is an issue of particular importance for Mexico. Last
month we organized an Arria Formula meeting on the
issue, on which we plan to follow up during the Mexican
presidency in November.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Kimani on his successful conduct and results of the
seventh Biennial Meeting of States of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, which undoubtedly represented a step forward
at the global level in the fight against this scourge.
Today Mexico reiterates its firm conviction
that the Security Council can improve practices and
transparency in the illicit arms trade, strengthen

21-2763011/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

schemes to prevent diversion, improve export-risk
analysis, ensure mechanisms for the verification of
authorized use and end users, in addition to promoting
the gender perspective and attending to victims of
firearms violence.
The timely publication of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/839) is very welcome. It
provides us with an updated diagnosis of the problem
and multiple recommendations for Member States,
many of which are in line with my country’s own
proposals. The information contained in the report is
alarming because of the multiplicity of evidence in all
regions of the world of the increase in illicit flows of and
trafficking in small arms, as well as its consequences
for international peace and security. The increase that
occurred during the coronavirus disease pandemic is
not surprising but is of concern.
The Security Council should make an objective
analysis of the tangible impact of small arms and
light weapons on the day-to-day life of all areas on
the Council’s agenda. It should also call more firmly
for compliance with the commitments made so that
international cooperation can generate conditions that
will enable new, more effective agreements to prevent
and counter the diversion and trafficking of weapons in
the context of peace operations.
The Secretary-General’s recommendations are
varied, and all of them relevant. I will focus only on
those related to the configuration of Council mandates.
Much of the Council’s attention on this issue has been
directed at promoting and strengthening arms and
ammunition management schemes, but that is only one
component of a much broader universe. It is necessary
to analyse the entire life cycle of weapons — from their
production and transfer, through brokering, to those
who turn out to be the end users. Weapons management
is incomplete if continuous and unrestricted flows
flood conflict zones and if actions remain reactive, as
they have so far, that is, once weapons are already in
the hands of those who should never have them.
For this reason, we strongly support the
recommendation on effective border controls.
Such controls should be comprehensive and foster
coordination between authorities in the different
countries through which the weapons transit. This
applies equally to the analysis of constantly changing
trafficking routes and networks. The mandates of
12/25

06/10/2021

peacekeeping missions and the renewal of sanctions
regimes must reflect these realities.
The report also warns of the disproportionate impact
on women and children — again, the most vulnerable
groups. We therefore support the recommendations
in the Secretary-General’s report on the need to
strengthen capacities in peace operations. The inclusion
of dedicated small-arms units in missions will be very
useful. Only with hard data and empirical evidence will
we be able to design timely and appropriate responses
in each context.
In conclusion, Mexico maintains that we must
generate better coordination, greater synergies and
opportunities for collaboration among all available
arms control instruments and regimes, including those
of the Security Council. We all have a responsibility
to assume. We therefore make today an attentive but
firm call to all States to commit themselves more
energetically to the task and take actions to counteract
the negative impact of the diversion and trafficking of
arms on international security and development.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I thank the Kenyan presidency
for programming this meeting on the threat posed to
peace operations by small arms and light weapons.
I would also like to thank High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu, Mr. Badreldin Elamin Abdelgadir
and Mr. David Lochhead for their informative and
insightful briefings.
The illicit transfer and use of small arms and light
weapons, including ammunition, continues to represent
a major threat to international peace and security by
fuelling armed conflicts in many countries and regions,
aggravating humanitarian crises, enabling terrorist and
transnational criminal organizations and undermining
respect for human rights, in addition to hindering
peacebuilding and socioeconomic development efforts.
As noted by the briefers, United Nations peace
operations confront — in various ways — the negative
impacts of the widespread circulation of small arms
and light weapons, which are often the direct cause of
fatalities among peacekeepers. Those negative impacts
should indeed be thoroughly assessed and taken into
consideration in order to enable peace operations to
effectively fulfil their mandates.
United Nations peace operations should be well
equipped and trained to ensure the safe, secure and
effective management of all stockpiles of small arms and
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

light weapon in order to be able to properly control their
own weapons and ammunition and to be in a position,
if requested, to contribute to reinforcing the capacities
of host Governments in that regard and to assist in the
treatment of recovered illicit weapons and ammunition,
including through the utilization of voluntary guidelines
such as the International Ammunition Technical
Guidelines, developed under the United Nations
SaferGuard Programme, and the Modular Small-armscontrol Implementation Compendium.
We share the view that the Security Council should
continue to address the issues related to the illicit
transfer and use of small arms and light weapons in a
more effective and holistic manner. In that regard, we
welcome the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his successive reports to the Security
Council on small arms and light weapons.
In addition to further enabling peace operations,
we would like to stress several important points for the
Council’s consideration.
First, the Security Council must ensure the
implementation of the arms embargoes it decides upon.
Secondly, the Council must continue to support
regional efforts for conflict prevention and arms
control, as it did in 2019 when it adopted resolution
2457 (2019), upholding the African Union’s Silencing
the Guns by 2030 initiative.
Thirdly, the Council should further consider and
incorporate a gender dimension when addressing the
issues related to small arms and light weapons by,
inter alia, stressing the importance of women’s full and
effective participation in all efforts to counter the illicit
transfer and use of small arms and light weapons, taking
into account its disproportionate impact on women and
recognizing that eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons is key to combating genderbased violence and sexual violence in conflict.
Fourthly, the Council should continue to support
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons, as well as all relevant disarmament and
arms control instruments.
For its part, Tunisia, which does not produce or
export weapons of any kind, supports all efforts and

S/PV. 8874

initiatives aimed at finding effective solutions to the
issues related to the proliferation of conventional
weapons, including small arms and light weapons. We
remain committed to the Programme of Action and
welcome the successful outcome of its seventh Biennial
Meeting of States, held in July 2021 in New York.
Tunisia is also party to the Firearms Protocol to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Convention, the Convention on Cluster Munitions and
the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and
its Protocols.
Lastly, Tunisia endorsed the adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty in the General Assembly because
we believe it can significantly contribute to finding
adequate solutions to the illicit trade in conventional
weapons, including small arms and light weapons,
without prejudice to the sovereign and legitimate right
of States to legally acquire conventional weapons and
ammunition for their self-defence and security needs.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank you, Mr. President, for calling this important
meeting. I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu
and Mr. Lochhead for their briefings.
I am also grateful to Mr. Abdelgadir, from the
Regional Centre on Small Arms in the Great Lakes
Region, for his remarks. The United States has enjoyed
a long-standing and excellent partnership with the
Centre to combat the illicit trafficking of small arms
and light weapons in the Horn of Africa and the African
Great Lakes region.
Peacekeeping operations present unique small
arms and light weapons management challenges. We
welcome the Security Council’s attention to this issue.
Many peacekeeping operations — especially those with
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
components — manage large caches of weapons seized
from former combatants.
For example, in a series of attacks in early 2000
on the weapon storage sites of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone, the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) captured more than 5,000 arms previously
surrendered to the United Nations by demobilized RUF
fighters. The United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali also suffered losses of
weapons seized from former combatants.

21-2763013/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

06/10/2021

Peacekeeping operations with mandates that
include the protection of civilians face a particular
challenge, as the peacekeepers may be more heavily
armed. Losses of small arms and light weapons
from operations in those environments provide more
advanced weaponry to armed groups, which enable
them to further escalate hostilities.

lockers and supporting the destruction of 36,000
excess small arms and light weapons and 560 tons of
ammunition. That assistance helps ensure that storage
facilities are physically secure, have proper oversight
and contain only serviceable munitions, creating a
buffer around insecure areas to prevent stockpile
leakage and improve combat readiness.

While the United Nations has made important strides
concerning small arms and light weapons management
within peacekeeping operations, generally, and in
DDR programmes specifically, in-mission protocols
remain unevenly applied. As history shows, that can
result in active combatants reclaiming and redeploying
armaments against both United Nations personnel
who seized and held that weaponry previously and
against the civilian populations that the United Nations
personnel are mandated to protect.

We pledge ourselves and continue urging all
Member States to combat the illicit trafficking of small
arms and light weapons as a primary way to mitigate
the continuation and escalation of hostilities in conflictprone areas around the world.

Looking ahead, the United Nations should expand
the use of best practices for small arms and light weapons
management and implement them across peacekeeping
operations. That should include operationalizing and
continually updating the protocols outlined in the
Effective Weapons and Ammunition Management
in a Changing Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Context manual, the second edition of
which was published just this year.
With regard to the illicit trafficking of small
arms and light weapons in general, the United States
reiterates our call for the States Members of the
United Nations to comprehensively implement the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and its complementary International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons. The United States remains committed
to their implementation, as well as to assisting others
in doing so.
In the Great Lakes region, the United States has
partnered with the Regional Centre on Small Arms
to support national weapons marking and tracing
campaigns that improve accountability of Governmentheld stockpiles. The United States has further improved
stockpile management capacity by training 500
storekeepers, using instructors from within the Great
Lakes region.
We have also complemented training efforts by
building new armouries, providing 1,500 weapons
14/25

Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Kenya for organizing this meeting and
thank the briefers for their statements.
The uncontrolled spread and the illicit trafficking
of small arms and light weapons is a threat to
international peace and security. It fuels conflicts,
crime and terrorism. We have all paid the price for it
and will continue to do so.
That is why France has worked hard to support
the adoption of specific measures and commitments,
in particular within the framework of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, whose conference we presided over in 2018.
In that regard, I would like to commend Kenya’s efforts
and its excellent chairmanship of the Biennial Meeting
of States on the Programme of Action.
The Security Council has played its role over the
years by addressing the issue of the regulation of arms
manufacturing and transfers, stockpile management,
marking and tracing, and post-conflict disarmament
and reintegration measures. The Security Council
could certainly do more.
First, it could call on States to join the Arms Trade
Treaty and the Firearms Protocol.
Secondly, the Security Council should encourage
States to mark weapons and support the International
Tracing Instrument. We should also focus on the
challenges raised by developments in the design and
manufacture of small arms and light weapons.
Thirdly, the Security Council should respect
arms embargoes and regularly update United Nations
sanctions regimes.
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

Fourthly, and finally, the Security Council could
mandate peacekeeping operations, when relevant, to
ensure the tracing of weapons and ammunition and
collect relevant data.
I would also mention the essential issue of
ammunition, which poses specific risks, such as theft,
the manufacture of improvised explosive devices
and the explosion of poorly managed stockpiles. We
welcome the conclusions of the United Nations Group
of Governmental Experts. It is essential that the
General Assembly adopt those recommendations in the
First Committee. France is working to that end with all
its partners.
Lastly, as others have already done, I would like
to underscore the importance of the Security Council’s
support for the many regional initiatives. The European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Caribbean Community
are all taking useful measures that are tailored to
realities on the ground. More needs to be done as
well in terms of assistance and capacity-building, and
cooperation in that area must be encouraged. That is
the objective pursued by the Franco-German road map
to curb illicit trafficking in the Western Balkans. We
must all do more in this area.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
the successful chairmanship of the Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. India stands ready to contribute to a
progressive approach that would help consolidate the
gains made during that meeting.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu,
Mr. Abdelgadir, Executive Secretary of the Regional
Centre on Small Arms, and Mr. Lochhead, from Small
Arms Survey, for their briefings.
The threat posed by the illicit transfer of small
arms and light weapons is a matter of concern to
the entire international community. As a complex
and multidimensional problem, it has a cross-cutting
impact on development, security, humanitarian and
socioeconomic aspects.
India attaches high importance to preventing,
combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small

S/PV. 8874

arms and light weapons. We consider that the primary
responsibility for addressing that problem lies with
Member States. In that regard, India supports the
redoubling of efforts at the national and global levels
to strengthen the implementation of the Programme
of Action and the International Tracing Instrument,
including through national legislative measures and
enforcement, export controls, information sharing and
capacity-building.
We take note of the observations and
recommendations in the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on small arms and light weapons (S/2021/839).
As mentioned in the report, the safety of United
Nations peacekeepers is directly affected by the steady
and illicit supply of small arms and light weapons
to warring parties in armed conf lict situations. The
Council is aware of numerous incidents in the past
where killings and attacks on peacekeepers were
perpetrated through the use of those weapons. Hence,
it is important for the Council to address the danger
posed by such illicit transfers to the safety and security
of peacekeepers by giving due attention to that issue in
the consideration of peacekeeping mandates.
It is a well-known fact that the f low of illicit
arms and weapons to non-State actors and terrorists
drives and sustains conf licts. In that regard, arms
embargoes are an important tool that the Council holds
at its disposal to curb the f low of such weapons to
situations of armed conf lict. It is a matter of concern
that embargoes continue to be blatantly violated, as
repeatedly reported by the various Panels of Experts
supporting the subsidiary bodies of the Council. It is
important that all Member States respect and strictly
enforce existing arms embargoes and strengthen
measures against the illicit transfer of arms.
United Nations peacekeeping missions could
support host countries in addressing the issue of
the illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons
by strengthening the capacities of law enforcement
and security agencies in safe handling, upkeep and
stockpile management of arms and weapons, including
those recovered from non-State actors. In that regard,
we welcome Secretary-General’s recommendation
to establish a dedicated component or a unit within
peacekeeping missions to handle such assistance.
The illicit possession and misuse of small arms
and light weapons by non-State groups and terrorists
is a violation of State sovereignty. In post-conf lict

21-2763015/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

situations, we often witness that non-State actors
continue to possess those weapons illegally, which
hinders disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
efforts. The Council must ensure effective and timely
action against such actors to ensure that post-conf lict
peacebuilding efforts are not jeopardized while
advancing security sector reforms, the capacitybuilding of law enforcement agencies, the promotion
of rule of law and good governance.
Let me also strongly underline the need for the
Council’s focus on the transfer and trafficking of arms
and weapons to terrorists and terrorist groups. Those
weapons become more sinister and lethal in the hands
of terrorists, who deliberately and indiscriminately
use them to target innocent civilians, including women
and children. For several decades, my country has
suffered immensely owing to cross-border terrorism
and violence carried out by terrorist groups using those
illicit weapons smuggled across our borders, including
now through the use of drones. The increase in volume
and the quality of the arsenal acquired by those
terrorist organizations remind us time and again that
they cannot exist without the sponsorship or support of
States. That aspect needs to be universally condemned.
India’s External Affairs Minister, in his address to
the Security Council earlier this year (see S/2021/48),
presented an eight-point action plan to counter
terrorism. Two of those points are directly relevant
to today’s discussion, namely, the need to address
the linkages between terrorism and transnational
organized crime and combating terrorist financing.
Those linkages have also been brought out clearly in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/839). I urge the
Council to have zero tolerance for terror actors, their
possession and misuse of small arms and light weapons
and their sponsors.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu
for her briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/839). We also listened carefully to
Mr. Badreldin Elamin Abdelgadir and Mr. David
Lochhead.
We support the fact that the Kenyan presidency is
conducting today’s meeting on small arms and light
weapons in the Security Council not as a disarmament
issue but in the context of peacekeeping operations. We
are well aware of the concerns of a number of States,
primarily those in Africa, where the problems posed
16/25

06/10/2021

by the illicit f low of small arms and light weapons are
particularly acute.
We believe that the Secretary-General’s biennial
reports on small arms and light weapons should devote
much more attention to peacekeeping. Furthermore, we
have every reason to expect that existing mechanisms in
that area, such as the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, will be better
ref lected in those reports.
Mandated
United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions play an important role in assisting States
with the implementation of security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes, strengthening law enforcement agencies
and restoring the rule of law. By engaging in the
disarmament of warring parties, the dismantling of
their units and the reintegration of ex-combatants to
prevent the recurrence of conf lict, peacekeepers are
working towards the important goals of sustaining
the peace process, creating conditions for a political
settlement and ensuring the safety of both the local
population and the Blue Helmets themselves.
In doing so, the successful implementation of
DDR programmes is impossible without lasting
reconciliation between the parties, including mutual
trust underpinned by sufficient security conditions and
genuine opportunities for the integration of disarmed
combatants into the newly created armed forces or
civilian life.
The presence of large numbers of uncontrolled
small arms and light weapons not only impedes the
safety of civilians and peacekeeping missions, but
in general undermines the possibility of ending the
armed conf lict and creating the conditions conducive
to the sustained reconciliation of the parties.
We are convinced that the responsibility for
controlling the circulation of small arms and light
weapons should lie with the Governments of the
countries on whose territory those weapons are found.
In that connection, we consider security sector reform
to be particularly important. Success in those processes
contributes not only to national reconciliation but also
to ensuring the creation of State security institutions
that are capable of effectively protecting civilians,
controlling the entire territory of the country and
countering terrorist groups. To that end, it is important
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

that the Government in question have the ability to
form professionally trained and equipped armed forces.
In that vein, we would like to remind our colleagues
in the Council of our position on the need to review
the sanctions regimes imposed on certain countries
so that the Government forces of States such as the
Central African Republic, the Sudan, South Sudan and
Somalia can be adequately armed and trained, thereby
allowing them to properly maintain law and order.
We see no backdrop for the discussion of small
arms and light weapons within the Security Council
other than peacekeeping. It can hardly be considered
in the context of various abstract topics such as
sustainable development, gender or climate change,
which we occasionally hear about from our colleagues.
We doubt that discussions within that framework would
bring any added value, especially not in the Security
Council, since the priority forum for the discussion of
issues relating to small arms and light weapons is the
General Assembly.
On an open and universal basis, regular work is
carried out in the General Assembly on the Programme
of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, which is
the only specialized global document in that area. In
that context, we appreciated Kenya’s efforts to hold the
seventh Biennial Meeting of States on the Programme
of Action and its implementation earlier this year. In
practical terms, we consider it important to promote
the implementation of its outcome document, first
and foremost at the national level. We must not forget
that combating illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, ensuring their secure stockpiling and
destroying surpluses are the prerogative of States
themselves and an integral part of their sovereignty.
The Russian Federation has highly developed
national legislation to combat illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons. We are willing to actively
share our experience, including our most successful
tried and tested practices, with interested countries.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the briefers for
their informative and insightful contributions.
The illicit f low of small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition exacerbates ongoing conf licts,
intensifies intercommunal violence and abets and
sustains violent extremists, terrorists and organized
criminal groups. Controlling and curbing small arms
and light weapons transfers should therefore be an

S/PV. 8874

integral part of post-conf lict and armed violence
reduction efforts, including in the mandates of United
Nations peace operations.
Positive examples already exist, and various
United Nations peace operations, including in
Haiti, the Sudan and Mali, are mandated to support
weapons management in the contexts of community
violence reduction, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform programmes.
We welcome the fact that the United Nations Mine
Action Service, which Estonia is proud to support, is
also often an integral component of such missions and
can provide them with direct support and technical
assistance in activities related to the control of small
arms and light weapons.
While United Nations peace operations have
continued to deepen their support to national
authorities, there is still room for reinforcing the role
of United Nations peace operations in dealing with
illicit f lows of small arms and light weapons.
First, the Security Council could include, in a
more systematic way, the tasks of record-keeping and
tracing of weapons in peace operation mandates, in line
with international instruments and standards. Also,
the secure and safe management of peacekeepers’ own
weapons and ammunition deserves to be addressed in
the mandates.
Secondly, in order to improve compliance with
arms embargoes, cooperation and information-sharing
between peace operations and panels of experts
could be strengthened. The systematic collection and
analysis of data on seized, found and surrendered
weapons can provide important information about the
sources and supply chains of armed actors. Consistent
information-sharing could therefore help both peace
operations and panels of experts in their endeavours
to better implement their Security Council mandates.
Thirdly, in order to maximize a mission’s ability
to respond to small arms management and to carry
out tasks related to arms embargoes, we support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to consider the
establishment or designation of a unit or cell within a
peace mission with specific expertise and skills.
Finally, for Estonia, adherence to, and the
ratification of, key international instruments in that
area is of crucial importance. We call on all States
to implement the Programme of Action to Prevent,

21-2763017/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons.
Estonia also continues to champion the
universalization and implementation of the Arms Trade
Treaty. We believe that, when the Treaty is effectively
and widely implemented, it will have great potential
to contribute to more responsible and transparent
international arms transfers.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Sir, for convening us today to discuss this important
issue. Our thanks also go to our briefers, not only
for their valuable contributions but also all the work
they do in this area in their respective fields. It was
good to hear such practical and common-sense advice
from them. We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report of on small arms and
light weapons (S/2021/839). It is very important that
we consider peacekeeping in this context but, as we
heard repeatedly today, peacekeeping does not happen
in a vacuum. We therefore need to consider the issue
carefully in the round.
Although small arms and light weapons have
important and legitimate uses, they are also subject to
diversion and misuse, which costs hundreds of thousands
of lives. Illicit small arms undermine security and, in
doing so, sustainable development, fuelling further
conf lict, crime and terrorism. Many United Nations
processes contribute to countering the illicit trade in
small arms. In that context, we warmly thank your
Mission and you, Sir, for your able leadership of the
recent seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as
others also acknowledged today.
As our speakers have brought out, effective control
of small arms and light weapons should be seen as an
important part of our wider approach to conf lict in the
Security Council. The United Kingdom is therefore
pleased to support the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research in a project to integrate
conventional arms control into conf lict-prevention
work. Together we have developed a risk-analysis
toolkit for conf lict practitioners that will strengthen
their understanding of the risks and impact of arms
18/25

06/10/2021

and how conventional arms control can contribute
to United Nations conf lict prevention, management
and resolution.
We also welcome the focus within the latest report
of the Secretary General on children affected by armed
conf lict and the gendered dimensions of the harm
caused by the illicit trade in small arms (S/2021/437).
As we heard repeatedly today, it is clear that children
and women bear the brunt of the impact of small arms.
We therefore support its recommendations, particularly
on coherence in programming related to children and
the role States should play to counter sexual violence
in conf lict by tackling illicit arms f lows, in line with
the Arms Trade Treaty or other national obligations.
As others said earlier, the Arms Trade Treaty is a key
multilateral tool to ensure well-regulated legal trade
in conventional arms and address illicit transfers. We
continue to encourage all States to ratify and accede to
the Treaty.
Illicitly traded small arms affect different
countries and regions in different ways, which has
been made clear today. Accordingly, we commend
regional approaches in that area, including the African
Union’s Silencing the Guns initiative and The Western
Balkans road map. The United Kingdom itself is
leading a review of the Handbook of Best Practices
on Small Arms and Light Weapons of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe with regard to
stockpile management. We also continue to support
work to address the risks of stockpiles of ammunition,
including through the recently concluded Group of
Governmental Experts on problems arising from the
accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles
in surplus.
The United Kingdom will continue to prioritize
work on small arms to strengthen domestic frameworks,
and we are helping countries to strengthen arms
control frameworks through national legislation to
implement better stockpile management procedures
and tackle the grave challenges recognized in the
Secretary-General’s report.
You put this issue on the agenda today, Sir,
because it is clearly at the very heart of the Council’s
work. We heard again and again that unchecked
proliferation — plain and simple — causes conf lict,
conf lict causes insecurity and unchecked proliferation
is therefore exacerbated even further by it. That
proliferation causes human misery where it occurs,
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

and, as we said, that cost is felt mainly by women
and children, as well as peacekeepers, whom we
deploy, as we heard earlier. It is therefore clear that
the Council needs to focus on the objectives set out
by our briefers. It is also clear that we need to think
very carefully when members in the Council call on us
to modify or reconsider arms embargoes that we have
implemented. We implement them for a reason, and
we need to consider very carefully the implications of
changing them.
Let us redouble our efforts. Let us consider
whether we can sign the Arms Trade Treaty if we have
not already. Let us properly implement all Council
resolutions in this area and think through the issue very
carefully as we mandate our peacekeeping missions.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Like others, I want
to start by thanking Kenya for convening today’s
very important meeting, which we see as critical
to addressing the very real threat posed by the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons across
the agenda of the Security Council and beyond. I
also want to congratulate Kenya on the outcome of
the seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
held in July. I thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, Mr. Abdelgadir
and Mr. Lochhead for their insightful briefings. Their
tireless advocacy and comprehensive research are what
the Security Council needs — and needs to hear.
The facts revealed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/839) are stark. Small arms and light
weapons cause the majority of violent deaths in conf lict
and non-conf lict settings. They facilitate more human
rights abuses than any other weapon. They perpetuate,
inf lame and prolong conf lict. Put simply, addressing
the threat is fundamental to the Council’s work. The
Secretary-General’s report provides tangible and,
importantly, actionable recommendations on how we,
individually and collectively, can achieve that. I want
to make four points that Ireland believes are crucial to
achieving our goal of silencing those guns once and
for all.
First, understanding the problem is essential
to treating it. The Council has a responsibility to
consistently and systematically scrutinize the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons as a driver

S/PV. 8874

of conf lict. In doing so and preventing such illicit
transfers, we can hope to better protect civilians. United
Nations peace operations mandated by the Council
have a crucial role to play. However, the mandates
require clear objectives and, importantly, specialized
resources to implement them. That is particularly
relevant in the context of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes.
Effective management, processing and treatment
of weapons and ammunition stockpiles are needed.
Equally important is the identification and elimination
of illicit trafficking routes and points of diversion.
Building the capacity of host States in both of those
areas is our shared responsibility. We in Ireland are
playing our part and will continue to offer training and
support through our defence forces.
My second point relates to the importance of
synergies across the United Nations system. From
resolution 2220 (2015) and the United Nations
Programme of Action and the Secretary-General’s
disarmament agenda, this threat cuts right across
the spectrum of the United Nations; so too must
our response.
We have seen direct evidence of the instrumental
role that regional organizations and programmes can
play in addressing small arms and light weapons.
The African Union’s Silencing the Guns project is an
example of strong regional leadership and engagement.
Regional road maps, such as those implemented by
the Economic Community of West African States and
in the Western Balkans, are also making important
strides.
We all share a collective responsibility to stem the
f low of illicit small arms and light weapons. Enforcing
United Nations arms embargoes is an important
aspect of that, as other speakers said. Furthermore,
national reporting, international cooperation and
information-sharing are critical, including to ensure
effective weapons tracing.
My third point is in relation to gender. While men
and boys account for the vast majority of violent deaths,
women often bear the brunt of the socioeconomic
fallout from small arms and light weapons-driven
conf lict. As co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security, we have also heard
how the proliferation of those weapons negatively
affects the security of women and girls in countries
such as Somalia and South Sudan. As others noted,

21-2763019/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

such conf lict entrenches gender-imbalanced power
dynamics and facilitates violence against women and
girls, including sexual and gender-based violence and
human trafficking. That is unconscionable. It simply
cannot stand. We know that gender-sensitive responses
are sustainable and effective responses. Integrating the
women and peace and security agenda into initiatives
and actions to combat small arms and light weapons is
therefore key. Equally, the needs of children must be
taken into account when developing gender-sensitive
and age-sensitive programmes.
Allow me to conclude by highlighting the explicit
connection that the Secretary-General draws between
climate change and its potential effects on peace and
security — an area where we believe the Security
Council needs to take specific action. We strongly
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to further examine the specific impact of climate
change on the use, effects and availability of
conventional weapons.
It is crystal clear that small arms and light weapons
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
It is our responsibility, around this table, to address
that threat. The Secretary-General’s Securing Our
Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament provides
the framework. His report provides the concrete
recommendations. Now is the time for bold action.
Ireland will continue to champion this issue and to
work with all its partners here at the Security Council
and across the General Assembly to accomplish that.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We
commend Kenya for convening this very important
and well-timed briefing. We also thank our briefers for
their presentations.
The illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons have
contributed to instability and insecurity in many
regions and constitute threats to international peace
and security. For that reason, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, as a State party to the Arms Trade Treaty,
recognizes the importance of sustained international
cooperation and national action to mitigate the global
impact of illicit weapons f lows. We firmly support the
implementation of the Programme of Action on Small
Arms and the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons at all
levels.
20/25

06/10/2021

Strengthened partnerships between the United
Nations and regional, subregional and interregional
organizations are required to combat the incessant
illicit trade, in line with resolution 2457 (2019). At the
regional level, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
recognizes the need for mechanisms to protect our
people. Even though we do not manufacture small
arms and light weapons or import them on a large
scale, our region continues to be severely impacted
by irresponsible and illicit weapons f lows, aided by
permissive gun laws in many manufacturing countries.
CARICOM has therefore accelerated the Roadmap
for Implementing the Caribbean Priority Actions on
the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and Ammunition
across the Caribbean in a Sustainable Manner by
2030. We are also firmly supportive of analogous
arrangements, such as the African Union’s Silencing
the Guns initiative and the regional road map for the
Western Balkans. However, such efforts will be all for
naught if States that manufacture arms and engage in
their trade do not assume greater responsibility for the
consequences of that trade. Undoubtedly, domestic
policies can have harmful implications beyond borders.
The misuse of small arms and light weapons
continues to hinder our pursuit of the Sustainable
Development Goals. The high number of grave
violations against children, as well as the serious threat
posed to women and girls, linked to the use of small
arms and light weapons is alarming. Furthermore, the
availability and the ease of movement of small arms and
light weapons in the Sahel and Central African regions
enable terrorism and violent extremism and escalate
intercommunal tensions, which are being exacerbated
by the devastating impacts of climate change. To
effectively protect civilians from the scourge of small
arms and light weapons a whole-of-system approach is
required, including Security Council engagement on
the matter.
We underscore the necessity of building national
capacity and institutional policy frameworks to support
effective disarmament, demobilization, security sector
reform and reintegration programmes that provide for
the inclusion and full and effective participation of
women, young people and civil society. In that regard,
we commend the work of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs.
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

Illicit arms f lows create cross-cutting and
multidimensional global challenges to which all States
are susceptible. There must be concerted action to
adequately address such challenges and safeguard
peace and security.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. I also listened
carefully to the statements by Mr. Abdelgadir and
Mr. Lochhead.
The illegal f low, excessive accumulation and
wanton misuse of small arms and light weapons
exacerbate armed conf licts, hinder sustainable
development, bolster terrorism and transnational
organized crime and threaten international peace
and development. At the same time, the illegal f low
of small arms and light weapons also makes it more
difficult for peace operations to perform their duties,
exacerbates the security risks in the mission areas of
peace operations and threatens the personal safety
of United Nations personnel. To address such issues,
China wishes to state the following.
First, the countries concerned should bear the
primary responsibility. In accordance with their own
national conditions, countries should establish and
improve laws and regulations, enhance the supervision
and control of weapons and ammunition, strengthen
border control, make every effort to prevent the f low of
small arms and light weapons into illegal channels and
effectively shoulder the responsibility of controlling
the f low of small arms and light weapons within their
borders. All countries should strictly implement the
Security Council’s arms embargo resolutions, refrain
from transferring or selling weapons to countries
subject to Security Council arms embargoes and
earnestly fulfil their international obligations.
Secondly, the United Nations should play an active
role. Preventing conf licts and maintaining peace
are important responsibilities of the United Nations.
Peace operations should perform their duties in strict
accordance with their mandates and on the basis of
respecting the sovereignty of the countries concerned
and carefully listening to their wishes. They should
provide capacity-building support to the countries
concerned and help them to strengthen the control of
small arms and light weapons. China attaches great
importance to the Secretary-General’s report on small
arms and light weapons (S/2021/839), supports the
Secretary-General and the relevant United Nations

S/PV. 8874

agencies in continuing to work to that end and hopes
that the Programme of Action on Small Arms and the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons will be fully and
effectively implemented.
Thirdly, new technologies ought to be fully
utilized. New materials and technologies make it
easier to manufacture, design and move small arms and
light weapons while adding to difficulties in tracing,
supervising and regulating such weapons. Peace
operations should capitalize on new technologies to
pay close attention to the f low of small arms and light
weapons in mission areas, effectively strengthening the
early-warning and emergency-response capabilities of
peacekeeping missions, striving to ensure the safety of
peacekeepers and minimizing the risks resulting from
the illegal f lows of small arms and light weapons.
Fourthly, promoting development should be put
on the agenda of work. Development is the master key
to solving all problems. The international community
should help the countries concerned to tackle poverty
and backwardness, promote economic development,
maintain social stability, achieve the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals and eliminate the triggers for trade
in or use of small arms and light weapons.
At the general debate of the seventy-sixth session
of the General Assembly, China’s president, His
Excellency Mr. Xi Jinping, put forward the Global
Development Initiative, which provides an impetus to
help countries recover from the pandemic, promotes
stronger, greener and healthier global development and
open a propitious space for international development
cooperation (see A/76/PV.3, A/76/332, annex VI).
All countries in the world are welcome to join this
initiative.
China has always attached great importance to
addressing the illegal f low of small arms and light
weapons and has adopted a prudent and reasonable
attitude towards the exports of such weapons. China
formally joined the Arms Trade Treaty in July 2020
and submitted its initial national report, which ref lects
its responsible attitude of actively participating in
the governance of the global arms trade and towards
maintaining international peace and security.
China actively engages in international cooperation
with developing countries to combat the illegal f low of

21-2763021/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

small arms and light weapons and provides assistance
to the best of its ability, including by establishing
the China-Africa Peace and Security Cooperation
Fund within the China-United Nations Peace and
Development Fund in an effort to support the Silencing
the Guns in Africa initiative.
Combating the illegal f low of small arms and
light weapons and building a world of lasting peace,
universal security and freedom from gun violence are
the shared dreams of people of all countries. China
stands ready to work with the international community
to take overarching and comprehensive measures
that accommodate the interests of all parties, jointly
crack down on the illegal f low of small arms and
light weapons, make unstinting efforts to ensure the
smooth conduct of peace operations, and safeguard
international peace and security.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Kenya for organizing
today’s meeting on the issue of small arms and light
weapons, on the occasion of the consideration of the
seventh biennial report of the Secretary-General on
small arms (S/2021/839), as mandated by Security
Council resolution 2220 (2015). I would also like to
thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Badreldin Elamin
Abdelgadir and Mr. David Lochhead for their briefings.
This meeting is timely in that it will allow us to
deepen the discussions that began at the recent Arria
Formula meeting hosted by Mexico, as well as those
that took place at the seventh Biennial Meeting of
States on the Programme of Action, which was held in
New York from 26 to 30 July 2021.
The uncontrolled f low of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition continues to be a
serious threat to international peace and security.
The consequences of the circulation of these weapons
are widely felt in all regions of the world. The spread
of small arms sustains hotbeds of tension, paralyses
stabilization efforts and undermines humanitarian
assistance and the protection of civilians. In short, it
hinders the execution of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, especially in a context already marked by
the expansion of international terrorism.
The Niger welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has taken this problem into account in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, even though,
despite all the efforts made, the control of illicit arms
22/25

06/10/2021

remains a major challenge to the achievement of the
objectives of peacemaking and peacebuilding.
If the responsibility for securing weapons on its
territory lies with each country, the production and
distribution of these weapons are the responsibility
of those who manufacture them and not the victims
of their use. This is the case even when the Security
Council has decided to impose an embargo, which is
the case in Libya.
My country also stresses the need to provide
specialized training in the management of arms and
ammunition prior to the deployment of peacekeepers,
in order to facilitate the execution of mandates. We
remain convinced that all solutions to the issue of
small arms and light weapons necessarily require a
stronger political commitment by States, given the
transnational nature of the circulation of illicit weapons
and all the geopolitical and economic implications
thereof. Furthermore, we believe that, in addition to
incorporating arms management into mandates, the
Council must continually ensure that the host country’s
capacity to ensure the proper management of stocks of
arms and ammunition is strengthened, in order to avoid
any negative inf luence on the peacebuilding process.
In addition, the prevention of illicit arms
trafficking can be ensured through the strengthening of
border surveillance in cooperation with neighbouring
countries, particularly in the implementation of
preventive
measures,
information-sharing
and
the application of international conventions and
programmes on the control of small arms. In Africa,
these include the African Union’s Silencing the Guns
initiative, the Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons of the Economic Community of West African
States, and the Central African Convention for the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, to name
a few.
The Niger, a vast country at the crossroads of Africa
that has already experienced problems of insecurity,
has taken the measure of the threat posed by the
uncontrolled circulation of light weapons by creating,
on 28 November 1994, the National Commission for
the Collection and Control of Illicit Weapons. This
entity has made a significant contribution to the
control of illicit weapons, even though the porous
nature of our borders makes its mission difficult.
Efforts are continuing with the support of bilateral and
multilateral partners, including the United Nations,
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

particularly in the area of humanitarian demining and
capacity-building in tracing, marking and storage of
small arms and light weapons.
I would like to commend the cooperation between
the National Commission and agencies of the United
Nations, which has made it possible, particularly
on the border between Nigeria and the Niger where
the circulation of these weapons remains a source
of insecurity, to implement a project aimed at
strengthening the capacities of the community police
services and raising awareness among the populations
of the communities concerned in the Maradi and
Tahoua regions of the Niger. The project has also
supported the Government’s efforts aimed at ensuring
the physical security of stockpiles and the marking and
registration of weapons seized and/or collected from
the population.
In the Sahel region, where the impact of the Libyan
crisis illustrates what happens when small arms and
light weapons circulate, as in other regions hosting
peace operations, the prevention of arms trafficking
is fundamentally based on the strengthening of
peacemaking and peacebuilding initiatives, the
reinforcement of State authority throughout the
national territory and security sector reform. For this
reason, it is important to strengthen the capacity of
States to fight terrorism and support national strategies
to contain the spread of small arms and light weapons.
As has been established previously and elsewhere,
women and children — who make up the majority of
the population and who, moreover, are usually the first
victims of the violence caused by the proliferation of
small arms — must necessarily be involved in the fight
against this serious phenomenon.
In conclusion, my delegation calls on all States
Members of the United Nations to strengthen
cooperation in controlling the illicit f low of small
arms and light weapons in order to achieve the
objective of silencing weapons. To that end, it is also
important to promote the sharing of good practices in
order to enrich one another and complete our action to
appropriately manage this phenomenon at the regional
and international level.

S/PV. 8874

and for the mandates of peace operations. Illicit f lows
of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition
undermine the effectiveness of peace operations, and
the availability of such weapons serves to sustain and
exacerbate armed conf lict and pervasive crime.
These dangers threaten both the civilians living
in conf lict affected areas and the peacekeepers who
risk their lives to protect them and may impede the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. Children are
disproportionately affected by small arms and light
weapons and left vulnerable to injury, displacement
and death, as well as to recruitment and use in
armed conf lict.
Illicit f lows of small arms and light weapons
have a particularly destabilizing effect, as they are
uncontrolled weapons in the hands of terrorist or
other groups with agendas to further unsettle often
fragile situations. In that regard, Norway has several
recommendations.
First, Norway encourages all Member States to
support the Secretary-General’s desire to mainstream
small-arms measures in other thematic areas,
including the protection of civilians, human rights,
counter-terrorism, organized crime, peacekeeping
and humanitarian assistance. All control initiatives
for small arms and light weapons should be carried
out with due attention to their potential impact on
children — and I am glad that several colleagues
highlighted this point today. We must take steps to
ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in small-arms control and recognize the
gendered impacts of the illicit f lows of small arms and
light weapons. Gender-responsive small-arms control
can help us better address this threat to international
peace and security.

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I also thank the
briefers for their concrete, comprehensive and very
useful remarks today.

Secondly, the Security Council must promote
an effective approach to weapons and ammunition
management and continue to integrate it as a key
pillar to support peace processes, good governance
and the reduction of violence. Special emphasis
should be placed on ensuring robust physical security
and stockpile management. Furthermore, support for
national efforts to manage weapons and ammunition in
the context of peace operations should be strengthened,
as that will reduce the harmful effects of illicit f lows
of small arms and light weapons.

Protecting civilians against violence and threats of
violence is a core objective for the Security Council

Thirdly, we must continue to prioritize support
for peace and reconciliation efforts, since parties to

21-2763023/25

S/PV.8874

Small arms

06/10/2021

conf lict will be less prone to resort to armed violence
if they are involved in a constructive political process
or mediation.

the previous report (S/2019/1011), but we have had to
contend with pandemic-related complications and their
effects on peace efforts globally.

Fourthly, we must continue to build on existing
efforts to tackle the illicit f low of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition at the international,
regional, subregional and national levels. We saw
positive developments at the seventh Biennial Meeting
of States on the Programme of Action and at the Seventh
Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty,
and we can look to models such as the Regional Centre
on Small Arms in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of
Africa and Bordering States and the African Union’s
Silencing the Guns by 2030 initiative.

Of critical importance is that the SecretaryGeneral’s report details several conf lict situations
under the Council’s purview where peace efforts
have been undermined by the proliferation of illicit
small arms and light weapons. We therefore wish to
underscore the following imperatives in our collective
efforts to address this challenge, including within the
context of peace operations.

Finally, we would like to thank Kenya and Mexico
for working together to ensure that this issue stays on
the Council’s agenda.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.
I
thank
Under-Secretary-General
Izumi
Nakamitsu, Mr. Abdelgadir and Mr. Lochhead for their
insightful briefings and for joining us today
The continued proliferation of illicit small arms
and light weapons is exacerbating conf licts, sparking
refugee f lows and internal displacement, intensifying
the threat of terrorism, undermining the rule of law,
complicating conf lict-resolution efforts, threatening
and frustrating peacekeeping operations and generally
fuelling a culture of violence and impunity. They may
be small and light, but that is exactly what makes them
more dangerous, especially when placed in the wrong
hands. By their very nature, small arms are easy to
acquire, use, transport and conceal.
The destructive global impact of illicit small arms
and light weapons and their ammunition makes it an
issue of concern for international peace and security.
Indeed, their impact goes beyond the context of peace
operations, which is our focus today, to reach other
areas of concern to the Security Council, including the
protection of civilians, counter-terrorism and children
in armed conf lict, among others.
Against that backdrop, Kenya welcomes the
biennial report of the Secretary-General on small arms
and light weapons (S/2021/839), pursuant to resolution
2220 (2015). From the report, it is eminently evident
that the Council must remain actively seized of this
matter. We note that a lot of work has been done since
24/25

First, there is need for a comprehensive architecture
built by collaboration and coordination among the
relevant United Nations organs and agencies, regional
and subregional organizations, as well as civil society.
That emerged clearly during the seventh Biennial
Meeting of States on the Programme of Action, which
Kenya had the privilege to chair.
Secondly, the strength of regional initiatives, as
exemplified by the Regional Centre on Small Arms
in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of Africa and
Bordering States, is undeniable. The initiatives of
regional organizations, including the African Union’s
initiatives to silence the guns by 2020 and Agenda
2063, as well as those of several regional, subregional
and national institutions on relevant aspects, such as
securing storage for weapons and ammunition, as well
as raising awareness and collecting and destroying
illicit small arms and light weapons, should be
supported.
Thirdly, Council mandates must be strengthened.
In addition to the reporting by the Secretary-General
on this issue, the Security Council should emphasize
supporting Governments in affected areas to enhance
their capacity to monitor proliferation trends, undertake
security sector reforms and implement disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in a
coordinated manner.
Fourthly, we call for strengthening the capacity of
United Nations missions and Governments in weapons
and ammunition management, which is critical to the
prevention of the diversion and illicit trade of small
arms and light weapons.
As a final point, there is a need for the Security
Council to consider the issue of small arms and light
weapons in the Council’s preventive efforts so as to
pre-empt the outbreak and entrenchment of conf lict.
21-27630

06/10/2021

Small arms

In conclusion, I again emphasize Kenya’s support
for continued discussion on this subject with a view to
seeking effective ways of supporting peace operations.
We ask the members of the Council to identify areas of
convergence in today’s briefing and to use them to build
consensus as we look to continue the consideration
of this matter in the days ahead. The impact of illicit

S/PV. 8874

small arms and light weapons across the files in the
Council is undeniable. It is critical that we take it up.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

21-2763025/25
