S/PRST/2006/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 January 2006
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5356th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 January 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns with the utmost firmness the attack
against a detachment of the United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which occurred on 23 January 2006 in the
national park of Garamba, resulting in the death of eight Guatemalan
peacekeepers and the severe wounding of five others. It offers its condolences
to the victims’ families and to the authorities of Guatemala. It commends the
dedication of MONUC’s personnel, who operate in particularly hazardous
conditions.
“The Security Council considers this aggression to be an unacceptable
outrage. The peacekeepers were involved in an operation against suspected
elements of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) reported to be present in the
park of Garamba. The LRA have conducted a long-running and vicious
insurgency in northern Uganda which has caused the death, abduction and
displacement of thousands of innocent civilians in Uganda, Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council calls upon the Government of
National Unity and Transition immediately to take all necessary measures to
bring to justice those responsible for this attack.
“The Security Council also condemns with the utmost firmness the recent
seizure of villages in the area of Rutshuru, province of North Kivu, by
insurgent elements. It expresses its concern at atrocities and human rights
abuses which have been reported in this context. It considers all such actions
to constitute a serious threat to the peace process and to the transition, and
demands that these cease immediately. It stresses the need for unreserved
commitment to the integration process of the armed forces, in the spirit of the
Global and All-Inclusive Agreement.
“The Security Council further underlines the importance of the electoral
process not being disturbed and encourages in this regard ongoing efforts for
community reconciliation. It also stresses in this context the importance of
early adoption of the electoral law under discussion in the Parliament, and of
respect for the timetable drawn up by the Independent Electoral Commission.

06-22205 (E) 250106

*0622205*

S/PRST/2006/4

“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to, and respect for the
national sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity and unity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It expresses its solidarity with the
Congolese people and its support to the Government of National Unity and
Transition. It calls for the prompt extension of State authority throughout the
Congolese territory.
“The Security Council reiterates its call upon States in the region to
deepen their cooperation with a view to putting an end to the activities of
illegal armed groups, and reaffirms that any recourse to the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity of a State is contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for MONUC, and urges
MONUC to continue to fulfil its mandate with determination.”

2
