V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

l. Calls upon those countries which have not yet
done so to take the necessary political decisions on
such basic elements in order to enable the United
Nations Negotiating Conference on a Common Fund
under the Integrated Programme for Commodities to
resume its work within a clear1y established negotiating
framework;
2. Reaffirms the urgcncy of cstablishing thc common fund and, to that end, requests the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to undertake consultations with a
view to reconvening the Negotiating Conferencc carly
in 1978.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/197.

Restructuring of the ef'onomic and
social sectors of the Uniterl Nations
system 177

121

---------------

Member States, a Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation, at a high
level which he determines as commensurate with the
functions outlined below, who, acting under the
authority of the Sccrctary-Gcncral, would cffcctively
assist him in carrying out his rcsponsibilities as chief
administrativc officcr. under the Charter of thc United
N ations. in thc cconomic and social ficlds. Accordingly. the Director-General, under the dircction of
the Sccretary-Gcncral, should be in chargc of:
"(a)
Ensuring the provision of cffective lcadership to thc various componcnts of thc Unitcd
Nations system in thc ficld of devclopmcnt and international cconomic co-opcration and in exercising
over-all co-ordination within thc systcm in ordcr
to cnsure a multidisciplinary approach to thc probkms of devclopmcnt on a system-widc basis;

"( b) Ensuring, within thc United Nations, thc
cohercnce, co-ordination and efficient managcment
of ali activities in the economic and social ficlds financed by the regular budget or by cxtrabudgctary
rcsourccs. 1 Ho

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order and 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 4 containing thc Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 ( S-VII) of 16
September 1975, by which it established the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic and
Social Sectors of the United Nations System for the
purpose of preparing detailed action proposals with a
view to initiating the process of restructuring the United
Nations system so as to make it more fully capable of
dealing with problems of international economic cooperation and development in a comprchensive and
effectivc manner, in pursuance of General Assembly
resolutions 3172 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973 and
3343 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, and to make it
more responsive to the requirements of the provisions
of the Declaration and the Programmc of Action on
the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order as well as thosc of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Reaffirming its desire to continue thc process of restructuring the United Nations system, of which the
results of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee constitute
a valuable initial contribution,
l. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic and Social
Sectors of the United Nations System 178 and expresses
its deep appreciation to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee for the exccllcnt manner in which he conducted its work;
2. Decides that paragraph 64 179 of the recommendations contained in chapter III of the report of the Ad
H oc Committee should read as follows:
"64. The General Assembly should invite the
Secretary-General to appoint, in full consultation with

7. Requests all organs, organizations and bodies
within the Unitcd Nations system to implement these
recommcndations within their respective spheres of
competence and to submit progress reports, including
plans for further implementation, to the General Asscmbly at its thirty-third session through the Economic
and Social Council at its sixty-fifth session;

1 7 1 See also sect. X.B.4, decision 32/447, and sect. X.B.7,
decisions 32/450 A to C.
1 7 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/32/34 and Corr.1) and Supplement No. 34A (A/32/34/ Add.1).
l 79 Paragraph 5 of section VIII of the provisional mimeographed text (A/32/34 (Part 1) ), p. 27.

180 This applies equally to ali services and organs within the
United Nations without prejudice to their respective spheres
of competence or terms of reference as contained in their
relevan! legislative mandates.
1H1 Comments made in the Ad Hoc Committec, at thc resumed sixty-third session of the Economic and Social Council
and at the thirty-second session of the General Assembly.

"In addition, the Secretary-General could entrust to
the Director-General othcr tasks in arcas of responsibility related to thc ensemble of the cconomic and
social activitics of thc Unitcd Nations. Thc DirectorGeneral should be appointcd by the Secretary-General for a pcriod of up to four years. He should be
provided with the nccessary support and resourccs.";

3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
of thc Ad Hoc Committee. as amcnded in paragraph 2
above and rcproduced in thc annex to thc prescnt
rcsolution;
4. Invites the Secrctary-General to appoint a Director-General for Dcvelopment and International Economic Co-operation as soon as possible, prefcrably
during the first quartcr of 197 8;
5. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to implement
those recommendations which are addressed to him,
to assist thc organs, organizations and bodies involved
in the restructuring process and to rcport to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session, through thc Econornic and Social Council, within the scope of its competcncc, at its sixty-fifth session;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth session
a report giving further details on how he plans to
implernent thc conclusions and rccommendations annexed to the prcscnt resolution in thc light of comments
made 1 H1 and to seek guidance, as necessary, on issues
rcquiring further clarification;

General Assembly-Thirty-seeond Session

122

8. Decides to keep under review the implementation
of the above-mentioned conclusions and recommendations.
109th plenary meeting
20 December 1977
ANNEX
Conelusions and recommcndations of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic nnd Social
Sectors of the Unitcd Nations Systcm

CONTENTS
Paragraphs

Section

J.

GENERAL AssEMBL Y

1-4

II.

EcoNOMIC AND SOCIAL CouNCIL

5-15

JJI.

ÜTHER UNITED NATIONS FORUMS FOR NEGO·
TIATIONS, INCLUDING THE UNITED NATIONS
CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
AND 01HER UNITED NATIONS ORGANS AND
PROGRAMMES, THE SPECIALJZED AGENCIES. THE
lNTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY AND
ad hoc WORI D CONFERENG.S

16-18

IV.

STRUCTURES FOR J.ffGIONAL AND INTERR! GIO?SIAL

19-27

CO·OPERATION

V.

( b)
The Second and Third Committees should, within
their respective spheres of competence, fully utilize the possibility of grouping substantively-related items undcr one heading for purposes of considerntion.

(e)
Discussions in the Second Committee should focus on
individual items or groups of items, organized in the manner
indicated in suhparagraph ( b) above. Such discussions may
be held concurrently on more than one item or group of items
and should he addressed as far as possible to proposals submitted undn thc, e items. The Second Committee should set
agreed deadlines for the submission of such proposals. These
measures should also be adopted, to the extent applicable. by
the Third Committee.

4. Documentation submitted by or on behalf of the
'kcretary-General to thc Second and Third Committees as
well as to other United Nations bodies in the economic and
social fields concerning items on their agenda should be
concise, action-oriented and in conformity with the relevan!
g~neral and specific legislative directives.

ÜPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES OF THE UNITED NATIONS

28-36

SYSTEM

VI.

PLANNING,
PROGRAMMING,
EVALUATION

VJJ.

lNTERAGENCY CO-ORD!NATION

50-58

VJIJ.

SECRETARIAT SUPPORT SERVICES

59-64

I.

BUDGETING

AND

37-49

GENERAi. AssEMBLY

l. The effectiveness of the General Assembly in fulfilling
its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
as the supreme organ of the Unite<l Nations system in the
economic and social fields should be increase<l by the following
measures:
(a) The Assembly should fully exercise its powers under
,the Charter to promote, ínter alia, solutions as to international economic, social and related problems and, to that
end, to function as the principal forum for policy-making
and for the harmonization of international action in respect
of those problems.
( b) The Assembly should concentrate on the establishment
of over-all strategies, policies and priorities for the system
as a whole in respect of international co-operation, including
operational activities, in the economic, social and related
fields. It may assign to other forums within the United Nations system, as necessary, the responsibility for negotiating
and submitting recommendations for action in specific areas.

The Assembly should review and evaluate developments in other forums within the Unite<l Nations system and
establish appropriate guidelines for further action. J,t may
also review and evaluate developments in forums outside the
United Nations system and address recommendations to
them.
2. The General Assembly should promote support and
assistance to the developing countries, in the context of measures agreed upon by those countries, for the purpose of
strengthening and enlarging their mutual economic co-operation.
(e)

3. The General Assembly should rationalize its methods
of work and proce<lures in the economic an<l social fields and,
as a first step, should adopt the following measures:
The Assembly should organize its agenda and allocate
the items thereon in such a way as to achieve a b-alanced and
efficient distribution of items in the Second and Third Com(a)

mittees, taking due account of the respective functions of
those Committees, the nature of the items concerned, their
substantive interrelationships and the need to consider questions of economic and social development in a co-ordinated
manner. The Chairmen of the Second and Third Committees
shoul<l hold consultations with a view to assisting the General
Committee to that end. Steps should also he taken to improve
c:o-ordination between the Second and Third Committees, on
lhe one hand, and the Fifth Committee, on the other.

II.

EcoNOMIC

AND SOCIAL CoUNCIL

5. In exercising its functions and powers under the Charter
and in fulfilling its role as set out in the relevant General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions, the
Council, under the authority of the Assembly or in the performance of such functions as may be assigned to it by the
Assembly, should concentrate on its responsibilities:
(a) To serve as the central forum for the discussion of
international economic and social issues of a global or interdisciplinary nature and the formulation of policy recommendations thereon addressed to Member States and to the United
Nations system as a whole;
(b) To monitor and evaluate the implementation of overall strategies, policies and prioritiC6 e5tablished by the General Assembly in the economic, social and related fields, and
to ensure the harmonization and coherent practica! operational
implementation, on an integrated basis, of relevant policy
decisions and recommendations emanating from United Nations
conferences and other forums within the United Nations system
after their approval by the Assembly and/or the Economic
and Social Council;
(e) To ensure the over-all co-ordination of the activities
of the organizations of the United Nations system in the
economic, social and related fields and, to that end, the
implementation of the priorities established by the General
Assembly for the system as a whole;

(d) To carry out comprehensive policy reviews of operational activities throughout the United Nations system, bearing
in mind the need for balance, compatibility and conformity
with the priorities established by the General Assembly for the
system as a whole.

6. In discharging these responsibilities, the Economic and
Social Council ~ hould bear in mind the importance of assisting
in the preparation of the work of the General Assembly in
the economic, social and related fields so that the Assembly
may give timely and effective attention to the substantive
issues requiring consideration. Such preparation should include
the drawing up, for consideration by the Assembly, of sug¡;cstions regarding the l;itter's documentation and organization
of work in the economic and social fields, as well as of recommendations for action by the Assembly on substantive issues.
7. The Economic and Social Council should organize its
work on a biennial basis and provide for shorter but more
frequent subject-oriented sessions spread throughout the year,
exccpt wh~n the General Assembly is in session. Such sessions

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Coinmittee

of the Council should be scheduled for the purpose, inter alia,
of considering action by the United Nations sy,stem in particular sectors, reviewing the results of technical work undertaken in specialized bodies and establishing guidelines for such
work, reviewing programme budgets and medium-term plans
within the United Nations system, and recommending policy
guidelines for operational activities. The Council, taking into
account the provisions of paragraphs 10 and 11 below, should
identify subject areas on which such sessions should be held.
8. In formulating its biennial programme of work, the
Economic and Social Council should identify the issues which
will require priority consideration, decide on thc schedule and
agenda for its subject-oriented sessions and determine the
manner in which substantively-related items on its agenda
should be grouped under one heading for purposes of consideration. The Council may, in modification of its programme,
decide on ad hoc arrangements-including in ,particular the
convening of special sessions-to deal with emerging problems
meriting special or urgent international attention. fn formulating its programme, the Council should take into account the
possibility of transmitting certain of the reports submitted
through it to the General Assembly without debate.
9. At such times as may be decided upon by its members,
the Economic and Social Council should also hold periodic
meetings, at the ministerial or other sufficiently high leve!,
to review major issues in the world economic and social
situation. Such meetings should be effectively prepared and
should concentrate on importan! policy ,!feas justifying highlevel participation.
1O. In the light of the foregoing and in order to ensure
that the subject areas referred to in paragraph 7 above are
given the most dfective and informed consideration possible
within the broad context of the tasks indicated in paragraph 5,
the Economic and Social Council should assume to the
maximum extent possible direct responsibility for performing
the functions of its subsidiary bodies; these bodies would
accordingly be discontinued or their terms of reference redefined and/or regrouped. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 27 below, the regional commissions should continue in
being.

11. On the basis of the foregoing, the measures set forth
in subparagraphs (a) to (d) below should be adopted by the
Economic and Social Council not later than the end of 1978
in respect of its expert and advisory groups, its standing committees and ,the functional commissions, and the Council should
give high priority to this task in formulating its programme
of work:
(a) The discontinuance of the expert and advisory bodies
of the Council unless the Council takes affirmative action to
renew and redefine their mandates and, where appropriate,
to set deadlines for the completion of their activities;
(b)

The thorough streamlining, including discontinuance,

as appropriate, of the standing intergovernmental committees;
(e) The redefinition and regrouping, on the basis of their
substantive and methodological interrelationships, of the terms
of reference of the functional commissions, or the assumption
by the Council in appropriate instances of direct responsibility
for their work;
(d) The assumption by the Council of direct responsibility
for carrying out the preparatory work for ad hoc conferences
convened by the Council itself and, as appropriate, by the
General Assembly, without ,prejudice to arrangements already
agreed upon for conferences currently under preparation.

12. Toe Economic and Social Council should to the
maximum extent possible refrain from establishing new subsidiary bodies; it should make every effort to meet the need
for any new bodies by holding subject-oriented sessions as
provided for in paragraph 7 above. For their part subsidiary
bodies of the Council should refrain from creating new
subordinate sessional or intersessional groups without the
prior concurrence of the Council.
13. In the light of paragraphs 10 and 11 above, ali States
Members of the United Nations wishing to participate in the

123

work of the Economic and Social Council should be enabled
to do so to the fullest possible extent. In addition, consideration should be given to ways and means of making the Council fully representative. 182 Where the Council decides in the
context of the measures envisaged in paragraph 11 above to
regroup the terms of reference of particular subsidiary bodies,
it should also give consideration to the possibilty of such regrouping being accompanied by an increase in the membership of the reconstituted body or bodies. The Council should
continue to invite non-member States to participate in its
deliberations on any matter of particular concern ,to them.
14. The Secretary-General and the executive heads of the
organizations of the United Nations system should participate
more actively in the deliberations of ,the Economic and Social
Council and should provide full assistance to the Council in
accordance with the relevant general and specific legislative
directives.
15. The Economic and Social Council should examine and
improve its consultative relationships with the non-governmental organizations, taking fully into account the provisions
of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order. The Council
should also make recommendations for the rationalization
and harmonization of consultative relationships with the nongovernmental organizations by the organizations of the United
Nations system as a whole and in the context of ad hoc world
conferences.183
IIJ.

ÜTHER UNITED NATIONS FORUMS FOR NEGOTIATIONS,
INCLUDING THE UNITED NATIONS CoNFERENCE ON TRADE
ANO DEVELOPMENT ANO OTHER UN!TED NATIONS ORGANS
,\NO PROGRAMMES, THE SPECIALIZED AGENCIEs,184 THE
INTERNATIONAL ATOMlC ENERGY AGENCY AND ad hoc
WORLD CONFERENCES

16. Ali United Nations organs and programmes, the
specialized agencies, the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, the International Atomic Energy Agency and ad hoc
world conferences should co-operate in whatever measures
are necessary for the effective discharge of the responsibilities
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
and should, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and within the scope of their respective basic instruments,
give full and prompt effect to their specific policy recommendations.
17. In carrying out their respective mandates, ali United
Nations organs and programmes, agencies and ad hoc world
conferences should be similarly guided by the over-all policy
framework established by the General Assernbly and the Economic and Social Council, taking fully into account the needs
and requirements of the developing countries.
18. In the light of General Assembly resolution 31/159
of 21 December 1976, appropriate measures should accordingly be taken to enable the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, within available resources, effectively
to play the major role envisaged in resolution 90 (IV) of 30
May 1976 of the Conference 1 • 5 as an organ of the Assembly
for ddiberation, negotiation, review and implementation in
the field of international trade and related areas of international economic co-operation, bearing in mind the need to
182 For re,servations and interpretative statements regarding
thi~ formulation, see Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly,
Thzrty-sccond Session, S11p¡,leme11t No. 34 (A/32/34 and
Corr. 1) • annex J.
1 " 3 Fo~ interpretative statements regarding this ,paragraph,
s.ee Ofj1cwl Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 34 ( A/32/34 and Corr.1), annex l.
1 H4 It is the understanding of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Restructuring of the Economic and Social Sectors of the
United Nations System that the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade is treated by the U nited Nations as a de facto
specialized agency ( see, inter afia, Offecial Records of the
Economic and Social Council, Fifty-ninth Session. Plenarv
Meetings, 1973rd meeting, para. 19).
·
1.,1> See Proceedings of the Unitcd Nations Conference on
Trnde and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexe,1· (United Nations puhlication, Sales No. E.76.IT.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

124

maintain its close and co-operative relationship with the
Assembly and to co-operate with the Economic and Social
Council in carrying out the Council's responsibilities under
the Charter.
]V.

STRUCTlJRES

F0R REGIONAL

.\ND 11\TERREGJONAL

C0-0PERATI0N

19. The regional commissions should be enabled fully to
play their role un<ler the authority of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council as the main general
economic and social development centres within the Unite<l
Nations system for their respective regions. having due regard
to the responsibilities of the specialized agencies and other
United Nations bodies in -specific sectoral fiel<ls and the coordinating ro1e of the United Nations Development Programme in resped of technical co-operation activities.
20. Taking into account the special needs and conditions
of their respective regions, they should exercise team leadership and responsibility for co-ordination and co-operation at
the regional leve!. They may convene periodic meetings, as
necessary, for the purpose of improving the co-ordination of
the relevant economic and social activities of the United Nations system in their respective regions.
21. The regional commissions should provide inputs for
the global policy-making processes of the competen! United
Nations organs and should participate fully in the implementation of the relevant policy and programme decisions taken by
these organs. They should be consulted on the definition of
the objectives to be include<l in the medium-term plan of the
Unite<l Nations covering fields of interest to them. taking into
account the spe,cial needs and conditions of their respective
regions.
22. Subject to such guidance as may be provided by the
Governments concerned and without prejudice to membership
of the regional bodies concerned, the o:rganizations of the
United Nations system should take early steps to achieve a
common definition of regions and subregions and the i<lentical
location of regional an<l subregional offices.
23. Relations between regional commissions and the organizations of the United Nations sy,stem should be strengthened. Close co,operation with the United Nations Development
Programme should be established and appropriate arrangements
made to enable the reg¡onal commissions to participate actively
in operational activities carried out through the United Nations
system, including the .preparation of intercountry programmes,
as may be required, in their respective regions. Without prejudice to the special needs and conditions of each region, and
taking into account the plans and priorities of the Governments concerned, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council should take measures to enable them to
function expeditiously as •executing agencies for intersectoral,
subregional, regional and inter,regional projects and, in arcas
which do not fa!! within the purview of the sectoral responsibilities of specialized agenci-es and other United Nations
bodies, for other subreg¡onal, regional and interregional projects.
24. The regional commissions concerned should assist developing countries at the request of the Govcrnmcnts concerned in identifying projects an<l preparing programmes for
the promotion of oo-operation among those countries. Taking
fully into account the relevant global policy decisions of thc
competent United Nations organs, the regional commissions
concerned should intensify their efforts, with the assistancc of
the competent organizations of the United Nations system
and at the request of the Governments concerned, to strengthen
and enlarge economic co-operation among the developing countries at the subregional, regional and interregional Ievels.
25. As a means of promoting more effective interregional
co-operation, the regional commissions should strengthen and,
as appropria,te, expand existing arrangements for the continuou,
exchange between them of information and experience. Such
arrangements may include th,~ holding of periodic intersecretariat meetings, utilizing existing machinery as far as possible
for that purpose.

26. In order to enable the regional commissions effectivcly
to discharge the responsibilities indicated in thc preceding
paragraphs. ,the necessary authority should be delegated to
them an<l. to the same cnd, adequate budgetary and financia!
provision should be madc for their activities.
27. Taking into account the special necds an<l conditions
of their respective regions an<l bearing in mind the objectives
set forth above. the regional commissions should rationalize
their structure,. ínter afia by s,treamlining thcir subsi<liary
machinery.
V.

OPERATIONAI. ACTIVITIES 0F THE ÜNITED NATI0NS SYSTEM

28. Restructuring measures in respect of thc opcrational
activities cf the United Nations system for developmcnt should
serve to promote the a,chievement of the following obje,ctives:
(a) A real in crea-se in the flow of resources for such
ac,tivities on a predictable, continuous and assured basis:

( b) The assistance provided should be in conformity with
the national objectives and priorities of the recipient countries:

(e) The orientation of these activities and the allocation
of available resources for the activities to fully reflect thc
over-all strategies. policies and priorities of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council:
(d) The achievement of optimum efficiency and the re<luction of administrative costs with a consequcnt increase in thc
proportion of resources available to meet the assistance rcquircmcnts of rccipient countries.

29. In carrying out the comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development. as provided for in
paragraph 5 (d) above, the Economic and Social Council
shoul<l be guidcd by the objectives outlined in paragraph 28
above.
30. With thesc objectives in view and as a first step. with
future steps to be determined by the General Assembly, integration measures as outlined in the following paragraphs
shoul<l be gradually undertaken, under the authority of the
Secretary-General wherever appropriate, in respect of cxisting
United Nations programmes and Funds for devclopment
financed by extrabudgetary resources. The implementation of
these measures should be carried out under the guidance of
the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council particularly bearing in mind, firstly, that a major premise underlying such integration is that it will stimulate substantially
higher levels of voluntary contributions to operational activities
for development and, sccondly, that it should accordingly be
carried forward with due regard to the current lcvels of such
voluntary contributions. The resources, aims and objectivcs of
each programme. as reflected in existing programmes and
Funds, should remain clcarly identified.
31. Without prejudice to other arrangements for mobilizing
additional funds for par,ticular programmes through other
measures or from other sources and subject to provision bcing
made for the earmarking of contributions for specific programmes, there should be held a single annual United Nations
pledging conference for ali United Nations operational activities for development. 1n preparing for the pledging conference.
the Secretaria! should m:1ke availahle to Governments information concerning previous and curren! contribut ions for the
various prograrnmes from Governments and other sources.
32. Measurcs should be takcn to achieve maximum uniformity of administrative, financial, budgetary, personnel and
planning procedures. including the establishment of a wmmon procurement svstem, harmonized budget and programme
cycles, a unified pe~sonnel system and a c~mmon rccruitment
and training systcm.
33. At the country leve!. there should be improved coherence of action and effective integration. in accordancc with
the objedivcs and priorities of the Governmcnt conccrncd.
of the various seotoral inputs from the Unitcd Nations systcm.
The United Nations Development Programme country-programming process 1"; ,hould be utilizcd as a framc of rcfer1 ~H See

resolution 2688 (XXV), anncx, paras. 1-5.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

125

ence for the operational activities carricd out and financed
by the organizations of the United Nations systcm from their
own resources.

and the Economic and Social Council should, in the light of
expcricncc, keep under conlinuous review the terms of reference of the Committee.

34. On behalf of the Unitcd Nations system, ovcr-all
responsibility for, and co-ordination of, operational activities
far development carried out at th~ country leve! should be
entrusted to a single official to be designated taking into
account the sectors of particular interest to the countries of
as¡¡ignment, in consultation with and with the consent of the
Government concerned, who should exercise team leadership
and be responsible far evolving, at the ceuntry lcvel, a multidisciplinary dimension in sectoral deve.Jopment assist:mce programmes. These tasks should be carried out in conformity
with the priorities established by the cornpetent national
authorities and with the assistance, as necessary, of joint
interagency SJdvisory groups. Subject to the requirements of
individual countries, steps should be taken to unify the country
offioes of the various United Nations organizatiom.

42. Mcasures should be taken to improve !be effectiveness
of interna! evaluation procedures in respect of programme
implcmcntation. Appropriate methods should also be developed
in ordcr to assist the competcnt intergovernmental bodies,
with thc assis,tance as requircd of the Joint Jnspection Unit,
in carrving out their re,ponsibilities for externa! evaluation.

35. In the context of the foregoing, consideration should
be given by the General Assembly to the establishment of a
single governing body responsible far the managcment and
control, at the intergovernmental leve!, of United Nations
operational activities far development. 18 7 This body should
replace the existing governing bodies. Jts composition should
be such as to ensure a wide, equitable and balanced representation.
36. Steps should be taken to ensure adequate developing
country representation at the ex,ecutive management and other
central decision-making levels of secretariat structures in thc
area of operational activities far development of the United
Nations syst,em.
VI.

PLANN!NG,

PROGRAMMING,

BUDGET!NG

AND

EVALUATION

37. The reoommendations in the present section are
designed to enhance the effectiveness of the planning, programming, budgetary and evaluation processes within the
United Nations system.
38. The competent intergovernmental bodies charged with
programming and budgeting should develop thematic approaches with a view to ensuring the implementation, by the
Secretaria,t units concemed, of the over-all priorities established by the General Assembly.
39. The Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
should fully discharge its responsibilities, in accordance with
i,ts terms of reforence, as the main subsidiary organ of the
Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly far
planning, programming ami co-ordination. In discharging those
responsibilities, it should also assist the Council and the
Assembly in supervising, reviewing and carrying out, as appropriate, evaluation exercises in respect of the activities of
the United Nations, particularly those having system-wide
implications. Furthermore, it should consider and make recommendations regarding the establishment and harmonization of
medium-term plans and programmes, including the concepts
on which they are based.
40. In addition, the CommiUee for Programme and Coordination should in the light of !he perspective indicated
above formulate recommendations, far consideration by the
Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, on
the relative priorities of United Nations progmmmes; in this
conteM subsidiary intergovernmental and expert bodies should
accordingly refrain from making recommendations on the
relative prioriües of the majar programmes as outlined in
the medium"term plan and should instead propase, through
the Committee, the relative priorities to be accorded to the
various subprogrammes within ,their respective fields of competence.
41. The Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
should make such further improvements in its programme
and methods of work as would facilitate the full discharge
of the abov,e-mentioned responsibilitics. The General Assembly
1 87 J.t is agreed that the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World
Food Programme are to be excluded.

43. The organizations of the Unitcd Nations system should
intensify their efforts to develop harmonized budget presentations and a common methodology of programme classification
and description of content. They should synchronize their
programme budgct cyclcs and provide full and compatible
infarmation on e,trabudgetary resources in their programme
budgets.
44. These organizations should work out without further
(b!ay solutions to the timing and technical problems which
are impcding thc dfcctivc application of the existing procedures
for prior consultation on work programmes in order that the
competent governing boJies may be enabled to take ful!
acoount of thc results thereof befare approving such programmcs. ln !he same context, vigorous steps should be taken
towards joint programming in related programme areas.
45. These organizations should intensify their work on the
elahoration of medium-term plans. including the problems of
methodology. procedure and the harmonization of plan cycles.
In addition, the procedures for prior consultation should be
applied to these plnns with a view to establishing an increasing measure of joint planning in areas of mutual concern and
eventually to system-wide medium-term planning.
46. Measures ~hould be taken to facilitate representation
by States members of the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination at a high level of expertise and to ensure the
continuiry of such representa.tion. To this end, and subject to
the review envisaged in paragraph 12 of General Assembly
resolution 31/93 of 14 December 1976, the payment by the
United Nations of ,the travel and per diem expenses of one
represcnlative of each State member of the Committee should
be continued.
47. In exercising its responsibilities as defined by the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions should
be guided by the priorities of the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. To emure more equitable representation, particularly for the interests of the developing countries,
the size of the Advisory Committee should be increased to
at least sixteen.
48. There should be close co-opera.tion between the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and
they should worl out appropriate arrangements for maintaining continuous contaot. The two Committees should so organize
their respective programmes of work as to facilitate the
discharge of the faregoing tasks; to !he samc end the Secretary-General should make th: necessary adjustments to the
cyde for thc pre¡nra,tion of the relevant documentation and
generally ensure compliance by the Secretaria! with the
procedures indicated above.
49. lntergovernmental bodies should enforce existing rules
rnncerning the submission of programme-budget implications
of proposals submitted to them. To the extent possible, a statement of programme-budget implications should be available
in writing during the consideration of proposals and normally
not latcr than twenty-four hours befare the approval of the
propos:ils concerned. Such statements shall indicate, as appropriate, related progr:,mmes already included in the relevant
medium-term plan, the percentage increase in the expenditures
of the Secretariat units concerned and the resources which
could be released from any programme elements which have
bccomc obsolete, of marginal usefulness or ineffective. If in
the course of a scs,ion two or more statements of programmehudget implications havc been submitted, the Secretary-General
shall submit, at thc conclusion of the session, a summary of
such statements containing aggregate figures.

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

126
VIJ.

]NTERA(jEi'iCY

CO-ORlJIN ATION

50. Interagency co-ordination at the intergovernmental leve]
should be govern,~d by the policy gui<l line3, <lirectives and
prioriües ectablished by the Ccne•r:il Assembly ami, undcr
its authority, by the Economic anJ Social Council in the
exercise of their over-all responsibiliti~s as ou:lined in sections
I and II.

5 i. At the intersecrctariat leve!. intcragency co-ordination
should aim at effectively assisting in the preparatory work fo.r
intergov~rnmcntal decisions. in the implementation of such
decisions and in their translalion intD mutu:tlly complementary
or joint programme activities. To that end, it should integra.te
into a coh;;rent whole the rekvant ex,pertisé and inputs of
the organizations of the Unit2d Nations system. 1t should also
be a built-in element of the substantive support to be provided
to the intergovernmental bodies concerned for the di~charge
of thcir policy making functions as well as an integral part
of intersecretariat armngements for policy and programme
execution.
52.

On the hasis of the foregoing, interagency co-or<lina-

tion at the intersecretariat leve! should concentrate on thc

following tasks:
(a) Preparing, in compliance with the relevan! general
and specific legislative directives. concise an<l action-oriented
recommenuations for considcration by the intergovernmental
bodies concerned;
(b)
Concerting in an effective manner the irnplementation, in accordance with paragraph 16 above, by the United
Nations organs, programmes and agencies concerned of policy
guidelines, directives and priorities omanating from the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council;

(e) Developing the co-operative and, wherever possible,
joint planning, as well as the co-ordinated execution, of programme activities decided upon at the intergovernmental leve!.

53. Interagency co-ordination at the intersecretariat leve]
should be pursued with ful] respect for the competence, where
relevant, of the regional commissions as outlined in section IV.
In the field, such co-ordination should be pursued in conformity
with the objectives and priorities of the Government concerned and should be supportive of the local co-or<lination
arrangements established by that Government.
54. The machinery for interagency co-ordination at the
intersecretariat leve] should centre on the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination under the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral. Subject to the guidance and supervision of the Economic and Social Council, that machinery should be streamlined and reduced to a mínimum; except where the discharge
of permanent functions necessitates the retention of continuing
machinery, maximum use should be made of flexible, ad hoc
arrangements designed to meet the specific requirements of the
intergovernmental bodies concerned and geared to the policymaking and programming processes of the General A5sembly
and the Council. In the light of these considerations, steps
should be taken to merge the Environment Co-ordination
Board, the Inter-Agency Consultative Board and the Advisory
Committee of the United N ations Industrial Development Organization with the Administrative Committee on Co-or<lination, which shoul<l assume their respective functions.
55. The agenda, functioning and reporting systems of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination should be adjusted
to respond fully and promptly to the priority concerns, specific
requirements and programme of work of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. The reporting schedules
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination shoul<l be
reorganized so as to conform to the meetings calendar of the
intergovernmental bodies concerned. Under the authority of
the Secretary-General, the executive secretaries of the regional
commissions should be enabled fully and effectively to participate in the work of the Administrative Committee on Coordination on matters of concern to their respective commissions.
56. Arrangements should be made to improve communication between the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination

an<l the intergovernmental bodies concerned, including wi<ler
access to the results of the relevan! Administrative Committee
on ( 'o-ordin:,tion discussions by thesc bodies on matters of
concern to them. As nccessary, mutually convenient procedures
shou!J be worked out to enable the Chairman or designated
reprl!scntative of any of these bodics to be associated in an
appropriate manner with Administralive Committee on Coordination <liscussions of particular concern to that body.
57. The review by the Economic and Social Council of the
relationship agreements between the United Nations an<l thc
specialized agencies should he guide<l, inter alía, by the nee<l
to ensure that the agencies give full and prompt effect in accor<lance with the Charter of the United Nations and within
the scope of their respective basic instruments to the recommendations ma<le hy the General Assl!mbly and the Council
for the co-ordination of their policies and activities.
58. The powers of the General Assembly under Article 17,
paragraph 3, of the Charter should he fully exercised in thc
interests of system-wide co-ordination, particularly in the context of the establishment of over-all priorities and in relation
to administrative and budgetary issues of broad applicability.
Appropriate arrangements to alisist the Assembly in that regar<l
should be made by the Economic and Social Council, the
Committce for Programme and Co-ordination and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.

VIII.

SECRETARIAT SUPPORT SERVICES

59. The recommendations in the present section represen!
guidelines, the detailed implementation of which the SecretaryGeneral would carry out in exercise of his powers under the
Charter of the United Nations.
60. In the economic and social sectors, the United Nations
Secretaria! should be restructure<l so as effectively to meet the
requirements and the policy directives of the General Asscmbly
and the Economic and Social Council and, in the context of
the purposes stated in Article l. paragraphs 3 and 4, as well
as of the provisions of Articles 100 and 1Ol of the Charter,
to take fully into account in particular the development rcquiremenls of the developing countries.
61. In support of the relevan! intergovernmental bodies.
the United Nations Secretariat should concentrate on the following functions:
(a) Interdisciplinary research and analysis, drawing a,
necessary upon ali relevan! parts of the United Nations system.
On the basis of the relevant legislative authority, this function
inclu<les:
(i)

Preparing, on a regular basis, global economic ami
social surveys and projections to assist the General
Asfemhly and the Economic an<l Social Council in
the discharge of their responsihilities as set out in
sections I an<l II;

(ii)

Undertaking in-depth intersectoral analyses and syntheses of development issues, in close collaboration
v., ith those elements of the United Nations system
engagc<l in similar work and taking into acconnt relevan! work in the various sectoral components of the
United N ations system, and preparing concise and
ac,ion-oriented rccommendations on those issues in
accordance with the requirements of the General
Assembly an<l the Economic and Social Council, for
consideration by those organs;

(iii)

Identifying and bringing to the attention of Governments cmerging economic an<l social issues of international concern;

This function woul<l accordingly cover, inter afia, the provision
of substantive support services for the work of the Committee
for Development Planning;
( b) Cross-sectoral analysis of programmes and plans in the
c:conomic ,md social sectors of the United Nations system with
a view to mobilizing and integrating, at the planning and programming stages. the inputs and expertise of the organizatiom
of the United Nations system for the following tasks:

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Second Contmittee

(i)

Concerting in an effective manner the implementation
of policy guidelines, directives and priorities emanating
from the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council;

(ii)

Developing the co-operative and, wherever possible,
joint planning of programme activities decided upon
at the intergovernmental leve!, with a view to systemwide medium-term planning at the earliest possible
time;

This function would accordingly cover, ínter alia, the provision
of substantive support services for the relevan! work of the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination;
(e) Substantive support for technical co-operation activities
in economic and social sectors which are not covered by other
United Nations organs, programmes or specialized agencies;
this function would include, inter alía, the provision of technical expertise in the formulation, implementation and evaluation of country and intercountry programmes and of specific
projects, the provision of direct advisory assistance to Governments, the development of training materials and support of
training institutions;
(d)
Management of teclmical co-operation activities carried
out by the United Nations in respect of:
(i) Projects under the regular programme of technical
assistance;
(ii) Projects of the United Nations Development Programme for which the United Nations is the executing
agency;
(iii) Projects financed by voluntary contributions from
Governments and other externa! donors including
funds in trust;
(e) Provision, on an integrated basis, of technical secretaria! services for the Committee for Programme and Coordination, the Economic and Social Council, the General
Assembly, ad hoc conferences and intersecretariat co-ordination
machinery; this function includes organizing and co-ordinating
the provision by the Secretariat units concerned of substantive
support services, particularly documentation, as required by
the above-mentioned bodies, ensuring that the substantive units
concerned are informed of relevant developments in the work
of these bodies, including resolutions and decisions adopted by
them, and ensuring that these bodies are kept informed of
action being taken in response to their decisions by the Secretariat units concerned;
(/) Without prejudice to the function defined in subparagraph (a) above, and in response to dircctives from the relevant
intergovernmental bodies, research, including the collection of
relevan! data, and analysis in those economic and social sectors
that do not fa!! within the purview d other United Nation~
organs, programmes and specialized agencies.

127

62. In view of their particularly close substantive and
mcthodological re!ationship, the functions defined in paragraphs 61 (a) and 61 (b) above should be clustered together
in accordance with a programme of phased implementation.
In lhc same context, the functions defined in paragraphs 61 (e)
and 61 (d) above should also he clustered together in a
separate organizational entity in accordance with a programme
of phased implementation. The function defined in paragraph 61
(e) should he treated as a distinct function in a separate organizational cntity. The Sccretary-General should deploy the
function in paragr;1ph 61 (f) to the clusters of functions dcfined
in paragraphs 61 (a) and (b) or 61 (e) and (d), respectively,
on the basis of the substantive, practica] and methodological
relationships involved, and allowing for the possibility of deploying appropriate elemcnts to the regional commissions.
63. Thc dustering of functions indicated in paragraph 62
aben e should be accompanied by a thorough rationalization
and strearnlining of the capabilities of the org:mizational units
concerned, including the redeployment, as necessary, of their
staff n:sources.
64. The General Assembly should invite the SecrctaryGencral to appoint, in ful! consultation with Member States,
a Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation, at a high leve! which he determines as
comrnemurate with the functions outlined below, who, acting
under thc authority of the Secretary-General, would effectively
assist hirn in carrying out his responsibilities as chief administrative officer, under the Charter of the United Nations, in
the economic and social fields. Accordingly, the DirectorGcncral, under the dircction of the Secretary-General, should
k in charge of:
(a)
Ensuring the provision of effective leadership to the
various components of the United Nations system in the field
of development and international economic co-operation and
in exercising over-all co-ordinatíon within the system in order
to ensurc a multidisciplinary appro.ach to the problems of development on a system-wide basis;

( h)
Ensuring, within the United Nations, the coherence,
co-ordination and efficient management of all activíties in the
economic and social fields financed by the regular budget or
by extra budgetary resources. 1 88

In addition, the Secretary-General could entrust to the DirectorGeneral other tasks in areas of responsibility related to the
ensemble of the economic and social activíties of the United
Nations. The Director-General should be appointed by the
Secretarv-Gcneral for a period of up to four years. He should
he rrovidcd with !he necessary support and resources.
1>8 This :,pplies equally to :di services and organs within
th~ Unitcd Nations without prejudice to their respective spheres
of compelcnce or terms of reference as rontained in their
rclevant legislative mamfates.
