UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/822
26 July 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 26 JULY 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In my letter to you of 14 July 1999 regarding the East Timor popular
consultation process (S/1999/786), I informed you of my decision to begin the
registration on 16 July 1999, on the condition that meaningful, visible
improvements in the security situation would be observed in the immediate
future.
I am pleased to report that the 200 registration centres throughout East
Timor have now been open for the first 10 days of registration, with only
occasional temporary closures owing to local security problems. In that 10-day
period, 239,893 East Timorese have registered, 233,716 of them in East Timor
itself, and the remainder at external registration centres.
Security conditions in a number of provinces have shown signs of improving.
This positive development is in part attributable to the greater cooperation now
being shown by the Indonesian authorities, in particular the police, with their
counterparts in the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET).
Overall, however, security conditions still remain inadequate. Ongoing
intimidation by armed militia groups remains particularly prevalent in the
western districts of East Timor. One serious consequence of this situation is
the continuing inability of tens of thousands of internally displaced persons to
return to their homes in safety. The areas from which the largest numbers have
been displaced, particularly Covalima, Bobonaro and Liquica, remain under the
tight control of the militia. UNAMET, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the local authorities are cooperating to
promote the ability of the displaced to return to their domiciles and ensure
their enfranchisement, but further action to bring armed groups under control is
essential.
The people of East Timor are showing laudable determination to participate
in the popular consultation despite continuing intimidation. I therefore intend
to continue registration on the understanding that the Indonesian authorities
will work with UNAMET to achieve the further necessary improvements in the
security situation and urgently address the problem of internal displacement.
The completion of registration and the continuation of the popular consultation
process will depend upon my being satisfied that these improvements are achieved
99-21839 (E)

260799

/...

S/1999/822
English
Page 2

and sustained. As I am sure the Security Council realizes, conditions required
for a largely technical exercise such as registration are notably less stringent
than those which will be necessary for campaigning in the run-up to the
consultation.
I have informed the Governments of Indonesia and Portugal of my decision.
My Special Representative will continue to keep me apprised of the situation in
East Timor and I will keep the Security Council fully informed of developments.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
