United Nations

S/PV.6677

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6677th meeting
Wednesday, 7 December 2011, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Berger
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Mashabane
Ms. Hendrie
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in Burundi
(S/2011/751)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-62586 (E)

*1162586*

S/PV.6677

The 21 people arrested after the attack were indicted
last month, and the six accused of planning the attack
have been charged with crimes against humanity.

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Office in Burundi (S/2011/751)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Karin Landgren, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office in Burundi, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Paul Seger,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland, in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configuration for Burundi, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/751, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Burundi.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren (spoke in French): Since I last
reported to the Security Council, in May (see
S/PV.6538), there has been progress showing that
Burundi is carrying forward its peacebuilding efforts
largely as we had hoped. There have also been
developments that could jeopardize that progress and a
long-term socio-economic outlook rife with challenges.
The massacre of 39 people on 18 September at a
bar on the outskirts of Bujumbura reminded many
people of Burundi’s painful past. The following
morning, the United Nations and the international
community were invited to join President Nkurunziza
in visiting the site of the devastating attack, where 23
corpses still lay. On 18 October a commission of
inquiry presented its report to the country’s Prosecutor.

2

The defence has challenged several aspects of the
trial’s procedure, including alleging that counsel had
no access to their clients or to the report of the
commission of inquiry. The trial will be closely
followed and will be a decisive test of the
independence and impartiality of Burundi’s judicial
system. Nevertheless, I want to emphasize that the
attack was fundamentally an isolated incident and that
the security situation in the country remains generally
calm.
The past six months have seemed to point the
way towards normalization of relations between the
Government and the extra-parliamentary political
parties. The Government often expressed its
willingness to engage in dialogue, as realized by the
First Vice-President in the launching of quarterly
meetings with the registered political parties. The
Alliance démocratique pour le changement-Ikibiri did
not participate in those meetings. I encourage the
Government and the parties to tirelessly pursue efforts
at dialogue.
The prospects for normalizing relations between
the Government and the extra-parliamentary opposition
were overshadowed by the arrests and, above all, the
assassinations of members of some of those parties, as
well as by reliable information about recruitment,
organization and paramilitary training carried out by
members of certain opposition groups and parties. All
Burundian political stakeholders should be encouraged
to demand an end to assassinations and disassociation
from armed groups.
For a country still emerging from many years of
conflict, Burundi should be commended for the relative
political freedom in the context of its post-transition
Constitution. There is now a need to ensure that there
is no backsliding with regard to the political space,
including as a result of harassing the media and civil
society.
The country’s future is reflected in Burundi’s
one-year presidency of the East African Community,
which culminated in the holding of a summit in
Bujumbura on 30 November that was marked by
optimism, hope and determination. Burundi was
commended for its contribution to expanding
integration through the implementation of the protocol

11-62586

S/PV.6677

on a common market and the progress made in the
discussions on a single currency and political
federation. The debate was characterized by that vision
for expanded integration and by Burundi’s attachment
to an increasingly dynamic East African Community.
That provides an opportunity to strengthen the
country’s stability and democratization.
Nevertheless, for many Burundians the East
African Community remains an elusive concept.
Burundi’s capacity to benefit from it still needs to be
strengthened. The United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB) is endeavouring to continue its support to the
Government so as to enable it to move ahead with its
integration process.
Allow me once again to take this opportunity to
commend the important role played by Burundi,
despite its own challenges, to strengthen peace and
security in the region. In the context of the African
Union Mission in Somalia, Burundi has deployed many
troops to Somalia and has experienced tragic losses.
Burundi has made significant progress this year
in the area of transitional justice. A technical
committee was established in June to consider
Burundi’s commitments and international practice in
that area, as well as to develop a draft law and budget
on a truth and reconciliation commission. The
committee presented its report to President Nkurunziza
on 18 October. On 18 November, Mr. Laurent
Kavakure, current Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation and former Chair of the
committee, formally transmitted that report to me.
The report’s main purpose concerns the draft law.
As a whole, it reaffirms the fundamental principles of
the truth and reconciliation commission. It reiterates
the principles of commission’s independence and
impartiality, clearly states that the commission will not
be a judicial mechanism and charges the commission
with identifying all violations and crimes.
Nevertheless, it states that the work of the commission
should not prejudice the competencies of the special
tribunal.
Some
provisions
do
not
reflect
the
recommendations of the national consultations on
transitional justice concluded in 2010. The report
proposes a truth and reconciliation commission made
up solely of Burundians, while the national
consultations recommended a commission composed of
both Burundians and non-Burundians. Those

11-62586

consultations also recommended that the recruitment
panel be made up of representatives of the
Government, civil society and the United Nations —
something not provided for in the draft law.
I commend the collaboration between the
Government and the United Nations system that
marked the preparatory phase, during which we
provided experts along with material and logistical
support. A positive solution to outstanding issues will
serve to strengthen the confidence of the international
community, which will make it possible for it provide
its full support and the necessary resources for this
long-awaited process to allow Burundi to take
responsibility for its past. We look forward to
continuing our engagement with the Government and
other partners in order to arrive at a process that
closely adheres to international standards.
(spoke in English)
The National Independent Human Rights
Commission, established through a law consistent with
the Paris Principles, is another noteworthy achievement
of 2011. Since its members’ swearing-in, in June, the
Commission has gotten straight to work. This comes at
a time of continuing human rights challenges in
Burundi. In recent months, several prominent members
of Burundi’s dynamic community of human rights
defenders have been summoned before the Prosecutor’s
office in the Bujumbura Mairie for questioning, as
have representatives of civil society and the media.
Lawyers, too, have faced imprisonment. An
independent media, civil society and judiciary have
important roles to play in peace consolidation. I am
concerned that those roles are being constrained.
The consolidation of peace in Burundi also
remains marred by politically motivated killings. Since
the report (S/2011/751) of the Secretary-General was
prepared, BNUB has documented a further 11 cases of
suspected extrajudicial killings, bringing the number of
cases documented by the mission to 57 for the period
1 January to 30 November. It is the firm expectation of
the United Nations that the Government will take quick
and decisive measures to prevent killings linked to its
own agents and to investigate and punish those
responsible.
Many of those concerns have already been raised
in the 31 May report (A/HRC/17/50) by the former
independent expert on the Human Rights situation in
Burundi, Mr. Fatsah Ouguergouz, who recommended

3

S/PV.6677

that the Government take all necessary steps to bring to
justice the members of the defence and security forces,
as well as any other persons suspected of having
perpetrated gross human rights violations. The
independent expert also urged the Government to
pursue and enhance its efforts towards the
strengthening of the judiciary, including the
recruitment and independence of magistrates. The
United Nations will continue to extend full support to
all such efforts, and to encourage the enhancement of
national investigative efforts through the routine
conduct of autopsies and the use of forensic
investigations.
As the Council is well aware, those developments
are unfolding against a backdrop of extreme poverty.
The report before the Council sets out a snapshot of
those privations, which are exacerbated by high
population density and youth unemployment. The
nexus between land pressure and population growth is
a particular concern. While Burundi has made
significant gains in school education, it has fallen
behind in achieving the Millennium Development
Goals for poverty reduction, gender equality, maternal
and child mortality, access to safe drinking water,
undernourishment and the prevalence of HIV/AIDS.
Burundi’s physical, economic, social and legal
pressures must be addressed and managed so as to
reinforce, and not undermine, the consolidation of the
country’s hard-won peace.
Burundi is in the final phase of completing its
second poverty reduction strategy, which offers a
systematic basis from which the country, with its
partners, can address its economic and socio-political
challenges. The Government, the United Nations, the
World Bank and the Peacebuilding Commission are
working together to shape a partners’ event for 2012
that will be an opportunity to showcase the good
progress made and to attract both aid and investment.
As we anticipate that positive evolution,
continued strong regional engagement will be required,
as well as a common approach among partner
Governments, regional organizations and the United
Nations, in our support of Burundi’s peace
consolidation and economic development efforts.
As the report of the Secretary-General indicates,
we have had a smooth and efficient transition from the
former and larger mission, the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi, to our new light footprint

4

in BNUB. This remains an integrated mission, albeit
with a structure intended to facilitate the eventual
transition to a United Nations country team presence.
BNUB has worked on draft benchmarks to
prepare the way for this transition. Let me mention
briefly the principal benchmarks which are being
developed.
On Burundi’s democratic process, we would
expect to see continuing progress in the resolution of
political differences through dialogue and engagement.
On the country’s security and stability, we should
expect a security structure and related democratic
oversight enabling Burundi to respond effectively to
domestic and international security concerns while
respecting global norms and rights. We anticipate
continuing progress in transitional justice. We foresee
legitimate, democratic and accountable institutions,
from the national to the local levels. We look for an
increasingly independent, accessible and credible
justice system and a deepening culture of promoting
and protecting human rights.
I look forward to reporting to the Council on
these proposed benchmarks in greater detail.
When this mission phases out, it will be
important for the United Nations and other partners to
continue to give support to strengthening national
institutions. Our priority now is to have a common
vision for this within the mission and the United
Nations country team and to anchor these elements
within the work of the team.
Meanwhile, there is good collaboration among us,
including on a number of projects such as a programme
funded through a $9.2 million contribution from the
Peacebuilding Fund, to support the sustainable socioeconomic reintegration of marginalized populations in
three provinces bordering the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We continue to search for additional
funding for this vital sector to cover other provinces
where the needs are equally pressing.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
Burundi’s new Permanent Representative to the United
Nations in New York, Ambassador Herménégilde
Niyonzima, and also to thank outgoing Permanent
Representative Ambassador Zacharie Gahutu for the
good cooperation we enjoyed.
The road out of past violence is long and
difficult, as the world knows. In 2012, Burundi is

11-62586

S/PV.6677

expected to take further strides along that road by
initiating a formal process of truth, reconciliation and
justice. It is understood that this process must be an
inclusive one. Further ahead lie the 2015 elections,
which President Nkurunziza recently called on all
political actors to start preparing for. In addressing the
continuing challenges of peace consolidation and
development, Burundi’s Government and people
deserve our continued commitment and strong support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Landgren for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Paul Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to thank you, Sir, for having invited me to speak
in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I returned from a weeklong visit to Burundi in
late October, and my impressions in the field largely
confirmed the assessment and analysis contained in the
outstanding
report
of
the
Secretary-General
(S/2011/751) and in Ms. Karin Landgren’s briefing.
The country has indeed achieved some progress in
various fields, including the establishment of the
National Independent Human Rights Commission,
which Ms. Landgren just spoke of, the establishment of
an Office of the Ombudsman; and by continuing with
the transitional justice process.
I was particularly impressed by the President of
the National Independent Human Rights Commission
and the Ombudsman, who, through their commitment
and integrity, are contributing to improve the
functioning of institutions, good governance and
respect for human rights. Such institutions are
important to bolstering confidence between the people
and the authorities.
However, the various contacts that I had with
several representatives of civil society, State
institutions and representatives of the international
community on the ground confirmed the observations
made in the report of the Secretary-General to the
effect that considerable challenges remain on the path
to peacebuilding.
In my view, the three major obstacles to be
overcome are the socio-economic situation, the
political gulf between the Government and the extraparliamentary opposition, and, linked to this, the
human rights situation. As the report of the Secretary-

11-62586

General lists those shortcomings in detail, I shall not
repeat them here in order to save time. I merely wish to
say that I share his views.
This shows, in my opinion, that the bases for the
cooperation between the Commission and the
Government of Burundi, upon which we reached
agreement, as noted in the April 2011 document of
which I spoke during my previous briefing last May,
remain valid. However, given the developments in the
situation and the wishes of the Government of Burundi,
the PBC in future will place a heavier accent on
resource mobilization so as to implement the country’s
poverty reduction strategy.
Indeed, the integration into society of groups
affected by conflict enables them to live in dignity and
also minimizes the risk of former combatants taking up
arms once again and returning to violence because of a
lack of alternatives. This is particularly true in the case
of young people, among whom the unemployment rate
remains very high. Work would not only give them a
sense of purpose in life but also the feeling of being an
integral part of society. In that respect, socio-economic
integration is a key pillar of peacebuilding.
I was particularly struck by the case of an
18-year-old, a former Forces nationales de libération
combatant, who created a rice-producing association
jointly with local women with support from the PBC
Fund. That association made a profit of $7,000, which
is a small fortune in Burundi, and is continuing with
that project. We must replicate such projects, but the
country cannot do this alone, without international
support.
The Peacebuilding Fund has recently, as
Ms. Landgren noted, additionally disbursed nearly
$10 million to support such projects, and my most
sincere thanks go to the Fund for that decision. But
although that contribution is welcome, it is not nearly
sufficient to meet demand. As Ms. Landgren stated, we
must find an additional $15 million in the short term.
Here I wish to add my voice to that of the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative in
appealing to the international community not to forget
Burundi. The Government of Burundi plans to convene
international meetings in 2012 so as to mobilize funds,
and the configuration itself will spare no effort in
promoting the success of such endeavours.

5

S/PV.6677

I am well aware of the fact that the international
environment is not exactly conducive to this kind of
undertaking. However, given the high cost of an
international peacekeeping operation, providing
financial support to solidifying political and economic
development in a country emerging from conflict
would be considerably less expensive and more
economical than a major operation. Key partners such
as the World Bank, with which I have already met three
times, and the African Development Bank, with which
I met recently in Tunis, are ready to work with the PBC
to support the economic recovery of Burundi.
The economic and social progress that
Government is rightly seeking for its people will not be
sustainable in the absence of the rule of law and stable,
reliable institutions. The Arab Spring has shown us to
what extent peace, human rights and economic and
social development are interdependent.
Like the Secretary-General, I urge the
Government of Burundi to ramp up and speed up its
efforts in connection with political dialogue, respect
for human rights and good governance. I call in
particular on the Government to allow opposition
parties that are not represented in the Government,
human rights defenders and journalists to carry out
their activities freely, with respect for the law, without
fear of being intimidated, threatened or physically
attacked.
Reports indicating that opposition members have
been detained or even arbitrarily killed by the forces of
law and order are worrisome and are a blot on
Burundi’s image as a democratic, peaceful country. It
is in the interest of the Government of Burundi that
such cases be addressed with seriousness and
objectivity and that the perpetrators be brought to
justice.
I also call on the opposition to abandon its
empty-chair policy, unequivocally distance itself from
all forms of violence and participate constructively in
political debate in the interests of the country. Like the
Secretary-General, I hope that the forthcoming
elections, scheduled for 2015, will allow all parties to
participate freely and equally. The elections will not
only be important for Burundi; I believe that they will
provide a assessment of our own endeavours to build
peace.
Every time I visit Burundi I am quite impressed
by the richness and human quality of the country. Its

6

people deserve a better future, and as a country
configuration we are ready to contribute to that. Based
on the reactions I have had from many conversations, I
believe that the follow-up by the PBC and my visits to
the country are appreciated. They are a signal to
Burundians that the international community and New
York have not forgotten them.
The fact that the Commission is a body made up
of States gives it significant political clout. For States
that give Burundi financial support, the involvement of
the PBC assures them that the country is part of a
structure that affords a platform for regular and
institutional dialogue on all peacebuilding-related
issues. The PBC’s support helps complete the excellent
operational work that the Special Representative and
her team are doing on the ground and without which
the PBC could not fulfil its mandate. I should thank her
and her team sincerely for their work.
In conclusion, allow me to touch on the future of
the configuration in Burundi. When I briefed the
Council on 17 May (see S/PV.6538), I said that our
ultimate goal is to ensure that the Commission
becomes obsolete. The configuration has already
begun, flexibly and gradually, to prepare for that
transition. In the near future, however, as I have
already said, the PBC’s big challenge will be to give
Burundi support in mobilizing resources for its
economic and social development. In that regard, the
Commission will focus its efforts on areas that are
closely related to support for conflict-affected groups
and the first pillar of the poverty-reduction strategy,
dealing with matters pertaining to peacebuilding. After
that we should be able to consider helping the country
attract private investment, since, ultimately, the people
of Burundi’s prosperity will depend on developing its
private sector. The configuration is also willing to
support the national institutions that play a key role in
the areas of the rule of law and good governance, such
as the National Independent Human Rights
Commission and the Office of the Ombudsman.
Once those tasks are completed, it will be time to
take stock and decide together if and, should that be
the case, how cooperation with the configuration
should continue. Less intense support might be a
possibility. We are in any case heading in that direction
through holding meetings more often within the
steering group rather than convening the entire
configuration. I would like to thank warmly some of
the countries represented here in the Council that are

11-62586

S/PV.6677

especially active in the steering group, particularly
some African countries, the United Kingdom and
China and others. Their efforts have been extremely
important and very much appreciated.
As the Council will have noted, we still have
work to finish. I am ready to roll up my sleeves and
throw myself into those tasks as long as the
Government continues to show its interest and political
resolve to continue along this path with the
Commission.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Seger for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Adolphe Nahayo, Director-General of Regional
and International Organizations at the Ministry of
External Relations and International Cooperation of
Burundi.
Mr. Nahayo (Burundi) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to convey greetings to the Council from
His Excellency Mr. Laurent Kavakure, Burundi’s new
Minister for External Relations and International
Cooperation. He would have liked to be here in person
to take part in the presentation of this first report
(S/2011/751) on the United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB), but the Government entrusted him with
another mission at the last minute. He asked me to
share the following statement with the Council.
The Government of the Republic of Burundi is
grateful to the Security Council for agreeing to
maintain its political partnership with Burundi through
the United Nations Office in Burundi after the 2010
elections. The Government of Burundi is also grateful
to the Secretary-General for his efforts, and in
particular those of the Department of Political Affairs,
which appointed an effective team for Burundi, led by
Ms. Karin Landgren. The Special Representative and
her team have conducted the transition from the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi to BNUB
successfully and on time. We commend them for that.
Nor should we forget to mention the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
which has continued to support us in our efforts to find
solutions to the remaining challenges to peace in
Burundi.
Our thanks are also due to the Assistant
Secretary-General in charge of the Peacebuilding
Support Office, whose commitment to peace in

11-62586

Burundi mobilized more than $9.2 million in additional
funds for consolidating the gains made in reintegrating
conflict-affected populations, particularly in Bubanza,
Cibitoke and Bujumbura Rural provinces, and for
extending reintegration operations to other provinces.
The Secretary-General’s report on BNUB
assesses the implementation of resolution 1959 (2010)
by both Burundi and BNUB. In that regard, the
Government is grateful to the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for their understanding of
the true worth of the progress that has been made in the
various areas addressed by the resolution. Those
include, in particular, the Government’s adoption of a
national strategy on good governance and its fight
against corruption; its review of national defence and
security policy; the effective establishment of the
National Independent Human Rights Commission and
of the successful start of the activities of the Office of
the Ombudsman, as well as the preparation of
mechanisms for dealing with transitional justice. The
Government has already informed the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva that those
mechanisms will begin to be set up in January 2012.
The State Inspector General has already lodged
11 complaints with the Prosecutor in 2011. The
resolution and closure of those cases will enable the
Treasury to recover more than 20 billion Burundi
francs for damages suffered since 2007 — almost
$20 million — a quarter of which has already been
returned to the State’s coffers. The Government of
Burundi again expresses its gratitude for the
contribution of the United Nations and its other
partners in obtaining those results and in ensuring that
their ownership has been assumed by other national
stakeholders, in this case by Parliament, civil society
and the media.
At the same time, the Government should be
allowed to explain why some results are yet to be
achieved despite its efforts and goodwill. The report
refers to extrajudicial executions and torture. The
Government would like to recall that the continuing
armed violence in Burundi is the result of several
factors. The first is the presence of illegal firearms.
Despite the efforts to disarm civilians, the Government
realized during the pacification campaign in
Bujumbura Rural province that stocks of arms still
existed in the country — the legacy, unfortunately, of
the last rebel movement to rejoin the peace process.
Moreover, the porousness of our borders exposes the

7

S/PV.6677

country to illegally trafficked arms entering from
neighbouring countries because of banditry or
rebellions.
Such armed violence may be related to scoresettling among former combatants, landownership
disagreements, clashes between armed bandits and
police or attacks on innocent civilians by armed
groups. At any rate, when those presumed guilty are
law-enforcement officers, the Minister of Public
Security deals with them severely. The 31 October
report on security in Burundi gives all the details on
that situation and states, in page 24, that 223 police
officers have been arrested for involvement in armed
violence. The Mission of Burundi in New York will
provide that report to all delegations in New York.
Furthermore, the Government has undertaken, on
the basis of the results of peacebuilding, brainstorming
on lasting reform of the defence and security bodies.
Planning for eight years with respect to the National
Defence Force, and for ten years for the national
police, the Government wants to make these agencies
the guarantors of peace, the rule of law and territorial
integrity, but also the driving forces for development.
With respect to justice and the rule of law, the
Government is not the only party responsible for the
slow pace of the judiciary bodies. Today we see
repeated requests for hearings from partners in the
justice system so that they can gather all their
witnesses or build their cases. One also must
acknowledge that due to the failure by certain partners
to meet financial commitments, the Government has
not had sufficient resources to be able to appropriately
complete some of the cases, particularly when the sad
events follow one after another very quickly, such as
the case of Rukoko or that of Gatumba. Let us not lose
sight of the fact that Burundi is a post-conflict country.
Once again, the Government would like to reassure its
partners that the cases pending before the courts will
be brought to a conclusion.
With respect to freedom of expression and of
assembly, the Government of Burundi respects those
principles. But that does not prevent it from
ascertaining compliance with the law by private
associations or the press, particularly when the latter
advocate violence or civil disobedience, or even
outright disinformation. Again, the report of
31 October 2011 on security in Burundi confirms, on

8

pages 27 to 29, that part of civil society and certain
press organs have deviated from those principles.
The report refers to the absence of dialogue
between the Government and the extra-parliamentary
opposition. On this subject, the Council would agree
that lack of dialogue is not due to the Government. His
Excellency the President of the Republic issued an
appeal to opponents in exile to return to the country to
take part in dialogue, and the First Vice-President
invited the opposition to join in dialogue. In both
cases, those partners have rejected the calls outright
and instead have called for negotiations like those of
Arusha — as if there were no legitimate power in
Burundi. It is regrettable to hear certain opposition
leaders justify the paths of violence advocated in
certain statements made under cover of anonymity.
The Government will continue to extend its hand
for political dialogue, but it will not cease it steps
aimed at implementing Vision 2025. Through this
Vision the Government wants to make Burundi a
country of the rule of law, where social cohesion
reigns, a country that is economically prosperous, with
population growth under control. It wants to ensure
effective management of its patrimony in terms of land
and of its urbanization, a nation well integrated into the
East African Community.
In this framework, Burundi is completing the
drafting of the second version of its Strategic
Framework for Growth and the Fight against
Poverty — CSLP II — which is based on four strategic
axes: strengthening the rule of law, consolidating good
governance
and
promoting
gender
equality;
transforming the Burundi economy to ensure sustained
growth and job creation; improving the accessibility to
and quality of basic social services and strengthening
the foundation of the social safety net; and
management of the area and the environment in
harmony with sustainable development.
Without waiting for the implementation of CSLP
II, the Government has already reformed the land code
and strengthened the actions of the national
commission on land and other property in order to
manage current land conflicts. It has launched the
village management policy in order to free up some
arable land and has undertaken sustainable
reintegration of populations affected by conflict.
His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Burundi launched the campaign to control population

11-62586

S/PV.6677

growth, because the Government recognizes the
constraints that population growth imposes on
development. It is currently updating its national
gender policy to ensure that gender equality will boost
development

that will be defined on the basis of the CSLP II to
consolidate the gains that have been set out in the
report of the Secretary-General so that Burundi can
address the continuing challenges it faces. Long live
international cooperation.

During this month of December, Bujumbura will
be the venue for the national forum on food security.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Nahayo for his statement.

The Government of the Republic of Burundi has
already requested the United Nations and all friendly
countries to support the implementation of these
programmes for recovery now under way and those

There are no more names on the list of speakers. I
now invite Council members to informal consultations
to continue our discussion on this issue.

11-62586

The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

9
