S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6270th meeting
Friday, 12 February 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

60

President:

Mr. Araud/Mr. De Rivière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Heissel
Mr. Vukašinović
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Long Zhou
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Nakashima
Mr. Ramadan
Mr. Vargas
Mr. Lolo
Mr. Filatkin
Ms. Erdoğdu
Mr. Nkayivu
Mr. Green
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Transition and exit strategies
Letter dated 3 February 2010 from the Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/67)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-23924 (E)

*1023924*

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than five minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Morocco.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Kingdom of Morocco and my
Ambassador, allow me to commend and thank you, Sir,
for taking the initiative to hold this important debate. I
also thank Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Malcorra, the Special
Representatives and the Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General for their important contributions
to this debate.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to address the Security Council
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
Allow me to begin by warmly congratulating the
French presidency on placing peacekeeping at the core
of its monthly debate. Few days separate us from the
upcoming crucial session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, during which we hope to
have a substantive discussion on the ways to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping.
NAM attaches great importance to the founding
principles of United Nations peacekeeping, namely,
consent of the parties, the non-use of force except in
self-defence, and impartiality. The principles of
sovereign equality, the political independence and
territorial integrity of all States, and non-intervention
in matters that are essentially within their domestic
jurisdiction should also be maintained. The tenth
anniversary of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809)
provides us with an opportunity to celebrate and to
renew our commitment to these founding principles.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should
be provided from the outset with political support, full
and optimal human, financial and logistical resources,
and clearly defined and achievable mandates and exit
strategies. This means that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should not be used as a
substitute for addressing the root causes of conflict,
which should be dealt with in a coherent, well-planned,
coordinated and comprehensive manner, using other

2

political,
social,
instruments.

economic

and

development

I should like also to stress that transition
strategies are most effective when the relationship
between the host Government and the peacekeeping
mission is based on active cooperation. This entails
regular consultations and the setting up of coordination
mechanisms to allow for a dynamic communication
throughout the lifecycle of the peacekeeping mission.
Moreover, the success of a transition from a
peacekeeping environment to an exit phase necessitates
that due consideration be given by the United Nations
to the manner in which its overall efforts can be carried
out from the early stage of its engagement in postconflict situations and continue without interruption
after the departure of the peacekeeping operation, so as
to ensure a smooth transition to lasting peace and
security.
In this regard, the increasingly complex
environment in which United Nations peacekeeping
missions operate requires the building of an
anticipatory approach that would allow the components
of the mission — be they civilian, military,
humanitarian or other — to be prepared for unintended
consequences and to coordinate efficiently among
themselves. This, in turn, calls for an increased
integration of efforts and strategies to facilitate
coherence throughout the lifecycle of a peacekeeping
operation.
While it is important to debate exit strategies, the
closely related need for entry strategies must also be
stressed. This means that when the mandate of a
peacekeeping mission is being designed, adequate
means and resources should be made available. Equally
vital to an entry strategy is a pre-existing political
process supported by the parties concerned. A
peacekeeping mission cannot be deployed in an
environment where there is no peace to keep. The
Security Council is vested with the responsibility to
intensify efforts to revive faltering peace processes.
Exit is not usually an event but a process of
transition. An exit is facilitated by successful mandate
implementation and the ability to refine the mandate to
fit the circumstances on the ground as they evolve.
This requires a degree of flexibility and coordination
that is often difficult to achieve in a multidimensional
and complex peacekeeping operation.

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

There is no single recipe for a successful exit, but
one can easily conceive that the success of a
peacekeeping mission depends on its capacity to
shoulder the implementation of early peacebuilding
activities, which deliver immediate peace dividends to
the population. However, these early activities should
be conceived of within broader peacebuilding efforts.
That would guarantee that the transition and
subsequent exit of a peacekeeping mission is seamless
and successful.
The transition from a volatile environment to a
secure post-conflict context in which security is
guaranteed and conflict management mechanisms are
in place must be managed with the full involvement
and ownership of the host Government. In this regard,
mission strategies must have the flexibility to adapt to
realities on the ground and should be geared to
securing and retaining the support of the national
authorities in carrying out their mandates.
Indeed, one area that needs further attention is the
process by which mandates are set and reviewed. The
mechanism for triangular cooperation among the
Secretariat, the Security Council and the troopcontributing countries (TCCs) can be improved in
order to ensure successful transitions by building on
the first-hand experience of TCCs in developing clear
and achievable mandates. Greater consultation and
cooperation between the Security Council and TCCs
can help address this issue, as stressed in the
presidential
statement
of
5
August
2009
(PRST/2009/24), and incorporate transition and exit
strategies into mandates.
A central challenge for effective peacekeeping is
to make full use of the synergies between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) stresses the importance of early
peacebuilding action. Early advice from and
engagement by the Peacebuilding Commission would
ensure early and consistent peacebuilding and a
sustained engagement beyond the life of the
peacekeeping mission. The Commission has a clear
comparative advantage as it engages national
Governments in defining their respective needs and
priorities, thus enhancing national ownership. The
Commission also adopts a tailored, country-specific
approach. Equally important is the flexibility of the
Peacebuilding Commission to reach out to international
financial institutions and other development actors

10-23924

within and beyond the United Nations actors, which
are vital partners for broader and longer-term efforts to
sustain peace.
Success factors for early peacebuilding activities
in a peacekeeping context include national ownership,
which remains essential. Peacebuilding is a national
challenge and responsibility. Moreover, the United
Nations needs to enter each new context with a specific
plan, coordinated with national authorities and other
actors. These plans need to be developed in stages and
through a participatory approach.
In determining its priorities and jumpstarting
early peacebuilding activities, the peacebuilding
component of a complex peacekeeping mission should
aim to achieve the earliest possible transfer of
responsibility to local and national authorities. The
international community should support and assist
sustainable development. This means that more
attention must be given to the peacebuilding and
development priorities that should accompany
peacekeeping.
Before closing, I should like to stress that
transition and exit strategies are but components of the
lifecycle of a peacekeeping operation. The conditions
for setting up new peacekeeping missions are equally
vital. The transition from one step to another needs to
be carefully planned, properly resourced and given the
necessary political support, without which the risk of
mission creep becomes high. Peacekeeping is a means
to an end. That end is sustainable peace and
development.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): This restricted debate on exit
and transition strategies, convened under the French
presidency, is a timely initiative, especially in view of
the ever-increasing United Nations peacekeeping
engagements and the global financial crises, which
demand optimal resource utilization at the United
Nations. We thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le
Roy and Susana Malcorra, and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for their
excellent briefings. We also appreciate the dedication
of their teams in advancing the peacekeeping work of
the United Nations.

3

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

Pakistan aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The United Nations as an institution derives its
inspiration from our common quest for peace and
security. However, the multiplicity of situations and the
wide variety of contributing factors make the
proposition of total and lasting peace impossible. We
therefore see the persistence, recurrence and new
eruption of conflict situations in various parts of the
world. In spite of the perpetual nature of the challenges
on the peacekeeping landscape, we Member States
have contributed to the noble objective of
peacekeeping in a wide variety of ways.
Pakistan has remained committed to the United
Nations collective approach to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our commitment to
collective endeavours for peace has led us to become a
top contributor of uniformed personnel to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Today, over 10,000
Pakistani uniformed personnel are working in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Our unflinching
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
operations has been tested time and again. More than
100 Pakistani peacekeeping troops have sacrificed their
lives in the service of the United Nations.
The inherent correlation between policy
formulation, planning and implementation necessitates
a comprehensive approach to individual peacekeeping
situations. In tandem with our field contribution, we
have invested our efforts in the area of policy planning
and formulation. Our successful advocacy of a
comprehensive approach, in collaboration with the
endeavours of other Member States, resulted in the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.
We have seen that some missions have been
successful while others have had several shortcomings.
That calls for an urgent re-evaluation of our policy
formulation, planning and implementation concepts,
processes and parameters.
The fundamental flaw in policy formulation is
that policymakers succumb to the temptation of
creating parallel institutions and systems in
peacekeeping situations instead of investing in existing
national structures. Thus, from the very beginning,
most peacekeeping operations start as competitors of
local systems and, by virtue of being in a position of

4

power, contribute
structures.

to

the

decapitation

of

local

The monopoly on policy formulation and
planning is also a huge impediment to ensuring the
success of United Nations peacekeeping missions. The
rhetoric of triangular cooperation is often repeated in
United Nations peacekeeping debates, but with little
accommodation. In addition, how can one claim that
triangular cooperation involving the Security Council,
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat
is all encompassing while the parties on the ground —
the real stakeholders — remain outside the process?
The clear commitment of those parties and their
affinity to the objectives of a peace mission are not
only desired, but should be mandated through an
inclusive policy formulation process. Meaningful
quadrangular engagement at the very beginning, when
a peacekeeping operation is being conceived, will
therefore guard against the pitfalls that we very often
encounter.
The mechanics of the process itself, which are
also discussed in the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809),
necessitate the orderly closure of a mission. We are of
the view that brainstorming and consultations aimed at
determining clear and achievable objectives should
come first. That requires a thorough study of realities
on the ground, engagement with the parties in the field
and an assessment of resource needs and availability.
The presence of TCC-origin senior officials in the
Secretariat could be of great help at that stage in
setting achievable goals against the backdrop of the
most efficient use of resources.
Secondly, a peacekeeping mission should always
be built through a phased and staggered planning
approach that underpins the interconnectivity of
planning, execution and achievements under the
overarching rubric of a mission’s main objectives.
Thirdly, we agree with the observation made in
the presidency’s concept paper (S/2010/67) that there is
insufficient attention to and early investment in the
area of building national institutions. However, in that
connection, we would like to underscore that
peacekeeping, reconciliation and peacebuilding go
hand in hand and are not mutually exclusive.
The pre-eminence of political reconciliation after
the initial restoration of peace, within mutually agreed
parameters, is of paramount importance. The prospects
for peace are often better in the beginning, as third-

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

party intervention checks the hand of the aggressor or
the one at fault. It also opens doors for give-and-take
opportunities and strengthens the position of the third
party as an acceptable arbiter of peace.
The opposite of reconciliation would be the
driving of a wedge between parties by supporting one
over the other. Parties derive their existence mostly
from demographic realities that cannot be undone
through defeat or elimination. Peacekeeping without
reconciliation would mean rare success stories and
more sordid sagas. Yet, unfortunately, that Charter
provision has failed to command respect.
The
integration
of
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding
activities
through
institutional
arrangements is more a question of managerial
efficiency and managerial possibility. The nature of big
and cumbersome administrative structures limits top
management’s ability to see through the system. It also
clouds the need for transparency. Hence, coordination
must be strengthened and overlaps must be eliminated.
But that should not happen at the cost of institutional
efficiency and transparency.
The mandates of peacekeeping missions should
be commensurate with ground realities. We have seen
the evolution of mandates from traditional to
multifaceted ones. Gaps between Chapter VI and
Chapter VII mandates are often covered through
different mandate variations. Pakistan supported such
variations during our most recent tenure on the
Security Council in order to ensure peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and peace enforcement in the cases of
Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, such missions
without adequate resources are an anomaly, for hosts as
well as for Member States, including TCCs. Therefore,
all mandates must be matched with adequate resources,
including a sufficient number of well-trained and wellequipped troops having rapid-deployment capacities,
tactical and strategic reserve capabilities and the
requisite logistical support.
Failure sometimes ushers in perfect success, if
one is ready to rethink and readjust his engagement
strategies. Therefore, a delay in the successful
completion of a mission should not force us to abandon
a peacekeeping mission. In such a situation, we must
be guided by a deeper prognosis of the ground
situation, effective engagement with the parties, human
ingenuity and an unflinching commitment to the

10-23924

mission. Failure is not an option in the domain of
international peace and security. We look forward to
further in-depth examination of the important theme of
transition and exit strategies in a relevant forum, such
as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
In conclusion, we would like to pay homage to
the men and women who recently sacrificed their lives
or suffered injuries while performing United Nations
peacekeeping duties in Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating the French presidency on placing
peacekeeping operations at the core of this open
debate. I also take this opportunity to thank Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Ms. Susana Malcorra and especially you,
Mr. President, for inviting my delegation to participate
in this important event. I hope your able leadership will
guide our deliberations to meaningful and effective
transition and exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Article 43 of the Charter of the United Nations
stipulates that:
“All Members of the United Nations, in
order to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security, undertake to
make available to the Security Council, on its call
and in accordance with a special agreement or
agreements, armed forces, assistance, and
facilities”.
Bangladesh has been and is always ready respond
to this call with whatever means and capacity it has. In
this context, I reiterate the views of the Honourable
Prime Minister of Bangladesh, which she expressed
during the meeting between the United States President
and peacekeeper-contributing countries in New York
on 23 September 2009:
“Bangladesh takes pride in contributing to the
United Nations effort in the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is our
constitutional obligation as well.”
We remain committed to United Nations
peacekeeping as one of the most universal tools for

5

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

helping societies in conflict and post-conflict situations
and helping people to rebuild their lives. We subscribe
to the view of the Non-Aligned Movement that:
“United Nations peacekeeping operations
should be provided from the outset with political
support, full and optimal human, financial and
logistical resources and clearly defined and
achievable mandates and exit strategies”.
In this regard, the often stretched peacekeeping
mandates deserve special attention. As we all know,
peacekeeping is no longer simply standing between
conflicting parties to end hostilities. Peacekeeping has
evolved into a complex of activities involving military,
police and civilian elements to preserve peace, assist in
humanitarian and development activities and thus
construct the foundation of sustainable peace through
the peacebuilding process. It is therefore critically
important to ensure that the countries providing
peacekeepers become an integral part of the decisionmaking process while drawing up the mandate of a
particular peacekeeping mission by the Security
Council.
They should also be engaged at the decisionmaking level in the peacekeeping missions. This will
allow the United Nations to ensure that the mandate is
achievable, manageable and truly effective. At the
same time, mandates should be accompanied by
sufficient resources, including human, logistical and
financial resources, at the disposal of the peacekeepers.
We agree with the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission when he says that “peacekeepers are early
peacebuilders”. We emphasize, however, that
peacekeepers’ role should not be ended abruptly at any
exit point. In terms of the comparative advantages in
particular areas, my delegation firmly believes that
peacekeepers are uniquely positioned to assist in
identifying and drawing on the most relevant capacity
requirements on the ground in post-conflict countries.
For
example,
disarmament,
demobilization,
reorientation and security sector reform are recognized
as two key elements in the peacebuilding process.
However, these two elements are also included in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions. Thus, any
experiences
gained
and lessons learned
in
peacekeeping operations could significantly assist in
and complement the peacebuilding process.
In this regard, we would like to recall the ninth
paragraph of the Security Council’s presidential

6

statement of 5 August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24), which
underscores
the
importance
of
introducing
peacebuilding elements into peacekeeping operations
before a transfer to the Peacebuilding Commission.
This, in reality, has yet to be translated in any countryspecific context. My delegation therefore emphasizes
the need for strong synergy between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandates.
Peacekeepers nowadays are entrusted with some
non-conventional tasks, including electoral assistance,
human rights situation monitoring, the resettlement of
refugees and internally displaced persons, the provision
of safe passage to United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies, security sector reform and the
training of security personnel, the disarmament and
demobilization of armed groups, providing medical and
emergency care, women’s empowerment, and assisting
in the development of the legal system and community
involvement. Thus, United Nations peacekeeping can
be considered as an important precursor to
peacebuilding missions in many respects.
We need to ensure the proper synergy between
the processes in order to achieve the end goal of
sustainable peace. We also need to ensure unity of
purpose and action for success in the process. The
entire United Nations membership — the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the peacekeepercontributing countries — must have a shared and
holistic vision about what we wish to achieve and how.
Now, let me turn to some specific areas in which
Bangladesh can and is ready to contribute to the cause
of sustainable peace and security. Bangladesh has
extensive
electoral
experience.
The
Election
Commission of Bangladesh completed electronic voter
registration and national identification for a staggering
80-plus million voters before the most recent general
election in December 2008. We are ready to share this
experience with other countries, particularly in postconflict countries.
Microcredit financing has been playing a critical
role in Bangladesh, including in income generation,
poverty alleviation, youth employment and women’s
empowerment. This model has been successfully
replicated in many countries as part of their
development planning and in post-conflict situations —
for example, Afghanistan, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
just to name a few.

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

Microcredit financing, however, must be
supplemented by other essential poverty alleviation
and job creation tools, such as building rural
infrastructure,
human
capacity
build-up,
the
development of microenterprise and provision of
primary health care and universal education, including
non-formal adult education, which can create an
environment in which access to financial capital can
add significant value. Microcredit financing can be
useful if it is seen as a means rather than a goal.
Bangladesh also has the expertise of community
involvement in nation-building efforts, and its
non-governmental organizations have proved to be a
successful agent of change. Bangladesh is ready to
share its best practices and experience at any time.
We have also established the Bangladesh Institute
of Peace Support Operations Training as a training
centre for peacekeepers from around the world. It has
state-of-the-art facilities, and Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy has visited and was pleased with it. In
line with the recommendations of the Brahimi panel,
Bangladesh strongly feels that the Institute should be
recognized as a regional peacekeeping training
institute. We would be happy to welcome potential
peacekeepers for training at the Institute and returning
peacekeepers for debriefing.
Before concluding, allow me to stress that the
success of transition from a peacekeeping environment
to an exit phase requires due consideration of the
whole process, from mandate creation to drawdown
and the exit phase. Transition from one phase to
another needs to be planned carefully, with due
emphasis on overlapping activities between phases.
Experience acquired in previous steps must be used in
subsequent steps to ensure the efficient and effective
use of human, financial and logistical resources. The
exit phase must be preceded by work adequate to
fostering sustainable peace and development and the
involvement of the local community to avoid creating a
vacuum in which undesirable elements can take over,
or so that the community feels let down, with no light
at the end of the tunnel. It is imperative that exit
strategies create an environment of hope and a feeling
of stability and empowerment on the part of the local
populace, so that the peacekeepers’ exit leaves behind
no vacuum or hopelessness.
The President (spoke in French): I call on my
colleagues to kindly limit their statements to five

10-23924

minutes for their own well-being, if they wish to leave
for the weekend.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): We would like
to thank the French presidency for organizing this
thematic debate on the issue of peacekeeping. This is
the fourth time in seven months that my delegation is
speaking in the Security Council on peacekeeping, a
fact that attests to the centrality of this activity in the
United Nations. I would also at the outset like to thank
the French delegation for its recent efforts, which have
led to improvements in the consultative mechanisms of
peacekeeping. My delegation appreciates the spirit
behind these initiatives.
We also note with appreciation the efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to
reach out to Member States in the ongoing work of
developing operational concepts. I am optimistic that
this spirit of cooperation will find reflection in the
forthcoming deliberations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
The concept paper (S/2010/67) circulated by the
French presidency for today’s debate is both
comprehensive and useful. My delegation would also
like to take this opportunity to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Council today has to manage its primary
responsibility of responding to threats to international
peace and security in an environment that has changed
very substantially since 1945. The Council has to deal
with situations that have complex, multidimensional
aetiologies. They cannot be easily labeled or
categorized. They have also proved very tenacious and
have defied straightforward solutions.
We are in this situation because every so often the
Council has mandated operations without a clear
understanding of what was required. In the rush to do
something, it has got into situations where objectives
have been confused. Mandates have been unrealistic;
time frames have been too ambitious. A band-aid
approach has been used and the resources allocated to
the task — financial, logistical, and above all,
human — have been pegged at minimal levels. Our
conclusions are reinforced by the joint study by the
DPKO and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, entitled “Protecting civilians in

7

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

the context of United Nations peacekeeping
operations”, which states that “Confusion over the
Council’s intent is evident in the lack of policy,
guidance, planning and preparedness”. It is evident that
the Council requires a new paradigm and new
approaches if it is to discharge its responsibilities.
We first need to recognize that there are no
shortcuts to peacekeeping. We are not dealing with
classic belligerents who are looking for a quick victory.
We are dealing with forces that have a stake in
continuing instability. We are dealing with forces that
flourish in the absence of the rule of law and in the
presence of violence and intimidation. We cannot deal
with these forces unless we are committed to the long
haul. Transition and exit strategies need therefore to be
approached accordingly.
Eighty per cent of United Nations peacekeeping
resources, financial and human, are deployed in postcolonial societies. The problems they face are not
unique and have been confronted in many nations in
Asia and Africa. It stands to reason that successful
post-colonial nation-building experience is the most
relevant to understanding how to approach the
successful management of complex peacekeeping
operations.
I am proud to represent a nation that has been an
active participant in United Nations peacekeeping
since 1956 and has contributed more than 100,000
peacekeepers to 40 United Nations operations. I also
speak on behalf of a country that is a well-established
and successful democratic polity that responds to the
aspirations of one of the most diverse populations of
the world and that is among the fastest growing
economies of the world. Imperialist thinking at the
height of the colonial era described all such countries
as ungovernable. Facts and history speak otherwise.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not mutually
exclusive. It is our understanding that both need to
continue simultaneously over extended periods of time.
Precipitate withdrawal of peacekeepers is a recipe for
disaster and a temptation that should be avoided at all
costs. As a peacekeeping operation gathers momentum,
it requires more resources, not fewer. The military
component will have to be supplemented, and not
supplanted, by police and rule-of-law capacity and by a
capacity for development administration. By development
administration capacity, we mean the ability to respond

8

to the basic aspirations of the people beyond law and
order.
It is also important to remember that United
Nations operations are essentially in aid of national
authorities and national capacities. National authorities
usually have a good idea of what they require. The
Council and the Secretariat must not just listen more to
national Governments; they must also listen carefully.
There is no substitute for national capacities. The only
role the United Nations can play is to help in creating
conditions where these capacities can be exercised. We
believe that support for national authorities is key in
two areas. One is security sector reform and the other
is in providing primary inputs for socio-economic
development.
Security sector reform, in particular, needs far
greater coordination, cohesiveness and unity of
purpose. The training, equipment and working methods
of national police and other rule-of-law institutions
must be structured in a manner that is consonant with
the wishes of national authorities and not the priorities
of donors. In the case of economic development,
national authorities, as the experience of the
Peacebuilding Commission indicates, are capable of
developing strategies and plans. What they need is
resources and social investment.
Peacekeeping, which is the main contribution of
the United Nations to the maintenance of international
peace and security, has a budget of $7.8 billion. This is
a little more than 0.5 per cent of worldwide military
expenditures. As the concept paper circulated by the
President points out, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has a
ratio of one peacekeeper to 3,500 inhabitants. This is
also the equivalent of one peacekeeper for every 120
square kilometres. It needs very little imagination to
grasp the utter insufficiency of 17,000 peacekeepers in
the task of providing support to national authorities in
an area of responsibility roughly the size of western
Europe. It is evident that resources for peacekeeping
are utterly inadequate.
It stands to reason that an increase in the number
of quality troops is the first requirement. It also stands
to reason that troops require proper equipment and
enablers. We would like to see an increase in the
deployment of police and rule-of-law capacities. The
current composition of the DPKO as it exists today
does not have the capacity to plan for the nation-

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

building activities that are central to peacebuilding.
This capacity must be developed and will require a
multidisciplinary approach involving the development
pillar of the United Nations and greater cooperation
with countries in the global South.
It is very difficult to use objective parameters to
determine an exit point from complex peacekeeping
operations. A peacekeeping operation will have
succeeded if there is durable peace. Durable peace can
follow only from a successful peace agreement. The
conditions that can lead to a successful peace
agreement are also difficult, if not impossible, to
define. Peace processes and political settlements
cannot be subjected to budgetary discipline and
evaluation by administrators. The creation of peace, as
we are all learning in many different parts of the world,
is not a business process. It is a complicated political
undertaking with many imponderables. The Security
Council is not bound by benchmarks on when and
where it decides to intervene. Each decision is unique
and subjective judgments are involved. Similar
subjective judgments will have to be involved on when
an operation can be wound up.
I would like to conclude by referring to the issue
of accountability. Should there not be an accountability
requirement for those who mandate? Surely, their
responsibility cannot end with the generation of
mandates. If unachievable mandates are generated for
political expediency or if adequate resources are not
made available, who should bear responsibility? A
deficit in the willingness and ability to enforce
mandates is leading to an erosion of the credibility of
the United Nations itself.

a basis for this debate on strengthening the drafting of
Security Council mandates by providing resources and
capabilities, developing exit strategies, and achieving
the smooth and gradual transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and the long-term sustainable
development of countries emerging from conflict.
I would like also to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement early in the debate and the UnderSecretaries-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support for their briefings. I also thank Japan for
its efforts to enhance the interaction of the Security
Council with troop-contributing countries through the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations.
In our capacity as the Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement, we fully associate ourselves
with the statement made by the representative of
Morocco on behalf of the Movement.
While the United Nations is proud of the steady
increase in the number of its peacekeeping troops and
police, that increase also reflects the weak ability of
the Organization to reach successful political
settlements of existing disputes in host countries. It
also reflects in most instances a lack of interest in
developing the dimensions of peace settlements,
through cooperation with United Nations organs and
other entities, to create urban communities that provide
decent lives for belligerent forces and persuade them to
lay down arms and devote themselves to building their
country and to preventing it from descending yet again
into conflict.

The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Egypt.

Unfortunately, this phenomenon is most clear in
peacekeeping operations, at least 75 per cent of whose
budgets is allocated to reimbursing troop and
equipment costs, leaving less than 25 per cent to
development activities, to promoting peaceful
settlement efforts and to strengthening peacebuilding
efforts on the ground. That is a perfectly unacceptable
ratio that does not reflect the required balance between
peacekeeping, peace settlement and post-conflict
peacebuilding.

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for calling for
this important debate and for the attention given by
France to the ongoing deliberations on the future of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and on
addressing their challenges. I also thank you for the
concept paper prepared by your Mission (S/2010/67) as

Egypt has repeatedly stressed the need to prevent
peacekeeping missions from being transformed into
missions that manage rather than settle conflicts. Egypt
has also indicated the importance of focusing on
building the national capabilities of host countries from
the outset of a peacekeeping operation through parallel
efforts in peacebuilding. That will contribute to ending

Let me thank you again, Sir, for organizing this
debate. India pays tribute to peacekeepers who have
fallen, most recently in Haiti, and reiterates its
commitment to contributing, through its peacekeepers
and its national capacities, to the promotion of peace
and security and to the role of the United Nations.

10-23924

9

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

the growing reliance of host countries on the role of
peacekeeping missions in support of national capacities
in the areas of defence, security and the rule of law,
particularly in the light of the consequences of
prolonged peacekeeping missions in the absence of a
national alternative capable of performing the same
tasks and of protecting and consolidating whatever
stability has been achieved. All of these issues must be
taken into consideration in our search for a vision of
sequential transitions, with defined phases, from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, based on the need to
achieve comprehensive economic development as a
basis for such transitions.
In a contribution to defining a number of
elements that can be addressed in the context of
developing and implementing transition and exit
strategies for peacekeeping missions, I wish to stress
several important aspects that can be helpful to
formulating a new strategy in this regard.
First, there is a need to focus greater attention on
strengthening the Organization’s political efforts, from
preventive diplomacy, mediation and reconciliation
through peacekeeping, peacebuilding and support for
the development capacities of host countries, in
cooperation with United Nations organs and
international financial and economic institutions, to the
organized end phase of missions. That should be done
within a framework of respect for the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations reflected in the consent of
the parties, national ownership, impartiality, and the
non-use of force except in self-defence or to implement
a Security Council mandate.
Second, the Security Council must draft mandates
that are clear, achievable and based on a technical
assessment and sound political and military planning.
The Council should also indicate precisely what goals
are to be achieved and the role of each component of
the mission in achieving them. This must be done in
such a manner as to guarantee the required gradual
transition from peacekeeping to comprehensive
peaceful settlement, and in the light of clear
development plans for the transition to post-conflict
peacebuilding and the withdrawal of the United
Nations in coordination and cooperation with the host
country once it is able to assume its responsibility for
defence, security and enforcing respect for the rule of
law. The strategy should also take into account the
evaluation set out in the Brahimi report (see
S/2000/809) regarding the need for multidimensional

10

United Nations peacekeeping operations to launch a
limited number of critical peacebuilding activities,
pursuant to a phased plan for the smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Third, we must enhance trust between
peacekeeping parties represented in the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat, and strengthen coordination on the ground
between the Security Council’s special political
missions, regional organizations, and financial and
economic institutions operating in host countries in
order to ensure unity of purpose and consistency in
addressing the political, military, economic and
development dimensions.
Fourth, institutional cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
must be consolidated in order to take advantage of the
Commission’s advice in planning the peacebuilding
activities of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
taking into consideration the results of this year’s
upcoming review of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Fifth, we must pursue the development of
relevant Secretariat bodies and increase coordination
and interaction among them within the two
Departments of the peacekeeping sector, and with the
Department of Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding
Support Office, in order to achieve an integrated and
coherent vision that ensures unity of purpose and
action on the ground, in consultation with Member
States and within a framework of transparency and
ongoing dialogue aimed at overcoming problems
related to insufficient personnel and equipment and at
ending the lack of coordination of United Nations
activities on the ground.
Sixth, we must enhance resort to regional and
subregional organizations in addressing post-conflict
peacekeeping issues, without prejudice to the Security
Council’s competence but within a framework of joint
efforts to achieve peace and stability. Foremost among
such organizations is the African Union, which already
plays a lead role that deserves appreciation and
support.
Seventh and lastly, we must avoid addressing
peacekeeping and peacebuilding issues from the
perspective of reducing costs and disputing the
competences of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, represented respectively by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding Commission. The Economic and Social
Council also has to play a more dynamic role in
strengthening the capabilities of countries emerging
from conflict to relaunch the sort of effective economic
activities that guarantee an end to conflicts and
promote development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): My delegation greatly
appreciates the French initiative to hold discussions in
the Security Council with all the relevant stakeholders
on transition and exit strategies and for the succinct
concept paper on this important issue (S/2010/67). I
feel that a debate like this at the Security Council level
with troop- and police-contributing countries would
also help to add substantive value to our efforts to
make United Nations peacekeeping operations more
effective and efficient, thereby helping us ensure an
orderly transition and exit.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Ms Susana Malcorra, the two Under-SecretariesGeneral and the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General for their morning presentations. Before
I begin, I associate myself with the statement made by
the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
As a country participating consistently over the
past five decades in peacekeeping operations, we have
seen great transformations in such operations in that
time. Today, they are more diverse, more proliferate
and more challenging. But we also see that there are
also opportunities to contribute to peace and security
through successful peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations.
Devising transition and exit strategies should be
an integral part of any peacekeeping mission. It should
be planned at the earliest phase of the mission, while
keeping in view the end objective, provisions of the
comprehensive peace agreement signed by the parties
to the conflict, and the nature and complexity of the
problem in a realistic manner. We need to have firm
and clear discussions with the parties on the ground
about transition and exit around the time of the
comprehensive peace agreement itself, and clear
political and security objectives should be formulated
with benchmarks for each phase of the mission’s life so
as to streamline the transition process. As exit strategy
is largely influenced by the political and security

10-23924

situation in the host country, a balance should be
maintained between an untimely exit and the
possibility of relapse into violence.
Besides the ground reality, how the mandate is
drafted, what it includes, what and how much resources
are allocated, and whether or not necessary political
support is consistently rendered at the critical moment
have a great bearing on the evolution of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. In this context, the close
coordination and consistent involvement of the troopcontributing countries would also strengthen the
effective operation of peacekeeping operations as well
as their successful completion. This was also clearly
put forth in the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809), the
New Horizon paper and the report of Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations led by
Japan. After all, the way the peacekeepers respond to
the various evolving situations on the ground should
lead towards the successive progress of the situation,
which in turn depends very much on how we drafted
our mandate in the beginning. The specific and
synchronized integration of peacebuilding elements
into peacekeeping operations has immensely
contributed to ensure a smoother transition and exit.
We should effectively start the integrated concept
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding as a seamless
evolution in some of the situations. As we have seen
around the world, the coordinated delivery by the
United Nations system under one umbrella with one
integrated framework, national ownership, the building
of national institutions, matching resources as per the
mandate, and strong and consistent political support,
together with cooperative regional support, would
ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and eventually towards the normal
developmental activities of the United Nations.
I would like to stress that in order to make
peacekeeping operations an effective stage towards the
peacebuilding phase, the formulation of the concept of
operations and strategic guidance should focus on the
implementation of mandates and identified key tasks.
Based on the reports from the field, the Security
Council, in consultations with the troop-contributing
countries, should then review the mandates and
resources with a view to examining whether they are
matched with each other and whether there is a need
for an added impetus to the mission’s effectiveness,
leading towards the desired progress.

11

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

Similarly, the Security Council should ensure the
timely availability of allocated resources, especially air
assets and enabler components, for the effective
implementation of peacekeeping mandates within the
stipulated time. More often, we do not see an equal
level of commitment to providing support, especially
lifting capacity, when the area of coverage is large and
extensive and the situation precarious. Their timely
availability helps make peacekeeping operations
immediately operational and more effective, which will
lead towards early transition to the next phase.
In considering the transition issue, security, peace
and development have to be considered as an
integrated whole. Security is paramount to peace and
development, but they have to be promoted
simultaneously in order to make peace sustainable and
to ensure the peace dividend so that it reinforces strong
national ownership of the process. National leadership
is critical to long-term peace, development and
progress. The conceptual framework on capacitybuilding,
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration, and security sector reform should be
agreed upon at the outset with the parties concerned in
the conflict to ensure its smooth implementation,
which also ensures effective exit later.
We believe that the coordination of international
efforts is a must to establish an effective framework for
the protection of civilians in the mission area. This is
an overarching factor in the implementation of Security
Council mandates. But it should also be pointed out
that United Nations peacekeeping operations cannot
have an unlimited area of responsibilities without a
proportionate level of deployment and resources.
Otherwise, we would create a level of expectation that
cannot be fulfilled and which in the long run would
undermine the credibility of United Nations efforts
themselves.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to wish you
every success in fulfilling the tasks entrusted to you. I
would also like to thank the previous president, the
Permanent Representative of China, for the efforts he
had made during his presidency.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, and the

12

Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, Ms. Susana
Malcorra, for their comprehensive and candid briefings
this morning. I also thank their staff and salute all
United Nations colleagues who labour tirelessly in the
field on behalf of the Organization, recognizing their
good work in challenging and hazardous conditions.
The initiative of France to hold today’s important
debate is very welcome. It comes at a timely moment
as the United Nations is involved in a systemic
exercise of reviewing peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
While Jordan aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, allow me to make additional
observations on the key aspects underlined in the
concept paper prepared by the French delegation
(S/2010/67).
United Nations peacekeeping is an instrument
important to the maintenance of international peace
and security. It cannot be, however, a substitute for a
permanent solution or for addressing the underlying
causes of conflicts. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be accompanied by an inclusive
peace process that is well planned, carefully designed
and supported by the consent and adherence of the
parties concerned. The Security Council should also
sustain its political support for the process.
Peacekeeping operations have been mandated to
assist, in many different ways, countries torn by
conflict, to create conditions for sustainable peace.
Peacekeeping operations have also come to take on a
broader and more complex range of important new
tasks. That having been said, it is important to note that
no peacekeeping operation is intended to continue
indefinitely, and that the lifecycle of any peacekeeping
operation must at some point include an exit and, or, a
transitional phase.
We strongly concur with the view that exit and
transition strategies are key elements of the success of
any mission and that they ought to be strengthened.
However, an exit should only be considered the result
of achieving mission objectives and not a departure
from the goals supported by the international
community and set forth in Security Council
resolutions. Exit strategies should come into play when
a comprehensive settlement has been implemented and
sustainable peace achieved. Nevertheless, exit
strategies should also be flexible and adjustable to
deteriorations in any given area.

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

As many of the previous speakers have
articulated, a good exit strategy is facilitated by a good
entrance strategy. Therefore, peacekeeping operations
must have clear, achievable mandates, realistic goals
and end states that are not linked to artificial deadlines
or based on decisions that are irrelevant to the political
and security realities on the ground. To fully achieve
this task, the special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and troop- and police-contributing countries
have to be involved in the decisions of the Security
Council at the various stages of peacekeeping
operations. The expertise and experience of troop- and
police-contributing countries, objective information
provided and the situation on the ground should be
taken into consideration.
Moreover, adequate resources should be provided
at all stages of peacekeeping. Budgetary pressures
should not result in the premature termination of a
mission or in scaling it down in a manner that would
make it incapable of performing its tasks efficiently.
Good integrated planning is at the heart of a
coherent response to the needs of countries emerging
from conflict. An effective transition following the
conclusion of a peacekeeping mission must be factored
into the planning process from the outset as part of a
system-wide approach. Planning must specifically
incorporate a comprehensive peacebuilding approach
that addresses the causes as well as the symptoms of
the conflict. Moreover, there should be a clear idea of
what conditions are necessary for transition at the end
of the peacekeeping phase of a mission. The planners
should also take into consideration the significant
planning demands an actual transition will impose.
Transition into peacebuilding requires an examination
of the political, financial, institutional and bureaucratic
implications for all parties, including the Security
Council.
The achievement of a self-sustaining peace in
countries emerging from conflict requires a unified,
long-term effort involving the relevant parts of the
United Nations system as well as other key external
partners, such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary
Fund
and
regional
organizations.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations constitute
one piece of a broader puzzle and must always be
deployed as part of a long-term strategy.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
intended to play a key role in fostering greater

10-23924

coherence at the strategic level between the various
players involved in efforts to assist war-torn countries.
Hence, earlier engagement by the PBC might provide a
means for the Security Council to explore an earlier but
still sustainable exit from the military phase of
peacekeeping.
There are no hard and fast criteria, measures or
indicators that can determine when to close down a
peacekeeping operation. Since each situation is unique
and has specific problems, Council decisions will, of
course, have to be based on evolving realities and
considerations. The objective assessment of a given
situation in both the medium- and the long-term
perspectives is required for both exit and transition.
Such an assessment should take into consideration the
political, military, humanitarian and human rights
aspects, the views of parties, and the regional
dimension.
Although it is the prerogative of the Security
Council to decide when a mission has fulfilled its
mandate, close consultations with the troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
remain essential to any objective assessment of the
progress made towards laying the foundations of a selfsustaining peace and the likely consequences of a
significant reduction in or the total withdrawal of the
peacekeeping presence.
Peacekeeping operations must aim at achieving
the earliest possible transfer of responsibility to other
actors — first and foremost, local and national
authorities, but also international actors that will
remain behind to assist with development and other
issues. In this regard, some key benchmarks may be
used in determining at which point the process of
consolidation can be safely handed over to the national
authorities, assisted where necessary by international
actors, including United Nations agencies. These
benchmarks may include, for example, the absence of
violent conflict, the return of displaced persons,
progress made in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, the successful
holding of elections and formation of legitimate
political institutions, and progress made in the
establishment of governance and rule-of-law
mechanisms.
The specific set of benchmarks used will vary
from one situation to another, depending on the
underlying causes of the conflict and the dynamics in

13

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

play. Whatever the benchmarks adopted, they should
be regarded as interim objectives in the broader effort
to build a self-sustaining peace.

seek to reflect the lead role of a viable national
Government, as well as the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.

Planning should commence at the conception of a
peacekeeping operation. It is imperative that an
integrated planning process be in place, with strategic
and operational objectives, in addition to clear
benchmarks
that
allow
for
evaluation
and
accountability.

Mr. Ndabarasa (Rwanda): At the outset, I should
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. I should also like to join
others in commending your delegation for having
convened this apt and propitious debate on an issue of
critical importance to the future conduct of
peacekeeping operations and for the instructive concept
paper (S/2010/67) circulated to facilitate this
discussion.
We are grateful for and welcome the opportunity
to contribute to this debate, and thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Under-Secretaries-General and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for their
presentations this morning, and all those who have put
forward recommendations that we believe will greatly
enhance our consideration of these issues.
Peacekeeping operations, their conception,
authorization, implementation and eventual transition
are more likely to succeed if a number of key factors
are considered. These include a viable peace process or
a peace to keep; political will, commitment and clarity
of purpose on the part of all stakeholders; clear and
achievable mandates; the impartial implementation of
mandates; adequate and predictable financial, human
and logistical resources; and distinctly defined
transition and exit strategies. The very helpful concept
note circulated by the French delegation to facilitate
this dialogue examines some of these issues and raises
a number of questions that my delegation will
endeavour to address.
One issue raised is the drafting of mandates. All
stakeholders must work together to ensure that we
arrive at clear and achievable mandates that include a
desired end state, benchmarks and adequate resources.
In addition, due to the volatile environments in
which peacekeeping missions often operate, mandates
should allow for enough flexibility to adapt to changes.
The views and perspectives of the host country, troop
and police contributors and other relevant stakeholders
are critical to that end. To enable the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, mandates should also

14

With regard to capacities and resources,
peacekeeping operations should focus on fostering
national ownership and building the capacity of the
host country to better respond to, and address, the
security challenges it faces. Those efforts should be
matched with appropriate resources that will ensure
long-term sustainability and allow for well-timed
transition and exit strategies.
With regard to the coordination of international
efforts, peacekeeping missions are often blighted by
duplication of effort and contradictory initiatives. The
coordination of international efforts is imperative to
developing
successful
transition
strategies.
Coordination is key in fostering the credibility of
planning and implementation strategies. The buy-in of
key stakeholders can be achieved through coordination
and consultation.
With regard to process, the development of viable
transition and exit strategies is dependent on the
presence of clear benchmarks that allow for evaluation
and accountability. The Secretary-General’s reports on
peacekeeping missions should reflect the progress
made in the implementation of mandates. At the same
time, clearly established benchmarks should be
balanced with the need for flexibility — in effect, to be
able to change course when necessary.
In conclusion, it is important to point out that
successful transition and exit strategies are not an end
in themselves but, rather, offer the possibility for
comprehensive conflict resolution.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to express my gratitude for the
important statements made this morning, in particular
by the Secretary-General and by Under-SecretariesGeneral Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra.

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

Allow me to join others who have preceded me in
thanking you, Mr. President, for this timely initiative.
It is timely, first of all, because of the current situation
on the ground, in which complex scenarios and
missions require integrated approaches and strategies
from the United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding system. Secondly, it is timely precisely
because the link between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding will soon be considered by the entire
membership in two different contexts, namely, the
process of reviewing the Peacebuilding Commission
and at the next session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
“No exit without strategy” is the title of a report
on this issue that the Secretary-General prepared in
2001 at the request of this organ (S/2001/394). In our
judgement, several of its recommendations are still
valid, including, for example, the one that says that “a
good exit or transition strategy depends on a good
entrance strategy” (para. 6).
In that regard, it is important to take into
consideration lessons learned in the preparation of such
strategies. The work that the Council’s Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations has decided to carry out
on the experiences of various completed missions
therefore seems to us highly relevant. In that
connection, based on our very positive experience as a
troop contributor participating in meetings of the
Working Group in 2009, we reiterate our full readiness
to contribute to that undertaking on the basis of our
experience in a number of peacekeeping missions.
Having said that, however, we believe that there
is no sustainable exit or transition strategy that does
not include a serious and consistent consideration of
the underlying causes of a given conflict — be they
ethnic or political reasons or disputes over territory or
control over natural resources, among others. To that
end, the first step is to thoroughly understand the
causes of a conflict. In that regard, it is worth pointing
out that the change in the focus of many missions in
recent years from inter- to intra-State conflicts makes
the problems we must face even more complex.
A peacekeeping operation is hard pressed to
resolve all the sources of conflict. Nor do we believe
that this should be its purpose or its benchmark in
deciding on the termination or transition of a mission.
What is crucial, however, is that, from the very outset,
a mission work to strengthen national institutions and

10-23924

capacities so that they can begin to manage these
problems in a peaceful manner, thereby making a
reality of the principle of national ownership, which we
all endorse, and effectively laying the foundations for a
future transition.
In that regard, it is crucial to strengthen
institutional capacities in the areas of security and the
rule of law. We therefore encourage the Council to
continue to incorporate that element in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. However, that is not the only
area in which peace operations have capabilities and in
which they can have a positive influence.
While taking into consideration the specificities
of each case, it could be very important if, from the
beginning of a mission, emphasis were placed on other
tasks linked to early peacebuilding activities such as,
among others, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, the rebuilding of
infrastructure and quick-impact projects that produce
tangible peace dividends. In addition, actions aimed at
addressing the causes of conflict should not be put off.
These could include, for example, increasing political
participation, electoral system reform, respect for
ethnic identity and agrarian reform.
There certainly seems to be broad consensus on
the benefits that peacekeeping operations can include
in their mandates and early peacebuilding tasks, in
particular in the areas of security sector reform and the
rule of law. However, the same cannot be said of the
role of the peacekeeping system with regard to
socio-economic aspects of peacebuilding. That is true
in particular when it comes to efforts aimed at
medium- and long-term economic recovery, which is
necessary for ensuring that peace and security are
sustainable and that, once a mission comes to an end,
its benefits are not lost and the risks of a relapse are
minimized.
In that regard, it is important to analyse the types
of economic development that provide for a clear exit
strategy and to foster the conditions necessary to a
return to growth from the outset. In general, we must
be cautious and take into account the level of social
and economic devastation in the country or region in
question.
The actions and areas of focus that will promote
sustainable transitions through the different types of
United Nations presence on the ground, ultimately
leading to a complete handover of responsibilities to

15

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

the host States, require a serious effort of integration
and coordination, beginning within the United Nations
system. It is essential that there be certainty regarding
the roles that each body and agency must play, as well
as the leadership of these coordination efforts on the
ground.
In this context, we believe that there is an
important role for the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), the body created a few years ago to deal
specifically with post-conflict activities. If it is to play
that role, however, the PBC must be strengthened. This
would call for more resources, which could well give
rise to legitimate doubts as to the advisability of such
an approach and on the true ability of the United
Nations to ensure sustainable transitions.
Fortunately, in the past few years, various studies
have demonstrated the great imbalance between the
costs of conflict without a United Nations presence and
the estimates for a peacekeeping operation that meets
its goals effectively. Conflicts without a United
Nations presence are four times more expensive than
our peacekeeping operations. Moreover, we have all
witnessed successful examples of transition and should
keep those lessons in mind. We therefore believe that it
is worth committing ourselves to peacebuilding from
the outset, providing the system and its entities with
the resources necessary to fulfil its purpose.
Finally, allow me to reiterate three ideas that we
consider to be important in this process. First, there
must be clear objectives and exit strategies from the
beginning of a mandate’s discussion. Secondly, there
must be coordination of United Nations action on the
ground under the leadership of a representative,
lending the overall effort coherence and purpose.
Thirdly, peacebuilding tasks must be prioritized with
adequate human and financial resources.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I thank you, Sir, for
promoting a useful debate on peacekeeping that
focuses on the actual effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations, based on the capacity to assist a country in
its transition from conflict to peace. I also thank you
for inviting Italy, the most important European troopcontributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
to add its reflections to this debate. I also wish to fully
align myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the European Union.

16

A debate on transition and exit strategies requires
a focus on at least three different levels. First is the
strategic level, here in New York, with the participation
from the start of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the troop-contributing countries in drafting mission
mandates and planning; second is the involvement,
whenever possible, of the regional organizations most
affected by the crisis; third are national contributions,
which should be focused, among other priorities, on
building the security conditions indispensable to any
transition.
On the first point, Italy considers it essential that
the main protagonists, present and future, be brought in
at the very first stages of forging a peace mission.
These are the countries that contribute military and
police forces, and the Peacebuilding Commission, a
body conceived specifically to coordinate efforts to
consolidate institutions in States emerging from
conflict. Only integrated participation, a strategic
vision and shared responsibility from the outset among
the various actors of a peacekeeping operation will
permit timely preparation for the changing of the guard
between military Blue Helmets and peacebuilders
deployed to help a country stabilize. Such joint efforts
will unfailingly promote clearer mandates and fill
present transition gaps.
Members know that this is not a totally new idea.
In its presidential statement adopted in August, the
Security Council underlined the following conclusion:
“The Security Council… re-emphasises the
need for coherence between, and integration of,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development to achieve an effective response to
post-conflict situations from the outset”
(S/PRST/2009/24, p. 3).
In the same statement, the Council recognizes that a
peacekeeping mission should be a complement, not an
alternative, to a political strategy. Bearing in mind the
very wide deployment of United Nations troops around
the world, we believe that the moment has come to
shape concretely the coherence required by the
Security Council in that statement.
The five-year review of the Peacebuilding
Commission offers us the chance to move from words
to deeds. It is an opportunity to establish new working
methods, more cooperation and greater synergy
between the Security Council and its national and
institutional partners, which are called on to share the

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

burden of a responsible transition. In this context, we
cannot ignore the issue of strengthening the status of
the Peacebuilding Commission in the framework of the
United Nations institutional architecture.
On the second point, recent history illustrates the
growing role of regional organizations in the
international context. Sharing the burden of
peacekeeping with them maximizes the global
effectiveness of the United Nations, rationalizes the
resources available, and often increases the
possibilities of a successful transition. One example
should suffice; with the status of Kosovo clarified, the
United Nations is gradually passing the baton to the
European Union. Similar cooperation has proved useful
with the African Union, an organization that should be
encouraged and supported to share the burden of
peacekeeping.
With their shared geopolitical interests, economic
and trade relations, historical ties and cultural
affinities, the regional organizations are natural
partners, with the greatest interest in managing a crisis
afflicting one of their members or neighbouring States.
They
are
also
increasingly
institutionalized
international actors, as the recent Lisbon Treaty has
shown for the European Union. We thus need to
encourage a deeper and more structured partnership
between regional organizations and the United Nations,
foster adequate recognition of them, and structure
better cooperation and working methods with the
Security Council. The African Union-United Nations
Panel has made important efforts in this direction.
The Secretary-General has reminded us that
transition and exit strategies are dependent on
countries assuming responsibility for their own
security. Security and the rule of law are thus crucial to
assuring the handover from the Blue Helmets to
peacebuilding workers. The police component of
peacekeeping missions, which have dramatically
increased in the past few years, and the inclusion of a
civilian capacity, particularly in the area of the rule of
law, are indispensable to helping a country work
towards resuming full national ownership and
responsibility.
Italy provides a key contribution in this area. The
deployment model for Italian peacekeepers, especially
carabinieri, is to help re-establish State control and
security over the territory. But it is accompanied by an
ability to relate to the local population and an approach

10-23924

that integrates the civilian components of a mission.
The perception of police forces in relation to training
projects, infrastructure protection, reconstruction and
liaison with local authorities naturally increases trust in
peacekeepers. If we add to this the training activities
done in Italy to assist foreign police units assigned to
United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions,
the
effectiveness of this approach increases even more.
Italy, together with the European Union, will
continue to make its contribution, in the conviction
that, under the leadership of the United Nations, a
comprehensive approach at the strategic level
combined with national ownership are the essential
ingredients to ensuring a successful transition strategy
for peacekeeping missions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): I hope that the
Philippines, as the second-to-last speaker on the list,
will be given more than five minutes.
Let me start, Sir, by extending to you my
delegation’s warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February 2010 and for organizing this debate
on transition and exit strategies, which underscores the
special importance that the French presidency places
on peacekeeping. I also wish to thank you for inviting
the Philippines to participate in the discussion.
The Philippines associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. However, as
a troop- and police- contributing country, the
Philippines wishes to make the following points on the
issue under consideration.
First, peacekeeping is in a constant state of
evolution. In the past 60 years, we have seen how our
efforts to keep the peace have metamorphosed from the
more traditional form of separating warring States and
maintaining ceasefire lines to more complex and
multidimensional
operations
involving
various
stakeholders, which have come to include even
non-State actors. The unprecedented surge in the
demand for peacekeeping in areas of conflict
worldwide during the past several years cannot be
expected to end. While the cost of keeping the peace
may be staggering — it was estimated at $7.8 billion in
the past year alone — we cannot afford to fail. It is

17

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

thus incumbent upon all States Members of the United
Nations to ensure that we succeed in our efforts to
deliver and maintain the kind of peace that is needed to
allow people caught in conflict to move on and build.
Secondly, the role of the international community
is to promote and facilitate the handover of
responsibilities for lasting peace and the sustainable
development of a post-conflict area to its people. That
makes exit strategies for missions both sound and
necessary. Logic and reason therefore dictate that,
before we step in to help keep the peace, we should
also know when to step out and prepare the transition
towards that end. It is therefore imperative that a
clearly defined exit strategy be put in place in
formulating the mandate of any peacekeeping
operation. That means that the Security Council should
provide mandates that are not only clear and achievable
but are also provided with the proper resources to
accomplish the missions.
Thirdly, the Security Council must be able to set
a realistic time limit for the transition of any
peacekeeping mission. Critical tasks or identifiable
benchmarks before mission drawdown should
accompany the given deadline. A timeline will provide
us the ability to measure progress throughout the
mission and to protect the gains of years of
peacekeeping operations. However, such a timeline
should be based on existing realities on the ground and
on consultations with various stakeholders. Efforts
must be exerted to avoid a repetition of the premature
exit in Timor-Leste in 2005.
Fourthly, in setting and reviewing mandates, the
existing consultative mechanisms involving the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and policecontributing countries must be strengthened and
reinforced. The Security Council could benefit from
the actual experience on the ground of troop- and
police-contributing countries in formulating new
mandates and in reviewing existing ones. Cooperation
among various stakeholders, especially among the
actors involved in the conflict, is necessary to create an
environment conducive to the success of our
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. Close
cooperation and coordination between regional
organizations and the United Nations system are
necessary to ensure the effective execution of exit
strategies.

18

Fifthly, efforts to keep the peace must go hand in
hand with efforts to build peace. It is imperative that
peacebuilding activities be incorporated in the initial
stages of a peacekeeping mission, to empower and
prepare national and local authorities for the eventual
transition and exit.
Finally, to put everything in place, in the light of
the inputs put forward today by delegations, the
Security Council may now consider the creation of a
special ad hoc working group exclusively tasked with
preparing — after open-ended, transparent and
inclusive consultations and a thorough review of the
history of United Nations peacekeeping and previous
mandates — a working paper on general plans,
programmes, activities and strategies, which may be in
the form of rules and regulations, on the entry,
transition and exit of peacekeeping operations. That
would make the process transparent and accountable
and avoid ad hoc solutions, which could be affected by
temporary interests. Of course, the rules and
regulations can include flexible clauses to respond to
extreme emergency situations.
The President (spoke in French): I understand
that the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations would like to make a further statement. I
give him the floor.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I would just like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
debate. I believe it has been very productive and that
every statement has been very useful for each of us —
for both the Security Council and of course for us in
the Secretariat’s Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support. I think that we entirely
share the idea that peacebuilding activities should
begin as soon as possible in the context of
peacekeeping efforts, as we have very clearly said in
the New Horizon study. I also think that today’s debate
validates everything we proposed in that study. It is for
us to make use of all the integration tools at our
disposal — such as the Integrated Mission Task Force,
the integrated mission planning process and the
integrated strategic framework — to ensure that the
whole host of peacebuilding activities are integrated as
soon as possible into peacekeeping efforts. I think that
there is consensus on this. Once again, we proposed it
in the New Horizon paper, and we are very pleased to
take note of today’s consensus. Thank you, Mr. President,
for making this debate possible.

10-23924

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretaries-General for their statements and for
their participation in today’s debate.
Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.
“The Security Council reaffirms the
statement of its President of 5 August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24) and its continued commitment
to enhance further the overall effectiveness of
United Nation peacekeeping.
“The Security Council stresses in particular
its commitment ‘regularly to assess in
consultation with other stakeholders, the strength,
mandate and composition of peacekeeping
operations with a view to making the necessary
adjustments where appropriate, according to
progress achieved or changing circumstances on
the ground’. The Council stresses that the
overarching objective should be to achieve
success through creating the conditions for
sustainable peace on the ground, thereby allowing
for reconfiguration or withdrawal of the United
Nation peacekeeping mission.
“The Security Council underlines that an
advanced peace process is an important factor in
achieving
successful
transition
from
a
peacekeeping operation to other configurations of
United Nations presence. It also highlights the
importance of a host State protecting its
population, managing political disputes peaceably
and providing for basic services and long-term
development.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of supporting political processes and
national institutions, in particular for rule of law,
security and peacebuilding assistance at the
earliest stage. In this regard, the Council
reiterates the urgency of improving United
Nations peacebuilding efforts and achieving a
coordinated United Nations approach in country
as highlighted in the statement of its President of
22 July 2009 (S/PRST/2009/23) and in the
Secretary-General’s report on peacebuilding
(S/2009/304).
“The Council underlines the importance of
national ownership, constructive dialogue and

10-23924

partnership between national authorities and the
international community in helping to address
priority peacebuilding needs and the underlying
causes
of
recurring
instability.
Further
improvement can be made in Security Council
practice, supported by the Secretariat, to ensure
successful transitions, by developing clear,
credible and achievable mandates, to be matched
by appropriate resources.
The Security Council
“undertakes, whenever possible, to
include in peacekeeping mandates a desired
outcome of the implementation of mandated
tasks and a clear prioritization of tasks to
achieve it, reflecting the need to create
favourable conditions for sustainable peace;
“stresses the importance of an
appropriate level of military expertise for
Security Council decisions;
“stresses the need for precise and clear
recommendations to be made available by
the Secretariat at least a month before
mandate renewals, on the content of the
mandate and any necessary adjustments,
taking into account developments on the
ground and the views of the host country,
relevant troop- and police-contributing
countries, and other parties as appropriate;
“requests the Secretariat to plan
military, police and other peacebuilding
tasks in phases with clear objectives and
taking into account local conditions that
should be attained to allow mission success
and transition from a peacekeeping
operation, taking also into account the
recent lessons learned from transitions to
integrated peacebuilding offices;
“recognizes the utility of strategic
workplans and will consider extending their
use in peacekeeping operations. Progress in
achieving priority tasks laid down in
Security Council resolutions should be
measured,
as
appropriate,
through
benchmarks that can be easily monitored by
the Council;
“recognizes
the
importance
of
ensuring that mandated peacebuilding tasks

19

S/PV.6270 (Resumption 1)

are implemented as early as possible in a
peacekeeping operation in coordination with
the United Nations country team and with
due respect for security concerns and the
priorities of the host Government, taking
into account pre-existing programmes and
policies implemented before the inception
of the operation. In this regard, the Council
reaffirms the need to fully implement the
Integrated Mission Planning Process, and
also notes the importance of the Integrated
Strategic Frameworks. The Council also
notes the importance of the civilian
capacities review now being undertaken by
the Peacebuilding Support Office;
“undertakes to enhance coordination
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and looks forward to the 2010 review of the
PBC and the recommendations on how its
role can continue to be enhanced;
“welcomes the adoption by the
Security Council’s Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations of its programme
of work, and commends in particular its
decision to address key lessons learned
from past and current missions about the
successful implementation of transition
strategies, with a view to improving Council
practice;
“recalls the necessity to take into
account the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict, as and when
mandated, throughout the lifecycle of
United Nations peacekeeping and other
relevant missions, in line with Security
Council resolution 1894 (2009).
“The Security Council commits to regularly
monitoring progress and achievement of the
different stages of a given peacekeeping
operation. The Council stresses the importance to
maintain an efficient reporting and information
collection system.
“The Security Council reaffirms its belief
that United Nations peacekeeping is a unique
global partnership that draws together the
contributions and commitment of the entire United

20

Nations system. The Council is committed to
strengthening this partnership and acknowledges the
key role of the General Assembly’s Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
General Assembly’s Fifth Committee in that
regard. The Security Council recognizes the need
for continuous review of the Secretariat’s military
planning, police, judicial, rule of law, and
institution-building capabilities to ensure their
effective utilization and coordination.
“The Security Council recognizes the
contribution of regional and subregional
organizations to transition. The Security Council
calls upon all Member States and regional,
subregional and international partners to promote
coherence
and
coordination
of
their
peacebuilding plans and programmes with those
of the United Nations peacekeeping operation and
the wider United Nations presence on the ground.
“The Security Council undertakes to
provide the political support necessary to ensure
the effective implementation of peace processes,
in order to promote the success of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
“The Council stresses the importance of
considering early peacebuilding in its own
deliberations and of ensuring coherence between
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding to
achieve effective transition strategies. The
Council looks forward to further discussing the
implementation of this integrated approach and
requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts in this regard.
“The Security Council remains committed
to improving further the overall effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping, including through
the recognition and enhancement of linkages with
wider peacebuilding efforts, and will conduct a
further review of progress in this regard in late
2010.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/2.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded its work.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

10-23924
