UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

’

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

Page
agenda (S/Agenda/25 18) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of new Members concerning the
application of Brunei Darussalam for membership in the United Nations
(S/16367). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SlPV.2518

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,.
,
::
Documents of the’Secuhty’Counci1
(symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2518th MEETING
Held iu New York
President:

Mr. S. Shah NAWAZ

on Friday,

24 February

(Pakistan).

on the application for membership of Brunei Darussalam. In accordance with the procedure followed on
previous occasions, I ,propose that the Council first
proceed to the, vote on that ,draft resolution and that
representatives ,desiring to speak do so thereafter. If
I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
approves of this procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption

1984, at 3.00 p.m.

4. Accordinglv. I now nut to the vote the draft resolution contained&paragraph
3 of the Committee’s report
on the Admission of new Members.

agenda (SIAgenda/2518)

of the agenda
A vote was taken by show of hands.

2.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of
new Members concerning the application of
Brunei Darussalam for membership
in the
United Nations (S/16367)
The meeting

The draft resolution
lution 548 (1984)].

[reso-

5. The PRESIDENT:
I shah immediately convey this
decision to the Secretary-General
for transmission to
the General Assembly in accordance with the provisions of rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure.

was called to order at.3.55 p.m.
Adoption

was adopted unanimously

of the agenda
6. A number of representatives have asked to speak
following the voting, and I now call on them.

The agenda was adopted.

7. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): It is always a privilege, as a member of the Security Council, to welcome the application for membership of the
United Nations of a newly sovereign State. It is a particular privilege, and pleasure, to do so in the case of
Brunei Darussalam.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of new
Members concerning the application of Brunei
Darussalam for membership in the United Nations
(S/16367)
1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Indonesia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the representative of Indonesia to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

8. The United Kingdom has been in special treaty
relationship with Brunei since 1847. In 1888 the then
Sultan placed his country under the protection of the
British Crown when Britain assumed responsibility for
the defence and external affairs of Brunei.
9. A further agreement in 1906 provided for a British
Resident to be appointed to Brunei to advise the Sultan
on matters relating to the ‘internal administration
of
the State. This arrangement continued until 1959 when
the administrative
subordination of Brunei to Sarawak
-which mirrored similar arrangements of convenience
in various dependent Territories-was
ended and a
High Commissioner was appointed to Brunei in its own
right.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Koentarso
(Indonesia) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now consider
the report of the Committee on the Admission of new
Members concerning the application of Brunei Darussalam for membership of the United Nations [S/16367].

10. In 1971 a fresh agreement was signed, by which
the advisory powers of the High Commissioner in Brunei were relinquished and which provided that Brunei
should enjoy full internal self-government.
Thereafter
the only direct responsibility remaining with the United

3. In paragraph 3 of its report, the Committee recommends to the Council the adoption of a draft resolution
1

Kingdom
lations.

was for the conduct of Brunei’s

preserved tomb of a Sultan of Brunei in the suburbs of
Nanjing city; this bears historical witness to the traditional friendship between China and Brunei.

external re-

11. Finally, by a Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation concluded in 1979,’ it was agreed that Britain would
yield that last responsibility on 3 1 December 1983 and
that Brunei would, in the words of the Treaty, “resume
full international
responsibility
as a sovereign and
independent State”. The Treaty came into force from
3 1 December 1983; when Brunei became the forty-ninth
member of the Commonwealth
and the sixth member
State of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

18. On 1 January, the day when Brunei Darussalam
declared independence, both President Li Xiannian of
the People’s Republic of China and Premier Zhao
Ziyang of the State Council sent messages to Sultan .
Muda Hassanal Bolkiah Mu’izzaddin
Waddaulah, the
Head of State and Prime Minister of Brunei Darussalam, warmly greeting the proclamation of the independence of Brunei and notifying him that the Govemment of the People’s Republic of China had decided to
recognize ,the Government
of Brunei. We sincerely
hope that the traditional ,friendship between the two
peoples will develop and grow stronger under the new
historical conditions.

12. My Government is proud to have assisted Brunei
in good times and in bad. Many of my countrymen have
served in Brunei. This has led to notable links of affection at every level. We are happy that Brunei now takes
its rightful place in the comity of nations.

19. The Chinese Government has consistently held
that all countries, big or small, should be equal. Brunei
Darussalam has a long history and rich resources. Soon
after Brunei Darussalam proclaimed independence, it
became, first, the’sixth member State of ASEAN and,
then, the forty-fifth member State of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference. The Chinese delegation fully
supports the application
of Brunei Darussalam for
admission to membership of the United Nations and
endorses the recommendation
of the Security Council
to the General Assembly to accept the application. We
are convinced that Brunei Darussalam will make positive contributions to the prosperity and co-operation of
the region, to the preservation of international peace
and security and to the attainment of the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.

13. The Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation states
that “the relations. between the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland .and the State of
Brunei shall continue to be governed by a spirit of close
friendship”. It is clear evidence of that close friendship
that at the Brunei National Day celebration-, held yesterday, Her Majesty The Queen was represented by His
Royal Highness The Prince of Wales. It is in the spirit
of that friendship that I applaud the unanimous decision of the Council to recommend the admission of
Brunei Darussalam to the ,General Assembly as its
159th Member.
14. Mr, LIANG Yufan (China) [inrerpretationfrom
Chinese]: We are deeply gratified at seeing you,
Mr. President, an illustrious
diplomat of Pakistan,
which is a friendly neighbour of China, presiding over
the Security Council this month. With your rich diplomatic experience, outstanding ability and solid personality, you are steering the Council towards the
smooth accomplishment
of its tasks for this month.

20. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
The United States delegation-not
least as host country
to the United Nations-is
pleased to welcome the
application for membership of Brunei Darussalam. We
applaud the unanimous recommendation
of the Council
that Brunei’s application .be favourably considered.

15. I wish also to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation and thanks to Mr. Chamorro Mora, the
representative of Nicaragua, for the outstandingswork
done during his presidency of the Council last month.

21. Although our two countries are geographically
very far apart, Brunei and the United States have enjoyed a variety of ties over the past century. Our consular relations date back to the late nineteenth century,
and commercial contacts between our two peoples go
back even further. We are confident that a full range of
mutually profitable relations will expand in the years
ahead.

16. Having shaken off the foreign rule of nearly a
century, Brunei Darirssalam formally declared independence on 1 January 1984, thus becoming a new
independent State ‘in Asia. This is t,he victory won by
the Brunei people after long years of struggle. The
Chinese delegation rejoices at this happy event and
would like to take this opportunity
to extend warm
congratulations to the Brunei Government and people.

22. The United States was honoured to participate in
the National Day ceremonies yesterday, 23 February,
marking the restoration of Brunei’s full independence.
The fact that our official delegation
was led by
Mr. Kenneth Dam, Deputy Secretary of the Department of State marked the importance we attached to
that event. We would note also that Brunei’s first
ambassador to the United States, Mr. Pengiran Haji
Idriss, will present his letters of credentials in Washington on 13 March.

17. Brunei and China share a relationship that can be
.traced back to ancient times. Brunei started its friendly
exchanges with China as early as over a thousand years
ago. By the time of the Ming Dynasty of China, the
exchanges between the two countries had reached a
more profound stage. Today, there still remains a well2

23. Brunei will, we feel certain, be a constructive
addition to the membership not only of the United
Nations but also of ASEAN, which it is joining as that
organization’s sixth member. My Government has long
respected and admired ASEAN’s role in regional and
global affairs and is confident that Brunei’s participation in that organization will further strengthen its role.

29. Malta welcomes the forthcoming addition to the
now almost universal family of nations, and it gives me
great pleasure to speak in favour of the admission of
Brunei Darussalam to membership of the Organization:
30.

Three points occur to me in this connection.

31. First, and perhaps most important, a new membership is a healthy sign of faith in the United Nations.
Not only is this a salutary measure in itself, but, as it
occurs at a time when scepticism and sometimes even
cynicism about the work of the Organization is rampant, this act of faith by a small country is a rebuttal of
the weakness of faith that ,a11 too often threatens to
engulf us. We hope, therefore, that this demonstration
of practical faith will give doubters food for thought.
Certainly the Organization ,will be the better for it.

24. My delegation, finally, wishes to extend its warm
collegial congratulations to the people of Brunei and to
His Majesty Sultan Muda Hassanal Bolkiah on the
occasion of the restoration of Brunei’s full independence, its National Day celebration and its application
for membership of the United Nations.
25. Mr. SMIRNOV
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretafion from Russian]: The Soviet
Union supported the application by Brunei Darussalam
to become a member of the United Nations. The delegation of the Soviet Union welcomes the declaration by
Brunei Darussalam that it accepts the obligations contained in the Charter of the United Nations and solemnly undertakes to fulfil them.

32. Secondly, this new request for membership
comes from a small country. Speaking from the vantage
point of 1984, I believe it might be rewarding to look
back at the academic debates, for and against, concerning small countries becoming Members of the
United Nations. Today, with some history behind us,
1 venture to say that small countries have in word and in
deed made a valuable contribution to the Organization,
and, as a representative
of a small country- myself;
I cannot but feel that I should give a special welcome to
a new Member with which my country shares, among
other attributes, the characteristic of .smallness, in a
historic evolution which also has many similarities between our countries.

26. On the day when the independence of Brun.ei
Darussalam was declared, the Presidium of the ‘Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union sent His Majesty
Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei Darussalam a, telegram which said:
“On the occasion of the Brunei Darussalam’s declaration of independence, please accept our sincere
congratulations,and
every wish for the success and
welfare of the people of your country on the road of
independent national development.

33. Thirdly, the moment a new Member joins the
Organization, the ideals and aspirations of the United
Nations suddenly expand to embrace yet another member of the family of nations. We are convinced that
Brunei Darussalam will respond nobly to its obligations. We look forward to a long and fruitful collaboration with the newly independent State of Brunei Darussalam and its delegation, and we shall be honoured, as a
first step, to commence an effective mode of co-operation by co-sponsoring in the General Assembly the draft
resolution on its admission as a Member, with the same
warm feelings of solidarity and friendship as we express
in the Council today.

“The Soviet Union, constantly guided by the principles of equality and mutual respect for sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-intervention
in internal
affairs, hereby declares its recognition of Brunei
Darussalam as an independent, sovereign State, and
expresses its readiness to establish diplomatic relations with it.”
27. The Soviet delegation takes this opportunity to
express its warm congratulations
to this young State
and its people, and to wish it every success on its path of
independent development.

34. My country shares a third characteristic
with
Brunei Darussalam and with an impressive number of
other countries-that
is, membership of .the British
Commonwealth of Nations. It is gratifying for us to note
that the growth of that organization,
whose spontaneous bond is the result of historical development and
association, keeps apace proportionate with the advances made in the United Nations itself, and that in fact
the Commonwealth
often takes an impressive leadership role in the search for progress within the United
Nations in such matters as the advancement of human
rights and economic development.

28. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Mr. President, I wish first to
congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of
the presidency for this month. Not many pleasant
occasions come the way of Presidents of the Security
Council. You must therefore feel very pleased that the
unanimous recommendation
of the admission of Brunei
Darussalam should take place today, under your presidency. I believe that that is in itself a sincere tribute
to the high regard in which you are held by the members
of the Council. I would add an expression of gratitude
to your predecessor, the representative of Nicaragua,
Mr. Chamorro Mora, for the excellent way in which he
presided over the Council’s deliberations last month.

35. Finally, a word of congratulations
is due to the
representative of the United Kingdom and his Govem3

ment for the practical way in which they have led the
new country to independence, thus acceding to the
wishes of the inhabitants, which should always be the
supreme guideline.

an answer to this problem,
earnestly call.
43.

an answer for which we all

Mr. ICAZA

GALLARD
(Nicaragua) [interpretaThe Nicaraguan delegation wishes
most cordially and warmly to welcome the new State
that has today associated itself with our Organization
and is now a member of the international community. It
is joining those States that have undertaken the commitment and responsibility
strictly to abide by the
United Nations Charter, and without question that
implies the strengthening of the goals and purposes of
this universal Organization,
which gives my country
joy.
tionfiom

36. So, having joined in the Council’s unanimous
recommendation
that Brunei Darussalam become a
Member of the United Nations, we extend our warm
congratulations to its people and its Government, and
wish them well in the years ahead.
37. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France)
[interpretation
fio,m French]: It was with particular
pleasure that .my delegation voted in favour of the
admission of Brunei Darussalam to membership of the
United Nations.
1
_” I
. .
e..
38. In today recommending to the General Assembly
the admission of this new State, a few days after its
accession to independence, the Council is once again
demonstrating its commitment to the universality of the
United Nations, and France is very gratified by that.

Spanish]:

44. We are convinced that the people and Government of the new State will devote their best efforts to
the cause of peace and justice. Irrespective of its size,
Brunei Darussalam has an important place in this community of nations, membership of which entails sensitive obligations that are a true challenge to newly
independent States, especially at a time when the peace
and security of nations, in particular the small nations
and those that belong to the third world, are often
hindered by many kinds of tensions and various interests and when the preservation of independence and the
right to self-determination
seem to be not really inalienable rights but rights that are being questioned.

39. The new State of Brunei Darussalam is pledged to
fulfil the obligations contained in the Charter of the
United Nations. We are sure that it will fulfil them very
well and make a positive contribution to the efforts that
are being made by the Organization to promote peace
and development.

45. Once again we welcome the new State to the
Organization. Its presence and active participation will
increase the Organization’s
undeniable strength as we
consider the delicate matters dealt with here.

40. The French delegation gives a warm welcome to
our new partner within the United Nations family. We
extend our warm congratulations
to Sultan Hassanal
Bolkiah and his Government, and express to the people
of this young State our best wishes for its well-being and
prosperity.

46. The representatives of Brunei Darussalam can
rely on the co-operation of our delegation, and they can
include the people of Nicaragua among their best
friends.

41. Mr. BASSOLE
(Upper Volta) [interpretation
from French]: My delegation is very happy to see the
United Nations family about to grow by the addition
of a new Member. By responding positively to the request for admission to membership submitted by Brunei Darussalam, the Security Council has once again
demonstrated its concern to ensure that the Organization maintain its universal character. We are convinced
that this State will fully deserve its place in the international community,
as its commitment
to accept its
obligations under the Charter indicates. Upper Volta is
very happy to be able to co-operate with Brunei Darussalam with a view to furthering understanding between
peoples and international peace and security.

47.

Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) [interpr+ztion
from AruEgypt supported the application of Brunei Darussalam for membership of the United Nations. It did so
in the belief that the accession of that country to membership of the international family as well as ASEAN
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference will
contribute to the maintenance of international
peace
and security and increased co-operation between countries having different political, economic and social
systems.
kc]:

48. On this occasion it gives the delegation of Egypt
great pleasure to extend to His Majesty Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah and to the fraternal people of Brunei
Darussalam sincere congratulations
on the Security
Council’s unanimous recommendation
to the Assembly
concerning Brunei Darussalam’s request for admission
to membership.

42. Although today is a day of happiness, we cannot
fail to devote some thought to those people in the world
who are still languishing under the yoke of colonialism,
for this moment also brings to mind their profound and
legitimate aspirations to be with us, When shall we see
the adoption of a draft resolution recommending to the
General Assembly the admission of an independent
Namibia to the United Nations? We dare to hope that
Brunei Darussalam, which we warmly congratulate,
will effectively and constructively contribute to finding

49. Egypt has always supported the principle of the
universality of the Organization. We are confident that
the accession of this young State to the family of nations
and the contribution
it will make to the work of the
4

Organization will have a positive effect on efforts to
apply the lofty principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

57. I should like to associate myself with all the speakers who have preceded me in applauding and welcoming the unanimous decision of the Council to recommend the admission of Brunei Darussalam as a
Member of the United Nations. We have already had
the pleasure and privilege of welcoming it as a fellow
member of the Commonwealth
on 1 January of this
year.

50. I should like here to reaffirm that Egypt will spare
no effort to establish relations of close co-operation,
friendship and mutual respect with the State of Brunei
Darussalam, with which we have cultural bonds of
special significance. It will also be a pleasure for our
delegation to see the day on which it can co-operate
with the delegation of Brunei Darussalam to benefit the
international community.

58. India has had historically friendly relations with
this beautiful country inhabited by peace-loving people. We look forward to establishing closer links of cooperation with the Government and people of the newly
independent State.

51. Mr. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic)
[interpretation
from Russian]:
May I,
Mr. President, avail myself of this opportunity to welcome you to your responsible post as President of the
Security Council for this month and to wish you every
success in your work. I feel I should also refer to the
masterly skill and tact displayed by the representative
of Nicaragua, Mr. Chamorro Mora, when he was President of the Council.

59. The Government and people of India rejoiced at
the attainment of independence by Brunei Darussalam
on 1 January 1984, and a high-level Indian delegation was sent to participate in the independence celebrations.
60. India has consistently supported the principle of
universality, and the admission of Brunei Darussalam
as the 159th Member of the United Nations will go
further in the implementation
of that principle.

52. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic supported the recommendation
of the Committee on the Admission of new Members that Brunei
Darussalam be admitted to membership of the United
Nations. We associate ourselves with the congratulations that have been addressed to that young State here
in the Council on its attainment of independence and
wish it and its people success and good fortune.

61. We wish Brunei Darussalam every success and
look forward to working closely with its delegation to
achieve our common objectives in pursuance of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

53. When the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR studied
the letter dated 8 February 1984 from the Head of State
and Prime Minister of Brunei Darussalam to the Secretary-General, it was gratified to note the declaration
contained therein that Brunei Darussalam accepted the
obligations contained in the Charter and solemnly undertook to fulfil them.

62. Mr. MEESMAN
(Netherlands):
I have much
pleasure in joining those who have welcomed the
application
for membership
of the Organization
of
Brunei Darussalam. It goes without saying that my
delegation had no difficulty whatever in supporting the
recommendation
contained in paragraph 3 of the report
of the Committee on the Admission of new Members.

54. May we express the hope that the young independent State of Brunei Darussalam as a new Member of
the United Nations, will make a useful contribution to
the noble tasks of the Organization.

63. Members of the Council are aware that my country has aiways attached great importance to the universality of the United Nations-and
of its subsidiary organs, for that matter-and
we are therefore glad
to welcome the now fully independent and sovereign
State of Brunei Darussalam as the 159th Member of the
Organization. We are confident that this new Member
-with which the Kingdom of the Netherlands hopes to
continue to maintain already excellent relations-will
fulfil the requirements for membership, namely, that it
is able and willing to carry out itsobligations
under the
Charter.

55. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): It is, Mr. President, a
matter of particular pleasure for me to see you, a diplomat of high repute and experience, and an outstanding representative of our close neighbour Pakistan, presiding over these deliberations, having assumed
the high offtce of President of the Council for the month
of February. While extending to you our felicitations,
I should like also to express my delegation’s sincere
appreciation of the dedication and competence with
which you have been guiding the deliberations of the
Council towards constructive conclusions.

64. We are delighted that the Council has unanimously decided to recommend Brunei Darussalam for
membership of the United Nations, thereby paving the
way for its admission to the comity of nations. We very
much look forward to welcoming its representatives to
New York.

56. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
express our deep appreciation to your predecessor,
Mr. Chamorro Mora, representative of Nicaragua, for
his excellent stewardship of the Council and the impartial and effective manner in which he conducted our
work last month.

65. Mr. CHIKETA
(Zimbabwe): We are happy tojoin
those who have spoken before us in welcoming the
5

admission of Brunei Darussalam as a new Member of
the world community. We look forward to co-operating
with the new State in the promotion of the principles
and objectives of the United Nations.
66. The addition of any Member can only strengthen
the Organization. Zimbabwe looks forward to the day
when we shall welcome Namibia as a full and independent Member of the Organization. Self-determination
is
a human right that should not be enjoyed only by the big
ones; it should be enjoyed also by the small nations,
including Namibia.

73. It was during last January when ASEAN members
held a historic meeting at Djakarta that Brunei Darussalam, which had just achieved its independence,
joined the Association. It is in this context that my
delegation has asked to be allowed to participate in the
Council’s meeting on the admission of Brunei Darussalam to membership of the United Nations in order to
express unreserved support for the application on behalf of ASEAN members.
74. As is well know, Indonesia and the other ASEAN
members have consistently supported the principle of
universality as one of the most effective ways to promote ‘international
co-operation.
We are particularly
pleased that the question of the admission of Brunei
Darussalam has been brought before the Council for its
consideration and approval. It is therefore with a deep
sense of gratification that I should like to express the
sincere appreciation of the member nations of ASEAN
to all the members of the Council for their unanimous
recommendation
to the General Assembly that Brunei
Darussalam be admitted to membership. It is our fervent hope that the Assembly also will unanimously
approve the decision reached by the Council.

67. Mr. ARIAS STELLA (Peru) [interpretationfrom
Spanish]: First, I should like, on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf, whole-heartedly
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
duties of President of the Council for this month. Your
qualities as a diplomat, your experience and your intelligence constitute a guarantee of the success of the
mission entrusted to you. Also, my delegation wishes to
express its congratulations
and gratitude to the representative of Nicaragua, Mr. Chamorro Mora, who presided over the Council during the month of January.
68. It is with deep satisfaction that my delegation
joined in the unanimous agreement adopted .by the
Council recommending
to the General Assembly that
Brunei Darussalam be admitted to membership of the
United Nations. We greet the people and Government
of Brunei Darussalam on this occasion. As of now, we
offer them the goodwill and co-operation of the Peruvian delegation so that, along with the other Members of the United Nations, we can work together for
the achievement of the goals and objectives of the
Charter.

75. We are fully confident that Brunei Darussalam’s
membership in the community of nations will contribute to furthering the principles of the Charter and the
objectives of the Organization.
76. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of PAKISTAN.
77. It is a happy coincidence that Pakistan, in its
capacity as President of the Council, has the privilege of
considering the request of Brunei Darussalam for membership in the United Nations.

69. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

78. Pakistan’s *support for the admission of Brunei
Darussalam is but one demonstration of our warm sentiments of friendship for the Government and the people of Brunei Darussalam and our satisfaction and joy at
its entry into the fold of the international community as
an independent and sovereign State. The admission of
Brunei Darussalam as the 159th Member of the United
Nations will mark a further step in the attainment of
universality by the United Nations.

70. Mr. KOENTARSO
(Indonesia): It is a privilege
for me to make a brief statement on behalf of the members countries of ASEAN, namely, Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore
and Thailand.
71. At the outset, I should like to express my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, and, through
you, the other members of the Council for affording me
the opportunity to address the Council on this occasion.

79. Pakistan rejoices in the independence of Brunei
Darussalam and greets His Majesty Sultan Hassanal
Bolkiah and the people of Brunei Darussalam on
entering a new phase of their history, ready to devote
themselves to the cause of freedom, peace and progress. The very name of Darussalam adopted by the
new State is imbued with this promise. As a token of the
goodwill and respect which the people of Pakistan have
for the brotherly people of Brunei Darussalam, the
President of Pakistan, General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq,
personally represented Pakistan at the celebrations
held at Bandar Seri Begawan yesterday.

72. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
extend to you, Mr. President, our warm congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of February. We are confident that
under your presidency the Council’s proceedings will
be brought to a successful conclusion. Permit me also to
congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Chamorro Mora of
Nicaragua, for the skilful manner in which he conducted the Council’s proceedings last month.
6

80. In welcoming the entry of Brunei Darussalam, a
fraternal Islamic State, Pakistan is confident that this
new and energetic nation will play an active role in the
United Nations and will contribute strongly towards
the advancement of the principles and purposes of the
Organization. In this common endeavour, Pakistan also
looks forward to the development of close brotherly
relations with Brunei Darussalam and the establish-

ment of fruitful co-operation and contacts with its delegation at the United Nations.
The meeting

rose at.4.40 p.m.
NOTE

be printed
No. 23477.
‘-TO

7

in “United

Nations,

Treaty Series”,

under

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Ies librairies et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
g : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get-&e.

H3AaHuR

opt-aHH3aqriu

t,6’beAWHeHHblX

HaswR,

w aremc~~ax
BO BC~X pai%oHax
pupa.
H~BOANT~
cnpaaKu
xr3rmwon4
Mara3mre
wnw n~mwre
no anpecy : OpraHw3auwa
Cexuwn
no nponaxe
wanaHwR, Hbio-Ffoprc
wnw Xeneaa.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

ZWHLX
*awern

HaqeR

MO)K”O

KynWTb

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en lib&as
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

cm300

B KHllWHbIX

Mara-

06 uaAaHwrfx
06%eAwHeHHblx

B

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,

90-61313-January

1993-2.050
