A /72/PV.98*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

98th plenary meeting

Friday, 22 June 2018, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Brown
(Liberia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Draft resolution (A/72/L.58)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Tudor Ulianovschi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and European Integration of the Republic of
Moldova, to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.58.
Mr. Ulianovschi (Republic of Moldova): Draft
resolution A/72/L.58, which I have the honour to
introduce today under agenda item 35, focuses on a
pressing legal and political issue against the background
of a protracted conflict that was generated externally in
the eastern part of the Republic of Moldova. It addresses
a matter of fundamental concern to my country.
Almost 27 years after Moldova regained its
independence and 26 years after it became a State
Member of the United Nations, the Operational Group
of Russian Forces (OGRF) and its armaments are still
stationed on the territory of the Republic of Moldova

without its consent. The continued presence of foreign
military forces and armaments on the territory of the
Republic of Moldova against its express wish is not
only incompatible with its independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and permanent neutrality, but also
entirely incompatible with the rules of international law
and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
The presence of any foreign troops on the
internationally recognized territory of any Member
State without its consent and against its express wish
constitutes a grave breach of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the rules and principles that govern
international relations. The Charter and international
law are very clear on that account and leave no room
for interpretations based on the circumstantial interests
of any given Member State. That is the main message
also conveyed by all resolutions adopted in the past
by the Security Council and the General Assembly on
unlawful military presence on the territories of Member
States.
The continued presence of the Operational Group
of Russian Forces and its huge stockpiles of armaments
on the territory of the Republic of Moldova should not
be an exception to the aforementioned international
rules and principles.
Accordingly, the proposed draft resolution reaffirms
the need for all States to adhere strictly to the principles

		 * Reissued for technical reasons on 22 August 2018.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-19181* (E)

*1819181*

A/72/PV.98*

of the Charter of the United Nations and recognizes
that the continued stationing of Russian military forces
and armaments on the territory of the Republic of
Moldova without its consent violates its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and that that is a problem that
must be resolved in good faith, unconditionally, without
further delay and in a peaceful manner.
The obfuscated and circumstantial claim that the
presence of the Operational Group of Russian Forces
on Moldovan soil is somehow legal in terms of the
1992 Moldovan-Russian ceasefire agreement is merely
a distortion of the actual content of that document.
The 1992 ceasefire agreement was not intended to and
did not give any basing rights for Russian military
forces in the Republic of Moldova. It merely provided
for specific conditions and tools to stop the violent
clashes that occurred as a result of concerted unlawful
action aimed at denying the authorities of the newly
independent State the exercise of constitutional control
of the eastern part of the country. One of those tools
was the creation of a Joint Control Commission (JCC)
empowered with military contingents — improperly
labelled later as “peacekeeping” — provided by the
parties to the conflict, including the Russian Federation.
The recurring discreditable narrative of the role of
the Operational Group of Russian Forces “as a guarantor
of peace and stability in the Republic of Moldova”
subtly implies that the OGRF might have a certain
“peacekeeping” role that makes it indistinguishable
from the rotating Russian contingent that participates
in the military component of the Joint Control
Commission. However, the truth is that the Operational
Group of Russian Forces has nothing to do with the JCC
military component. There are no legal grounds for the
OGRF to be considered part of that component and
there are no legal grounds whatsoever for the OGRF’s
continued presence in the Republic of Moldova.
For the sake of clarity, the draft resolution clearly
distinguishes between the Russian rotating contingent
operating under the JCC military component and the
Operational Group of Russian Forces, and further
stresses that the OGRF has not been entrusted with
any “peacekeeping” or any other legal mandate.
In that context, let me underline that the JCC’s
military component long ago fulfilled its scope.
That obsolete mechanism has turned into a factor of
conflict preservation and failed to ensure the full
demilitarization of the security zone. That is why the
Republic of Moldova has repeatedly called, within
2/13

22/06/2018

the framework of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for its transformation
into a neutral multinational civilian mission with an
international mandate.
The situation I have just presented cannot be
downplayed and casually defined as an outstanding
matter that arises from the implementation or
non-implementation of the signed, but not ratified, 1992
Moldovan-Russian ceasefire agreement. This protracted
situation is now almost 27 years old and cannot be
euphemistically characterized as a purely “bilateral
issue between the two United Nations Member States”.
The need for an early, orderly and complete withdrawal
of Russian troops and armaments from the territory
of the Republic of Moldova has been emphasized in
many consensual OSCE ministerial declarations and
related General Assembly resolutions — documents
that the Russian Federation also subscribed to or
co-sponsored. As a signatory to the 1999 OSCE summit
outcome document, the Russian Federation legally
committed itself to a complete withdrawal of its troops
and armaments by the end of 2002. Despite concerns
about the speed and transparency of the withdrawal
process, the uneven progress achieved by the Russian
Federation between 2001 and 2002 was noted, and its
self-commitment to completing the orderly withdrawal
of its troops and armaments by 31 December 2003 was
included in the Porto OSCE ministerial declaration.
Responding in good faith to the Russian Federation’s
technical requirements pertaining to the orderly
withdrawal within the new deadline — expressed by
the wording “provided the necessary conditions are in
place” — the participating States of the OSCE agreed
to continue their support for the withdrawal of Russian
troops and the disposal of ammunition by appropriate
measures, including through additional contributions
to a voluntary fund established for that purpose. At
the beginning of 2004, the process of withdrawal was
completely ceased on grounds that are both legally
and politically untenable. The rigid conditionality by
the Russian Federation that the OGRF’s withdrawal
shall be synchronized with, and finalized only after,
the settlement of the protracted political conflict in
the eastern part of the country is both illegitimate and
unacceptable. The withdrawal of foreign troops and the
conflict-resolution process are totally different issues
and cannot be linked. One should not be a condition for
the other.
18-19181

22/06/2018

The Transnistrian issue is a matter that falls within
the domestic jurisdiction of the Republic of Moldova. The
international conflict-settlement mechanism in place is
mandated to facilitate, in conditions of neutrality and
non-interference in internal affairs, a political solution
based on full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Moldova. The adopted
consensual OSCE ministerial declarations explicitly
stressed that progress on the withdrawal of the Russian
troops and armaments cannot be linked to any other
question, with due regard to existing agreements.
The references to the 2002 Porto OSCE ministerial
declaration that contained technical wording related to
the orderly aspect of the next stage of the withdrawal
process are out of context. As was agreed by all parties
involved in the negotiation of that statement, the wording
“necessary conditions” used in the context of orderly
withdrawal refers solely to technical arrangements and
shall in no way be applied to any political circumstances.
Neither the 2002 Porto OSCE ministerial declaration
nor other agreed documents stipulate a “mandate” for
the Operational Group of Russian Forces to indefinitely
“guard”, in the eastern part of the country, its huge
amount of armaments — around 21,000 metric tons
of munitions — or to “provide assistance and security
guarantees” to the unconstitutional power structures
created there after the signing of the 1992 ceasefire
agreement.
Let me recall here that the Moldovan Constitution
expressly prohibits the stationing of foreign troops on its
national territory. In view of that absolute prohibition,
no exceptions whatsoever are allowed. The continued
rigid conditionality by the Russian Federation that
the OGRF’s withdrawal shall be synchronized with
the settlement of an internal political issue clearly
contradicts internationally accepted principles, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
1970 Declaration on Principles of International Law
Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States, and indeed in all other documents adopted by
the United Nations with a view to upholding sovereign
equality.
The proposed draft resolution cannot be portrayed as
an “unfriendly action” towards another United Nations
Member State or as an attempt to “move discussions
elsewhere”. Rather, it seeks to consolidate the support
of the United Nations for a Member State whose
sovereignty and territorial integrity are undermined
by the continued illegal military presence of another

A/72/PV.98*

Member State. The increase in scope and frequency of
the illegal joint military exercises of the Operational
Group of Russian Forces with the paramilitaries of the
unconstitutional power structures in the eastern part of
the country is nothing other than a continuous violation
of the 1992 ceasefire agreement, which contains an
explicit legally binding commitment to ensuring the
neutrality of Russian forces.
Aimed at upgrading the military offensive capacity
of the unconstitutional power structures, the illegal
joint military exercises undermine the international
efforts aimed at a peaceful resolution of the protracted
Transnistrian problem. The Republic of Moldova,
echoed by other OSCE member States, has repeatedly
expressed its deep concern with regard to these unlawful
and destabilizing activities, which run contrary to the
obligations of the Russian Federation in the framework
of the 5+2 international settlement format.
We cannot but disagree with the characterization
given by the opponent of this draft resolution that the
Moldovan initiative is “confrontational by its nature”
and represents a “potential source of open tension in
South-Eastern Europe”. On the contrary, the OGRF’s
continued illegal presence and its unauthorized and
provocative military activities on foreign soil befit that
description and can also be identified as unlawful under
the terms of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Through its 21 July 2017 declaration, distributed
subsequently to the United Nations membership as
an official document of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, the Parliament of the Republic
of Moldova reaffirmed and re-emphasized the longheld official Moldovan position that the unauthorized
continued stationing of foreign troops in the eastern
part of the country constitutes
“violations of the constitutional provisions, as well
as of international law” (A/71/997, annex, p. 2).
The Parliament has also reiterated its calls for the
resumption and conclusion of the withdrawal process
of Russian forces, particularly of the huge quantities
of arms and munitions that continue to be present on
the territory of the Republic of Moldova. Although
they are located on the territory of the Republic of
Moldova, those weapons and munitions are not under
its “jurisdiction or control”. Due to the complete lack
of transparency on and access to those foreign weapons
and munitions, both the Moldovan Government and

18-191813/13

A/72/PV.98*

22/06/2018

the OSCE are effectively prevented from assessing the
technical conditions of those munitions, some of which
may pose substantial environmental danger, or from
monitoring weapons and munitions transfers within its
territory or abroad.

recommendation by the General Committee, and in
the absence of any procedural objections on the part of
Committee members, it was still not possible to move
forward with a procedural action that fully complied
with rules 41 and 42 of the rules of procedure.

For the same reasons, the Republic of Moldova is
unable to fulfil its international obligations as a State
party under various United Nations and international
disarmament conventions, particularly those that ban
certain categories of weapons. This situation is of an
international character and shall not be allowed to
persist. The Government of the Republic of Moldova
and its Prime Minister, Mr. Pavel Filip, have repeatedly
apprised the General Assembly and the high contracting
parties to respective conventions of its concerns in
that regard.

We firmly believe that any amendments intended
to change the title or substance of the proposed items
or resolutions, in a way that completely reverses their
scope or that, by their political implications, might
undermine or violate the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States, shall not constitute a
subject of procedural action or consideration either in
the General Committee or in the General Assembly.

It is also against that backdrop that, in its operative
part, the proposed draft resolution
“Urges the Russian Federation to complete,
unconditionally and without further delay, the
orderly withdrawal of the Operational Group of
Russian Forces and its armaments from the territory
of the Republic of Moldova” (A/72/L.58, para. 2)
and further encourages the OSCE participating States
to facilitate the completion of the process of withdrawal,
in accordance with the relevant OSCE Ministerial
Council decisions and as agreed at the 1999 OSCE
summit in Istanbul.
The draft resolution, in its last operative paragraph,
requests the inclusion in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-third session of the General Assembly of an
item entitled “Complete withdrawal of foreign military
forces from the territory of the Republic of Moldova”.
The respective request fully complies with Article
11, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations.
An item on this issue and its subsequent constructive
consideration by the General Assembly would constitute
a highly needed application of preventive diplomacy
vis-à-vis a Member State whose sovereign rights under
the Charter, territorial integrity and sovereignty are
continuously challenged.
In that connection, let me remind the Assembly
that the Republic of Moldova requested the inclusion
of a supplementary item, with an identical title, in
the agenda of the current, seventy-second session of
the General Assembly. Despite our strenuous, twomonth-long efforts to create the basis for a consensual
4/13

By bringing before the General Assembly the issue
of the long-awaited withdrawal of foreign troops from
the territory of the Republic of Moldova, we do not seek
confrontation or politicization. It is a matter of high
principle and of high political importance for every
Member State to fully exercise its legitimate rights and
authority on its own territory.
It is hoped that this initiative will enjoy the
same support and constructive attitude on the part of
Member States as did the similar General Assembly
resolutions adopted in 1992 and 1993 that contributed
to the withdrawal of foreign military forces from the
territories of Baltic States.
The overarching purpose of draft resolution
A/72/L.58, before the Assembly today, is to uphold the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter.
Therefore, a vote in favour of this draft resolution would
not be a vote against any Member State, but, rather,
a vote to uphold the Charter and international law.
Likewise, a vote against any motion that seeks to deny
the consideration of the proposed draft resolution would
be a vote to uphold the sovereign rights of Member
States to bring before the General Assembly issues of
legitimate concern that fall within its competence.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Government of the
Republic of Moldova, let me express deep gratitude
to the co-sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.58:
Canada, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, the United Kingdom
and Ukraine. Likewise, I wish to thank in advance
all Member States that will vote today in the spirit of
international law and the United Nations Charter.
18-19181

22/06/2018

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation on a point of
order.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation would like to propose an
adjournment of the debate, also known as a no-action
motion, as set forth in rule 74 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly. I would like to explain the
reasons for this initiative.
We are not shying away from discussing pressing
issues of the Transnistrian solution. Rather, we actively
support the relevant existing international formats, first
among which is the negotiation process under the 5+2
formula launched in 2005. Our country is committed to
the process of a political solution to the Transnistrian
issue and is one of the main mediators and guarantors
of the resolution process. There is no alternative to
that format. The contacts among the parties within its
framework enable gradual progress to be made towards
an outcome that would be acceptable to all. It is vital
to maintain a trusted dialogue, mutual respect and a
constructive atmosphere, and it seemed to us that there
have recently been more reasons for optimism. We
were therefore extremely disappointed and surprised
that the Moldovan delegation had hastily cobbled
together a draft resolution (A/72/L.58) for the General
Assembly without any preliminary consultations on the
text. Such odd ways of working on documents are not
conducive to reaching consensus and undermine the
Assembly’s principles of openness and transparency in
its activities. We therefore believe that considering the
draft resolution proposed by Moldova today would be
entirely untimely and counterproductive.
There is also one more argument for the importance
of postponing the consideration of Moldova’s text. We
just heard an extremely emotional statement from the
Moldovan Minister for Foreign Affairs in favour of
the draft resolution. I will refrain from commenting
on its content, which is typical of a certain segment
of the Moldovan elite in its selective use and skewed
interpretation of the facts. That is nothing new here.
I will just point out that he forgot to mention one
very important point in his long statement, which
is that in his homeland there is no consensus on the
draft resolution being introduced today. Our colleague
was obviously reluctant to share with us the fact that
on 19 June, President Igor Dodon of Moldova made
a special address in which he sharply criticized the
Government’s initiative in bringing this draft resolution

A/72/PV.98*

to the Assembly. I will not quote his harsh words, since
this is clearly an internal issue for Moldova. One thing
is clear, which is that the country is divided on the issue,
and today we are the unwilling participants in a publicrelations exercise that is being produced primarily for
domestic political reasons. It would seem to us that
participation in such machinations does nothing for the
General Assembly’s authority.
Frankly, today’s draft resolution has every chance
of playing an extremely negative role in the negotiation
process that I touched on just now. Peace, albeit a fragile
one, is currently being maintained the region. Many
of those here may have already forgotten the miseries
of the Transnistrian conflict during the 1990s. But it
was Russian military action that ended the bloodshed
there in 1992. According to various estimates, around
1,000 people died and 4,500 were injured on both sides
at the time, with colossal damage to infrastructure and
social facilities in the city of Bender. We would like
to emphasize that thanks to the Russian military, this
region is the only one in Eastern Europe where there
was no relapse into fighting.
We are committed to the Russian military
contingent’s fulfilment of the mandate and tasks of
the Joint Control Commission on the Dniester. As is
well known, it has been present in the Transnistrian
region of Moldova in order to protect munitions depots
that have been there since Soviet times. Both of those
components exist as a result of the unresolved nature of
the conflict, and they cannot be addressed separately.
Fortunately, there have been no emergency events
recently that might have been grounds for considering
this topic in the forum of the United Nations. It should
be discussed within the framework of the existing
bilateral and international formats for a Transnistrian
settlement. Attempts to politicize it could seriously
damage and significantly complicate the reconciliation
process between the Moldovan and Transnistrian sides
and, as a result, would only make a settlement of the
protracted conflict in Moldova less likely. We are
ready for productive work based on the principles of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Moldova.
We expect the same from the Moldovan side, on whose
political will the success or failure of this platform
largely depends. We call on Chisinau to refrain from
taking steps that might undermine its effectiveness and
from making confrontational moves. Unfortunately, the
draft resolution will do exactly that.

18-191815/13

A/72/PV.98*

I would like all the delegations in this Hall to
understand their responsibility. We do not want any
future efforts to address the Transnistrian issue to be
focused on overcoming the negative consequences of
the draft resolution before the Assembly. We realize
that the Moldovan initiative has caught many here
unawares. Can we really work on such a serious and
consequential text in such haste, without due discussion
or any certainty that it enjoys the necessary support in
the country that has submitted it? For us, the answer
is clear. This is not a situation where the General
Assembly should take a decision.
That is why the best option today would be
to postpone the discussion until the Assembly’s
next session, with the understanding that the draft
resolution’s authors will invite all stakeholders to work
on its text. The work of achieving the consensus that
is so essential in such cases will also help to ensure
that it is accepted in Moldova itself. I would like to
believe that such an approach will eventually prevail. I
want to once again make it clear that whoever votes in
favour of our proposal is not killing the Moldovan draft
resolution, merely giving us an opportunity to work on
it the way we should. Nor are we in any way infringing
on any State’s right to ask questions that concern it in
the General Assembly.
The Acting President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has moved, within the terms of rule
74 of the Assembly’s rules of procedure, that no action
be taken on draft resolution A/72/L.58. Rule 74 reads
as follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition to
the proposer of the motion, two representatives may
speak in favour of, and two against, the motion,
after which the motion shall be immediately put to
the vote.”
I shall now call on delegations wishing to
make statements with respect to the motion before
the Assembly.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): The motion that has
just been introduced seeks to prevent the General
Assembly from fulfilling its mandate under the Charter
of the United Nations. We believe that any motion
precluding discussion on issues related to respect for
the Charter and the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States is unjustified and undermines the authority
6/13

22/06/2018

and credibility of the Assembly, and draft resolution
A/72/L.58, introduced today by the Foreign Minister
of Moldova, is precisely about such issues and about
respect for the Charter.
The refusal of the Russian Federation to honour its
international commitments and withdraw its troops and
arms from the territory of the Republic of Moldova is
a clear violation of Moldovan national legislation and
international law. I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Moldova, within its internationally
recognized borders. My delegation will vote against
Russia’s proposal, and we call on other delegations to
do the same.
Mr. Ye Minn Thein (Myanmar): Myanmar believes
that engagement and the necessary consultations
are important. Myanmar therefore supports Russia’s
proposal to adopt a no-action motion on draft resolution
A/72/L.58 and adjourn consideration of this item until
the next session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Moraru (Republic of Moldova): I take the
floor to object strongly to the proposal by the delegation
of the Russian Federation to adjourn the debate under
rule 74 of the Assembly’s rules of procedure. This
attempt to prevent the consideration of draft resolution
A/72/L.58 on procedural grounds runs counter to the
best practices of the General Assembly. The call for an
adjournment aims to deny the States Members of the
United Nations their sovereign right to bring before the
General Assembly any concern that they believe merits
its attention and also limits the agenda of the Assembly.
The proposal contradicts one of the ideas on
which the creation of the United Nations was based,
namely, that the legitimate concerns of Member States
should be addressed and discussed openly. Every
proposal presented in the General Assembly deserves
consideration based on its own merits. On behalf of the
co-sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.58, I strongly
urge Member States to vote “no” on the proposed
adjournment of the debate.
Mr. Tozik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus supports the proposal to take a
procedural decision not to consider draft resolution
A/72/L.58, which has been presented to the Assembly
today under agenda item 35. Without touching on the
substance of the item, we want to draw the Assembly’s
attention to some procedural issues that in our view
present obstacles to a decision on the draft resolution.
18-19181

22/06/2018

The text was submitted to the Secretariat without
allowing due time to discuss it. Nor were there any
formal consultations with representatives of States on
the text of the draft resolution itself.
We would not like to see such an approach, which
obstructs the principle of transparency with regard to the
rules concerning the consideration of decisions in the
General Assembly, become part of normal practice in
the Assembly’s work. We do not believe that we should
permit a precedent to be created when a decision is being
made without the due involvement of all stakeholders
with a take-it-or-leave-it attitude. Considering the lack
of any negotiation process for the draft resolution and
the potential procedural issues, we support the proposal
to postpone its consideration today.
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
the motion submitted by the representative of the
Russian Federation that no action be taken on draft
resolution A/72/L.58.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Burundi, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Guinea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine,

A/72/PV.98*

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, Chad, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Fiji, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates
The motion was rejected by 80 votes to 24, with
48 abstentions.
The Acting President: As the motion for no action
has not been adopted, the Assembly will now proceed
to take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.58.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We regret that our proposal was not
supported. However, in considering the substance of
draft resolution A/72/L.58 and in making a decision, it
is vital that we have a clear understanding of the issue
today. In accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article
18 of the Charter of the United Nations and rules 83 and
85 of the Assembly’s rules of procedure, decisions can
be taken on important questions or any other category
of question. They differ on the majority — a two-thirds
majority or a simple majority — needed for taking such
decisions. I would appreciate a clarification on that.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic): My
delegation will vote against draft resolution A/72/L.58.
In explanation of our position, based on the historical
and geopolitical realities of this issue, we believe that
the best way forward is to continue handling it within
the framework of the bilateral relations between the
Republic of Moldova and the Russian Federation,
as well as within the framework of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

18-191817/13

A/72/PV.98*

In that regard, my delegation further affirms the
following facts.
First, matters relating to the draft resolution
continue to fall under the mandate of the 1992
Agreement on the Principles for a Peaceful Settlement
of the Armed Conflict in the Dniester Region of the
Republic of Moldova. The Agreement is still in force
and has been supplemented by an additional protocol
on the modalities of the presence of peacekeepers.
Secondly, any dispute arising from the application
of the Agreement and the additional protocol should
be resolved in good faith and through consultations
and direct contact between the Governments of the
relevant States.
Thirdly, the internationally recognized 5+2 format,
in place since 2005, is the best way to resolve conflicts
in the Transnistria region. However, its effectiveness
is still dependent on the genuine political will of the
concerned parties and should not be mixed up with
attempts to involve the United Nations in the issue for
political reasons. Such practices will not serve to better
the relations between the two countries and will impede
efforts to maintain security and stability in the region.
In that context, we would like to point out that relations
between the Russian Federation and the Republic of
Moldova have been on the right track since the signing
of the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between
the two countries in 2001.
For those reasons, my delegation believes that the
draft resolution would not serve to improve the relations
between the two countries and would jeopardize
the OSCE framework, especially considering its
imbalanced language and purely political approach. We
will therefore vote against the draft resolution, and we
call on other States to do the same.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We were talking about issues of procedure,
not substance. We regret that in the clear absence of
consensus in this Hall a disposition towards destroying
the unity of the Assembly has prevailed. We want to
once again affirm that Russia is firmly committed to
the Russian military contingent’s fulfilment of the
mandate and tasks of the Joint Control Commission on
the Dniester, for which, regrettably, no real basis for a
change in format is being contemplated.
Let me repeat once again that we are fully committed
to the process of finding a political settlement for the
8/13

22/06/2018

Transnistrian issue. However, the steps being taken by
Chisinau are destructive, runnning counter to Moldova’s
declared policy on settling the Transnistrian conflict
and contradicting international agreements. I would
like to once again draw attention to the fact that if the
Moldovan delegation’s initiative is implemented, it will
fly in the face of the efforts to achieve a Transnistrian
settlement that have been made under the auspices
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. It will do serious, if not irreparable, damage to
the General Assembly’s reputation. In that connection,
we call for a vote on Moldova’s draft resolution
A/72/L.58, and we urge all responsible delegations to
vote against it.
The Acting President: Before proceeding to take a
decision on draft resolution A/72/L.58, I wish to inform
members that the President has been approached by
several delegations concerning the majority required
for the adoption of the draft resolution.
Is there any objection to applying a simple majority
requirement to draft resolution A/72/L.58?
I see no objection. I will therefore take it that a
simple majority of members present and voting is
required for the adoption of draft resolution A/72/L.58.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/72/L.58, entitled “Complete and
unconditional withdrawal of foreign military forces
from the territory of the Republic of Moldova”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/72/L.58, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.58: the Czech
Republic, Poland and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.58. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Botswana, Bulgaria,
18-19181

22/06/2018

Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia,
Belarus,
Bolivia
(Plurinational
State of), Burundi, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, South
Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria,
Angola,
Antigua
and
Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Viet Nam
The draft resolution was adopted by 64 votes to 15,
with 83 abstentions (resolution 72/282)
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, I would like to

A/72/PV.98*

remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Nguyen Cuong Duc (Viet Nam): My
delegation abstained in the voting on resolution 72/282
for the following reasons. First, Viet Nam supports
the fundamental principles set out in the resolution
concerning the obligations of States Members of the
United Nations to comply with international law and
act in accordance with the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly those in
Article 2, which requires States
“to refrain ... from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State [and] to settle their international disputes
by peaceful means”.
Secondly, my delegation regrets that there were
no consultations on the resolution among member
States during the drafting process. Had there been
consultations, its content would have been more
comprehensive and balanced. Last but not least, Viet
Nam strongly believes that the peaceful settlement
of conflicts and disputes is key to sustainable peace
and development. We therefore encourage the
parties concerned to redouble their efforts to achieve
constructive dialogue and find peaceful solutions to the
benefit of all.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to express my regret at the outcome
of the vote. The excessive politicization of this issue
has occurred at the precise moment when real progress
was being seen in the negotiations between Tiraspol
and Chisinau. Last year, five bilateral agreements were
signed aimed at addressing important issues of everyday
life for the people on both sides of the Dniester. This
year, the parties also reached an very useful agreement
allowing non-commercial Transnistrian vehicles on
international roads. Moldova’s attempt in the General
Assembly will clearly not be conducive to further
progress in the negotiations.
It is no secret to anyone that Russia is a guarantor
of peace and stability in the region. We want to point
out once again that the leadership of Moldova is not
united on resolution 72/282. The outcome of the vote
demonstrates a clear divide among the States Members
of the United Nations on the issue. An absolute majority
chose to either abstain in the voting or not participate at

18-191819/13

A/72/PV.98*

all. If the aim was to split the General Assembly, it has
been achieved.
It is disappointing that those voting in favour of the
resolution included many members of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) who fail
to understand that the Moldovan initiative undermines
the efforts that have been undertaken within the OSCE
framework. We see that as a classic example of double
standards, as well as confirmation that the European
Union is not about to acknowledge progress made
through other international organizations, and that
therefore Brussels and its client States subscribing to its
foreign policy are not interested in a settlement but in
geopolitical considerations, and they are certainly not
going to consider the views of the ordinary people in
the region in their game. A highly democratic approach
indeed.
We will soon see the seriousness of the blow that
has been struck today against the process of bringing
the opposing banks of the Dniester together. It is a pity
that all the predictable negative consequences of today’s
vote will be associated with the General Assembly, a
body intended to bring peoples closer together, not to
divide them.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
earnestly hope that the issue under consideration by
the General Assembly today will be resolved through
peaceful means. However, we do not believe that the
Assembly is the appropriate forum in which to consider
issues of this nature. Because of that, we voted against
resolution 72/282.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting. We
will now hear statements following the adoption of
resolution 72/282.
I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.
Mrs. Cujo: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Albania, as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
The EU reaffirms its support for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova
within its internationally recognized borders. We
10/13

22/06/2018

want to highlight the importance of completing the
processes that were begun based on the commitments
agreed at the 1999 Istanbul Summit of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
would like to recall that respect for the neutrality of
the Republic of Moldova is a key element contributing
to efforts to realizing the peaceful resolution of the
Transnistrian conflict.
The EU welcomes the encouraging progress under
the 5+2 process on the settlement of the Transnistrian
conflict and remains committed to continuing to
support it. The EU welcomes the Protocol of the Official
Meeting of the Permanent Conference for Political
Questions in the Framework of the Negotiating Process
on the Transdniestrian Settlement held in Rome from
29 to 30 May under the Italian chairship of the OSCE
and the engagement shown by all participants in the 5+2
format, and underlines the importance of maintaining
a results-oriented process with a view to ensuring
continued progress in negotiations and tangible benefits
for the people.
Mr. Ulianovschi (Republic of Moldova): Resolution
72/282, which was just adopted, reinforces the resolve
of the Republic of Moldova to continue its efforts to
ensure the complete and unconditional withdrawal of
Russian forces from its territory and our belief that
our cause is just and legitimate. Today the General
Assembly once again affirmed that international law
and the Charter of the United Nations should prevail
in relations among States, and we shall stand firm in
defending those principles.
Today is a great day for the people of the Republic
of Moldova, who have regained their trust in the
international community’s commitment to stand by our
side and ensuring that justice can be done. I am proud
and pleased to stand before the General Assembly,
knowing that hundreds of thousands of my compatriots
are watching us today at this truly historic moment for
Moldova when, after more than 26 years, the General
Assembly has declared that the Russian military
presence is illegal and that it should be withdrawn. I
cannot express enough how important it was not to
dash the expectations of the people of Moldova and
of all who believe in diplomacy and the international
community. We know that the decision to support the
resolution was not very easy for many delegations. There
have been many factors unrelated to the resolution’s
true scope that aim at creating confusion through
18-19181

22/06/2018

A/72/PV.98*

misleading arguments and information. That makes our
achievement today even more valuable and important.

Again, this is a technical update that sets forth the
correct formulation of the event title.

But we are not there yet. While this resolution is very
important for us, it is just a small step in our consistent
endeavours to achieve its ultimate goal. As our sole aim
is to build relations of trust with all countriees on the
basis of mutual respect, understanding and, of course,
international law, we are committed to a constructive
dialogue with the party concerned in connection with
the withdrawal of foreign military forces and armaments
from the territory of the Republic of Moldova.

I would now like to thank all States Members of
the United Nations for their active and constructive
participation and valuable input made during the
informal consultations on A/72/L.61. I would also
like to thank all delegations that sponsored the
draft resolution.

Finally, I wish to thank all those who supported
this initiative, in particular the co-sponsors of this
resolution, who believed in its merit and rightfulness
from the very beginning. That provided great
encouragement to persevere in our efforts. No one’s
support will be forgotten.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 35.
Agenda item 65 (continued)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Draft resolution (A/72/L.61)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Uzbekistan to introduce draft
resolution A/72/L.61.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): Today, on behalf of
the Permanent Missions of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and my own country,
Uzbekistan, I have honour to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.61, entitled “Strengthening regional and
international cooperation to ensure peace, stability and
sustainable development in the Central Asian region”.
Before proceeding, I would like to introduce a
small technical revision to the thirteenth preambular
paragraph, which now reflects the correct title of the
conference it is referring to. The word “preventing”
must be added, as now reflected in the revised thirteenth
preambular paragraph, which is formulated as follows:
“Taking into account the outcome of the high-level
international conference on countering terrorism
and preventing violent extremism, held in Dushanbe
on 3 and 4 May 2018 ...”.

During the general debate of the General Assembly
at its seventy-second session in September, the
President of Uzbekistan, Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev,
proposed that the Assembly adopt a draft resolution on
Central Asia (see A/72/PV.5). This initiative received
broad support from Foreign Ministers of States of
Central Asia, Afghanistan, high-ranking officials from
the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, Europe and Asia, the United States of America,
representatives
of
international
organizations,
including the United Nations, the European Union, the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, and the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, during the
International High-level Conference on Security and
Sustainable Development in Central Asia, held last
November in Samarkand, Uzbekistan.
The main purpose of the proposed draft resolution
is to garner international community support for
Central Asian States’ efforts aimed at forging closer
regional collaboration based on the principles of goodneighbourliness and mutually beneficial partnership
so that they can more effectively utilize their
potential in trade, economic development, transport,
communication, cultural and humanitarian affairs
and other areas, in order to ensure peace, stability and
sustainable development in the region.
The countries of Central Asia have great potential
for cooperation and development. They share a common
spiritual, cultural and historical heritage. They are
brought together by a unity of faith, closeness of
language and similarity in their peoples’ mentality. The
countries of the region also have a common transport
and communication networks and economies that
complement one another. We therefore firmly believe
that Central Asia, located at the heart of the Eurasian
continent, can once again play an important role as a
major intersection in interregional transport and transit
corridors connecting East with West.

18-1918111/13

A/72/PV.98*

In this context, the current policies of Central Asian
countries on further strengthening bilateral relations
among themselves open a strategic opportunity for
establishing dialogue based on trust and building longterm constructive collaboration in the region. Over
the past year and a half, thanks to the bold and very
proactive policies put forth by President Mirziyoyev,
which have been fully embraced by the leaders of all of
Uzbekistan’s neighbouring States, we are observing a
fundamental shift in relations among the Central Asian
countries that has led to the creation of an entirely new
political environment in the region.
Contacts among Heads of State have increased
dramatically, resulting in greater political trust among
our countries, and we have begun to talk more about
the benefits of cooperation rather than competition. We
have also started sharing a common view of the need to
find reasonable compromise to a number of sensitive
regional issues. In particular, we have lately seen a
tremendous change in the basis of collaboration among
our countries, which has helped to resolve certain issues
that have persisted for more than 26 years.
At the initiative of the President of Uzbekistan, we
have established a mechanism of regular consultations
among the Heads of State of the countries of our region.
The first inaugural meeting of these consultations took
place last March in Astana, where issues of further
advancing and strengthening political, trade, economic
and humanitarian cooperation in the region were
thoroughly discussed. The Uzbek side proposed to host
the second consultative meeting of the Heads of State
next year in Tashkent.
The recent new dynamics have also been observed
in the relations between the States of Central Asia with
Afghanistan. This trend is very encouraging because
the prospects of stable and sustainable development in
Central Asia are inextricably linked to the achievement
of lasting peace in this neighbouring country. In
Central Asia, we believe that Afghanistan should
be more actively integrated in regional economic
processes, in particular in projects in the energy,
transport, communications and other sectors that
are being implemented by neighbouring countries.
Such engagement by Afghanistan with Central Asian
States would not only be an important contribution to
international community efforts aimed at achieving
a peaceful settlement of the current conflict in
Afghanistan, but also bring tangible economic
dividends to all countries of the region as a whole.
12/13

22/06/2018

In conclusion, I would like to express our sincere
hope that the proposed draft resolution will receive the
overwhelming support of all the States Members of the
United Nations, which we also encourage to become its
sponsors. For their part, the Central Asian countries
stand ready to closely cooperate with all Member States
in the practical implementation of the draft resolution.
Indeed, the successful adoption of draft resolution
A/72/L.61 could be conducive to the maintenance of
peace and stability in the region and to ensuring the
region’s sustainable development.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.61, as
orally revised, entitled “Strengthening regional and
international cooperation to ensure peace, stability and
sustainable development in the Central Asian region”.
For the Assembly’s information, the draft resolution
has closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/72/L.61, as orally revised: Albania,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Burundi,
Canada, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Morocco, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Samoa, Singapore,
Slovakia, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates
and Viet Nam.
Georgia, Kiribati, the Sudan, Iceland, Romania,
Belgium, Cape Verde, Malta, Cambodia, Afghanistan,
Malaysia and Luxembourg are also listed as sponsors of
draft resolution A/72/L.61, as orally revised.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.61,
as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/72/L.61, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 72/283).
The Acting President: We will now hear statements
after the adoption of the resolution.
18-19181

22/06/2018

Mr. Moldogaziev (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
delegations that supported resolution 72/283. I would
also like to make a statement on the interpretation of
paragraph 7 of the resolution.
We are not against the holding of a summit of the
Heads of the participating States of the International
Fund for Saving the Aral Sea. Nonetheless, we would
like to point out that in 2016 Kyrgyzstan took the
decision to cease its activity with regard to the Fund.
Until the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea is
reformed, we do not see any prospect of resuming our
participation in its work.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Dvořák (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
28 member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania; the countries of the Stabilization Association
Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes the adoption of
resolution 72/283. In that regard, the European Union
welcomes the positive developments under way in
Central Asia and is a committed partner of countries
of the region. Europe and the five countries of the
region are now closer than ever before, and we are
eager to engage further with the region where we have
significant interests. We welcome all efforts that help
Central Asia to develop as a peaceful, prosperous,
resilient and more closely interconnected economic and
political space. We shall release a new EU strategy on

A/72/PV.98*

Central Asia early next year and aim to set a new level
of ambition for our engagement in the region.
We welcome steps towards closer regional
cooperation in Central Asia and are happy to support
efforts for a collective approach to regional challenges,
such as security, trade facilitation, border management,
water and the environment, as well as sustainable
connectivity. The European Union would like to take
this opportunity to encourage Central Asian States to
continue to create the regional conditions for peace and
development in Afghanistan. It wishes to emphasize
that the language in resolution 72/283 refers only to
risks in Central Asia, given the specific circumstances
in that region.
I would like to conclude by confirming that the
EU and its member States will remain committed to
working closely with the specialized agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations, as well as with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
to support sustainable development in Central Asia.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
all delegations that sponsored and supported resolution
72/283. It is important that our countries show solidarity
and demonstrate that the integration process is under
way in our region. All Central Asian countries are
now on the path to sustainable development and closer
cooperation. A Central Asia that is stable and prosperous
is beneficial to all countries and organizations. Once
again, the delegation of Kazakhstan would like to thank
all countries that supported the resolution.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 65.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

18-1918113/13
