United Nations

S/PV.4677

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4677

th meeting
Friday, 20 December 2002, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Valdivieso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Colombia)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Raytchev
Mr. Chungong Ayafor
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. de la Sablière
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mr. Corr
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mekdad
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Wrap-up discussion on the work of the Security Council for the current month
Letter dated 19 December 2002 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2002/1387)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

02-75183 (E)

*0275183*

S/PV.4677

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Wrap-up discussion on the work of the Security
Council for the current month
Letter dated 19 December 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/1387)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
In this meeting, we shall hear statements from the
five outgoing members, to be followed by statements
from the remaining members.
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this wrap-up
meeting and for giving us, the departing members of
the Security Council, the opportunity to share our
views on the work of the Council over the past 12
months. This exercise will certainly be beneficial for
the Council’s future work as well as for the new
members who will be joining the Council next year.
I should also like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, and your delegation on the manner in which
the business of the Council is being conducted this
month. There is no doubt that it has been a very busy
month, but we are happy to note that you have striven
very hard to maintain your initial plan to end the
Council’s normal business today. I should also like to
thank your deputy, Ambassador Franco, for the daily
annotated programme that he has been sending to our
Missions. That has helped us enormously in preparing
for Council consultations and public meetings in a
better way, with the result that the work of the Council
has become more effective. It would be a good thing if
that practice could be maintained in the future.
In addition, my delegation is very grateful to you,
Mr. President, for having prepared and circulated a
non-paper to serve as a general guide for today’s
meeting. In it you have asked us to assess the main
contributions, political relevance, difficulties and
dilemmas of the Security Council, using examples of
the work accomplished during the year 2002, and to

2

identify similar problems for the Council for 2003. I
will try to follow your guidelines and will focus on a
number of issues that, I believe, have been and will
remain very significant for the Council.
Throughout the year, the Security Council has
striven very hard to maintain international peace and
security. Its commitment and perseverance have
resulted in many success stories, such as an
independent Timor-Leste and a stabilized and more
peaceful Sierra Leone, Angola and Kosovo — to name
only a few — as well as the remarkable Council action
in Afghanistan. Those success stories can provide very
useful lessons to the Council as it deals with other
conflict situations and further complex issues.
During the course of the year, the Security
Council has also made significant progress in its
working methods, particularly in the area of increased
transparency and interaction with the wider United
Nations membership. The increase in the number of
public meetings and of public briefings preceding
consultations on certain issues has been highly
appreciated by the general membership and has helped
to break the divide between the Council and other
United Nations Members. The Council should continue
to give the general membership the opportunity to
express their views and proposals on issues of which
Council is seized. In our view, that approach remains
the most effective way to obtain the greatest support of
the international community for any Security Council
action, as evidenced by the overwhelming response that
resolution 1373 (2001) obtained through the
methodology adopted by Ambassador Sir Jeremy
Greenstock. Maintaining that approach, which in turn
will strengthen the centrality of the Council, will be a
major challenge for the Council in the years to come.
Closely linked to that is the need for the Council
to be perceived as a credible and even-handed body
that looks at all issues with the same objective,
impartial and constructive approach. No distinction
should be made, in our view, in the manner in which
any particular subject is treated as opposed to another,
nor should there be any distinction between one group
of members and another within the Security Council.
Any such divide would be harmful to the Council’s
long-term relationship with the rest of the international
community. Council unity should remain the constant
objective of every member, since we all know that the
Council is most effective when it acts in unison.
Consensus-building on the basis of collective interest,

S/PV.4677

rather than divisions along the lines of national
interests, needs to be emphasized.
One of the major challenges for the Council in
the future will be the effective implementation of its
decisions and resolutions. Dozens of resolutions remain
unimplemented, some of them because of defiance by
members and others because they are simply
impractical. Several decisions concerning appeals and
urgent calls — for example, on rebel movements in
Africa or even for the disarmament of Kisangani —
have not been complied with. It will be necessary for
the Council to address that important issue to ensure its
own credibility.
As the Council discusses situations in areas
affected by conflict, we rely mostly on reports of the
Secretary-General and on briefings by the Secretariat
or by Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
which undoubtedly are both comprehensive and
extremely useful. However, our experience has shown
that, no matter how comprehensive such reports or
briefings are, there is much vital information that we
fail to obtain. That is why we feel that it is extremely
important for Council members to undertake regular
field visits to familiarize themselves with the situation
on the ground by interacting with the actors and the
local communities. Such visits also help to create
greater awareness among Council members of the real
needs and expectations of people at the grass-roots
level, thereby allowing for discussion beyond the
purely academic level. We have found all the field
missions in which we have participated to be extremely
useful, enlightening and, in many ways, very effective
in terms of the message that the Council sends to the
parties.
We feel that the Council should consider splitting
visiting missions into two or even three groups, as in
that way it would be possible for such a mission to visit
more places and to meet with more people in a
particular country. As the Council discusses the whole
question of field missions, it may wish to consider such
a proposal.
With the success of the peace processes in several
conflict situations in Africa, namely Sierra Leone,
Angola, Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the challenge that we will face will be the
consolidation of peace in those countries. The Council
must work towards that objective to ensure that those
countries reach a stage where peace becomes

irreversible. The signing of peace agreements is a
crucial stage in any process. That is the time when the
prompt support of the international community is most
important. It is an opportunity which we cannot miss,
even though sometimes we tend to become complacent
and start focusing attention elsewhere. Our experience
in Guinea-Bissau and in the Central African Republic
should remind the Council of the importance of peace
consolidation; in this context, we feel that it will have
to work in close cooperation with all United Nations
agencies for peace to be permanently anchored.
A full, comprehensive and effective programme
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) represents another challenge that the Council
will have to address next year and in the years to come.
Ways and means will have to be found to deal with
those not willing to undergo voluntary DDR. My
delegation has always supported the voluntary basis for
undertaking DDR, but at the same time we have always
stressed the need to have contingency plans in respect
of those who continue to undermine peace. Incomplete
DDR is a source for future instability.
In the same vein, we feel that the demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration of excombatants should be taken at a regional or even
continental level, especially in the case of Africa,
where there is such mobility and such “demand” for
combatants. We hope the Council will give serious
consideration to this issue.
The Council has been quite effective with
conflicts that are already full-blown. On several
occasions, especially during brainstorming sessions, we
have discussed the need for the Council to focus
attention on preventive measures that can be more
effective and more economical. At the beginning of
this year, the Council very timidly addressed the crisis
which Madagascar was experiencing at that time.
Currently we have been doing the same with the crisis
in Côte d’Ivoire. The Council is often reluctant, lest it
be accused of interfering in the internal affairs of a
sovereign State, to address what we would consider to
be a clear pre-conflict situation.
While we fully understand the limitations, we
believe there is a need for the Council to see how it can
best intervene in situations where conflicts may be
averted, before they escalate to uncontrollable scale. In
this regard, we feel that the Council should work
closely with regional and subregional organizations and

3

S/PV.4677

should fully utilize their early warning systems. Closer
cooperation with the African Union in the preventive
field is absolutely vital. The New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and its Peer Review
Mechanism provide the necessary framework to avert
crisis situations, and the Security Council could work
in helping to strengthen the institutional capacity of the
African Union and in implementing NEPAD.
Mauritius will be completing its two-year term in
the Council at the end of this month. Our membership
has been an extremely enriching and challenging
experience for us, especially in view of our size,
resources and influence. But it is that very specificity
which has led us to take a stand based on principles,
objectivity, impartiality, sense of justice, evenhandedness, fair play and, above all, consensusbuilding to preserve and strengthen the unity of the
Council.
As one of the representatives of Africa, we have
tried to focus the Council’s attention on African issues
and to bring a new perspective in dealing with some of
the burning questions afflicting our continent. While
advocating a global and comprehensive approach to
problems in Africa, we have highlighted the
specificities of each situation, which has to be viewed
on its own merits. We are pleased with the
establishment of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, just as
much as with the beginning of a new phase of
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. It is our sincere hope
that the Council will continue to further strengthen
such cooperation in the future. As we look back on our
performance, we have a feeling of great humility, as
well as some pride that our modest contribution may
have helped consolidate peace and international
security in the world.
I would like, in conclusion, to express my
Government’s sincere thanks and gratitude to all
members of the Council, whose assistance and support
have been of immense value to us. I wish to equally
thank the whole Secretariat team for their support,
especially during the Mauritian presidency. Last but
not least, I want to thank my own team, both those who
are sitting behind me and those who work behind the
scenes, for their dedication and hard work.

4

I would like to end my intervention by reading
out a quote from former President Clinton of the
United States, who has said that:
“We have no choice but to learn to live together,
to choose cooperation over conflict, to give
expression to our common humanity by following
simple rules: everyone deserves a chance;
everyone has a role to play; we all do better when
we work together; we are not as different as we
think”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Mauritius for the kind words he
addressed to me and to my delegation.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this wrap-up discussion on the
work of the Security Council over the past year. We
find this a very valuable exercise, and today it
especially offers departing members of the Council a
chance to give our views and assessment on the work
of the Council.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
the work of the Colombian presidency over the past
month, and everyone in your delegation for a month of
real achievement, commitment and effectiveness in the
work of the Council.
There is a phrase of T.S. Eliot — “liberation from
the future as well as the past” — that seems to me in
many ways, perhaps with undue scepticism, to sum up
the work of the Security Council. The Council stands at
the very centre of the multilateral and international
system, supporting cooperation by nations, anticipating
and averting threats to peace, but also building peace,
and enforcing peace where that is called for, conscious
always of risks, whatever their shape — but, as is the
duty of the Council, conscious also of hopes. This is as
it should be. Internationalism is about action, not just
ideals.
To serve in the Security Council, therefore, is a
great honour for any country. The Council is the
property of all United Nations Member States. It is the
property of the world, not of its members, permanent or
elected, and not of any combination of them.
What are the standards the Council must meet?
How do we meet these tests, how effectively does the
Council operate? Where do we stand, looking back and
looking forward? Those are issues I want to address in
my remarks today.

S/PV.4677

On how the Council performs its work, it seems
to me there are four central tests that must be met. The
Council is about, above all else, the safeguarding of
international peace and security. This is the place that
intersects with power and the views of capitals, some
that are powerful, some less so. But collective security
is about power and about the willingness to use power
for the wider good if necessary.

well. In Africa, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo is at
work. Support has been given to the Burundi peace
process. Peace has been broadly achieved in Sierra
Leone and Angola. Regional instability in many parts
of Africa still remains a problem. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is at work in the
service of the people of Afghanistan.

If the Security Council is just a talking shop, its
role has ended. There is always a balance there
between multilateralism and the individual role of
States, between national interests and the global public
good. This tension meets often in this Chamber. But the
Security Council is also about law. In a world where
bipolar deterrence or balanced equilibrium are gone
and where market forces shape much of the world in a
rather Darwinian fashion at times, this is a place that
says, on behalf of the international community, “It is
so; let it be done”. Even though the Council is
intensely political, it needs to always value this special
and austere role in international law.

Each month the Council looks at many issues on
its agenda. We take decisions, rightly, when we view
the time is right. That is the way it should be. But in an
increasingly untidy world, where events create
enormous pressure, we must stand further back from
time to time and look at the wider canvas and the wider
forces at work.

The Security Council must also value its
legitimacy; this is a political test. People around the
world, as we have seen in recent months, look to the
Council as a test of the legitimacy of major actions
affecting international peace and security. Therefore, a
sense of honour and fairness needs to be embedded in
our work. We must honour our decisions when taken
and our word when given. We must also honour the
expectations that the international community has in
us. And we must show fairness. We should not have
double standards on decisions we take. It is surely
wrong if war can flow from some decisions of the
Council while only shrugs and indifference flow from
others.
The Security Council must also be about
partnership. The Council cannot do everything and yet
specific decisions and issues have implications often
involving the economic and social as well as the
political dimensions. We need to see the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council as
partners and they need to view the Security Council as
a partner. We need stronger partnership throughout the
intergovernmental system in the United Nations. Too
much light in the United Nations, perhaps, shines on
this Chamber, and too little elsewhere.
How have we done in the light of these tests? In
the main, in the view of my delegation, we have done

In Africa, as Ambassador Koonjul has just said,
new and important forces are at work: the African
Union, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
regional cooperation and an increasing sense of African
ownership of African issues. We need to support all of
this in the work of the Council, including in relation to
specific decisions on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi, the Great Lakes region, Somalia and
the Central African Republic. We need to remember
that collective security and international peace and
security are concepts. Our decisions on issues
operationally are part of a wider matrix. Terrorism in a
failed State can be terrorism anywhere in the world.
Profound alienation, bitterness and failure to respect
human rights do not end at borders.
Specifically, we need more strategic focus on the
situation in the Middle East. It is a profound and
growing threat to international peace and security. The
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories is
intolerable and unacceptable. That this situation still
prevails is an affront to the international community
and reveals our lack of political will in a place of
deadly danger and injustice.
We also need more strategic focus on conceptual
and thematic issues. There is deep and unacceptable
poverty in Africa. There is alienation among many in
the Arab world. There is alienation in many parts of the
world because of exclusion from the benefits of
globalization.
We also need more strategic focus on conflict
prevention and on peace-building when conflict is over.
We need the capacity to think boldly, and not just on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).

5

S/PV.4677

But there are operational implications, such as how
effectively DDR operates in the Great Lakes and so
forth.
How do we operate? On our working methods, it
has been the view of my delegation, and I repeat today,
that there is too much on our agenda. There is too
much of “this issue, this morning, this month”. We
need a more focused approach, perhaps involving
setting aside one or two days a month to look at issues
that have to appear on our agenda, but in such a way as
to deal with them speedily and effectively instead of
devoting a full morning to each of them.
We need more committees of the Council. The Ad
Hoc Working Group on Africa and the sanctions
Committees are examples of how effectively
committees can operate. We need committees that
could filter and look at in more depth the issues on the
Council agenda.
We need more structured dialogue with the
Secretary-General and with the Secretariat. Apart from
the very valuable monthly lunch, perhaps the
Secretary-General could set aside part of the day once
a month for a background look at issues on the
Council’s agenda and at the canvas against which we
must consider them.
The relationship between the permanent five and
the elected 10 has been an issue of some contention
over the past months and years. In my view, there has
been a growing and welcome level of cooperation
among the elected 10. This is the way it should be. In
terms of the permanent five, my delegation has never
seen any plots or conspiracy. These are the members of
the Council which are permanent; they have a veto.
That is the world we live in, and the Security Council
reflects this.
But perception can be as important as reality. We
need to address perceptions. Those perceptions can
include, and at times have included, a sense that the
permanent five may not always show the sensitivity to
the elected 10 that is required. This is a matter of
perception, not necessarily substance, but we do think
it needs to be addressed in the period ahead. One way
of doing this might be a monthly meeting involving all
Council members away from the United Nations
building, where we would look at issues in a free and
flexible way.

6

Finally, where do we stand? In the view of my
delegation, the Security Council works well. It could
work better. It has come a long way in becoming more
open and more transparent. It should focus more on
main items on its agenda rather than necessarily
dealing with all items on its agenda in a routine way. It
needs to strengthen its partnership with other United
Nations bodies and they need to strengthen their
partnership with the Security Council. Here I am
thinking of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights,
for example.
Ireland finishes our Security Council with a
strong sense of pride at having served. We are proud
too that we have tried to highlight issues we think
matter: Africa, the Middle East, human rights and
conflict prevention. We leave with great admiration for
all the other members of the Council and for their work
in the service of peace. We leave also with a deep sense
of admiration and respect for the Secretary-General, for
his commitment, his integrity and his willingness to
show leadership at all times. We have appreciated that
very much.
In conclusion, it is right to express our
appreciation to everyone from the Secretariat involved
in the work of the Council, but also to the Secretariat
generally for the work that is done for the people of the
world with great idealism and effectiveness. This work
is often not appreciated around the world as it should
be.
This is a place that matters. It is, therefore, to be
guarded and cherished. That was the approach we tried
to bring to our period on the Security Council, and it is
the strong conviction that we have as we end it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Ireland for the kind words he
addressed to me and to my delegation.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Ten minutes to
summarize two years: that is quite a challenge. I may
have to piggyback to save time and say that I
completely endorse what Ambassador Koonjul and
Ambassador Corr have said about the wonderful work
done by the Colombian presidency — by you and your
team, Sir. I also endorse what they have said about the
usefulness of this wrap-up session, because, frankly, if
we did not have this wrap-up session we would be
leaving the Council without having an opportunity to
leave behind our impressions of what we have done.

S/PV.4677

We thank you very much for this, Mr. President. We
also want to emphasize the point that was made both by
Ambassador Koonjul and Ambassador Corr, that the
Council’s record over the past two years has been a
successful one. Indeed, my list of success stories is the
same as the ones they pointed to, so I will not list mine
here.
I want to emphasize a point. We thought the most
useful contribution we can make in this meeting is to
suggest areas for improvement in future years. We
believe, to quote an old cliché, that an organization
languishes if it only has unloving critics or uncritical
lovers, and I hope we will be seen as a loving critic of
the Council.
We believe that all good organizations should
have the three C’s: a culture of action, a culture of
innovation and a culture of reflection. Clearly in the
Council, as demonstrated in the remarks made by
Ambassador Corr, we have a strong culture of action.
We deliver results. Whenever a crisis occurs the
Council responds.
But frankly it is an organization that is weak in
the cultures of innovation or reflection. This is what we
will speak about. To bring about change requires
leadership from the owners of the Council. One thing
which has puzzled me is a question I raised at the
Security Council retreat. Who are the owners of this
Council? Is it the 15 Member States? Is it the five
permanent members? Is it the 191 Member States, or is
it, as stated in the Charter, “we the peoples” of the
world? We cannot fully address this subject, but I hope
it will form the subtext of what I speak of today.
The contribution we would like to make today is
to suggest five concrete areas where we believe further
improvements can be made in the work of the Council.
The first area is to try to undertake a sharpened
strategic overview of the work of the Council. As we
all know, the Security Council has become the busiest
organ within the United Nations family. It meets daily
and has grown in size and complexity. Each time the 15
members meet we discuss individual slices of the
Council’s work, whether it is the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Middle East or Burundi. But we
never step back and look at the whole picture of what
the Council is doing.
If you look at the whole picture, it is amazing
how much the load and complexity of the work of the
Council has grown in the last 10 years. For example, in

any single day we can examine conflict situations
across the globe from Asia to Africa. We can also move
from assessing political considerations on how to
encourage parties to abide by peace processes, to
deliberating military recommendations on the size,
shape and area of the deployment of peacekeeping
operations. We can move from responding to a
humanitarian crisis to monitoring financial embargos
imposed by the United Nations Security Council. We
can consider juridical questions relating to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), to examining the
legitimacy and adequacy of Members States in
combating international terrorism. This is a huge
agenda that has grown in the Council.
Each time we meet, we discuss each slice and we
never sit back and reflect on the Council as a whole
and on how it is performing as an institution. One
complete suggestion we would make — and this
probably builds on what both Ambassador Koonjul and
Ambassador Corr have said — is that we should find
time to sit back and reflect on the overall work of the
Council. We tried to do this during the annual retreat of
the Security Council with the Secretary-General. But
often there is no follow-up to the retreats.
Under your presidency, Sir, we had a very useful
meeting on 11 December 2002, and I commend you for
the record you have given us, because this
demonstrates the value of such reflective sessions. Of
course we can have more of such wrap-up sessions.
We should also build on the 15-plus-15 format
that Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock started in his
luncheon meetings, but all in all I think we need to do
more in terms of reflecting on the overall work of the
Council. We believe that is the way we can introduce
the culture of reflection.
The second area where we can benefit from
innovation and reflection is in the area of peacekeeping
operations. Clearly, peacekeeping operations have
become one of the most important instruments of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace
and security. The amount of money that the Security
Council authorizes to spend on peacekeeping —
$3 billion annually — is much larger than the United
Nations regular budget. But in the two years we have
been on the Council, there has never been even one

7

S/PV.4677

discussion on how we go about allocating these $3
billion.
Recently there was a book launch ceremony
where Professor Stephen Stedman of Stanford
University, speaking of his book “Ending Civil Wars”,
calculated how much the United Nations spends in
each peacekeeping operation per victim involved in the
conflict. You get a remarkable disparity where you can
spend up to a few thousand dollars per victim in the
Balkans to a few dollars per victim in Rwanda. This
disparity needs to be addressed because at some point,
people will be asking questions as to why there is such
a large gap in how you allocate your resources.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) has improved over the years to deal with the
evolution of peacekeeping operations from purely
traditional operations to complex multi-faceted
missions. Our view is that the Security Council needs
to catch up with the DPKO and move from purely
mechanical discussions on peacekeeping operations, to
more reflective discussions. We can, for example, make
better use of the Best Practices Unit of the DPKO, to
draw lessons of successful and unsuccessful
peacekeeping operations and apply them to current and
future operations. A concrete suggestion we can make
here is that in our existing Working Group on
peacekeeping operations we hope there will be more
reflection on how decisions are made concerning
peacekeeping operations.
A third idea which could benefit from innovation
and reflection is, of course, the area of sanctions. We
know sanctions are another key instrument of the
Security Council and we have shared some of the
experiences that all of us, as chairmen of the Sanctions
Committees, had in the meeting you organized, Sir, on
Wednesday 18 December 2002. But we do believe
more reflection is needed in this area. As the SecretaryGeneral once noted, “sanctions have had the
paradoxical effect of sometimes strengthening the
regime and punishing the people”. And as a
consequence, many questions have been raised about
sanctions regimes. For example, there was an article in
Harpers magazine in November 2002 that we should
look at. Again, more reflection is needed in this area. I
hope the Working Group on sanctions chaired by
Ambassador Martin Belinga-Eboutou will be able to do
more work in this area.

8

To give one example of how improvements can
be made, when we chaired the Liberian Sanctions
Committee, and we put up a travel banned list, we had
no personal details such as passport number for some
of the names on the travel banned list. Then we
discovered that another Sanctions Committee actually
had the details. But because each of the Sanctions
Committees works in locked boxes, there is no transfer
of knowledge from one to another. Clearly this is
something that can be improved upon, and something
the Working Group on sanctions can look at.
The fourth area which could benefit from
innovation and reflection — and I guess you will not
be surprised I mention this — is the area of working
methods and procedures of the Council. Here let us
stress that there have been improvements; more open
meetings have been held. Recent innovations include
the Mexican format begun in February 2002, of having
open briefings followed by informal consultations.
Clearly there is room for improvement. To cite an
obvious example, as we know, the Security Council
creates the most far-reaching international law, but
surprisingly, it does not want to be bound by rules
itself, except by a set of rules and procedures which we
know still remain provisional after almost 60 years. At
some point someone will ask the question: When will
your provisional rules stop being provisional? There
are also other areas where we need to improve working
methods.
One of the things I vividly remember about
working in the Council is in some ways the
mechanization of the work process. Each day when we
come to work, we go to the informal consultations
room, we hear a briefing, sometimes with slides,
sometimes without slides, sometimes we have fact
sheets, sometimes we do not have fact sheets. We go
through a mechanical routine of addressing each issue
almost in a set formula. But often we do not stand back
and ask, at the end of the day, how much value did we
add in that discussion, or did we just go through a
discussion for the sake of having a discussion? That is
why we think, frankly, that there is good reason to
activate and make more useful the Working Group on
Documentation and Procedures. We are aware —
speaking candidly — that there is some resistance to
the idea of making this Working Group more active.
We are aware that there is resistance, but we want to
suggest to those who, in a sense, resist change that it
actually may be in the interests of all 15 members to

S/PV.4677

have better working methods and procedures, because
in that way we will learn to use our time better.
I would like to make one simple suggestion: the
best way to have change is to provide leadership to that
Working Group. If we could agree, for example, to
have a permanent annual Chairman of the Working
Group on Documentation and Procedures — that has
been suggested by Ambassador Martin BelingaEboutou of Cameroon — I believe that we would be
making a huge leap forward in that area.
Finally, I would like to refer to the most difficult
issue. Indeed, I raise it with some trepidation, because I
am not sure whether easy answers can be found in this
area. But clearly it has to be addressed. It is, of course,
the area of the accountability of the Security Council.
Frankly, I do not see any answers being supplied to this
question, even within the next 10 years. But I hope to
plant a small seed which will grow into a tree some
day.
We all know that all organizations are
accountable in one way or another. Governments are
accountable to their electorate. Corporations are
accountable to their shareholders. The United Nations
Secretariat is accountable to the United Nations
Member States, who own the Secretariat. What is
unclear is who the Security Council is accountable to,
and what it is accountable for. There are no easy
answers to that. Some have cited Article 24,
paragraph 1, of the Charter, which states that the
Security Council acts on behalf of the Member States,
and say that the Council is accountable to the general
membership of the United Nations. But the well-known
book by Bruno Simma — The Charter of the United
Nations: A Commentary — notes that the Security
Council “is not subordinate to the Assembly”, as the
Assembly has not been granted the power to hold the
Council responsible for failing to present a report in
accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter
or for presenting a deficient report, or even for any
actions by the Council listed in a report.
Clearly, there are no easy answers. But even
though the Security Council may not be formally or
legally accountable to United Nations Member States,
it is also clear that the Council does in some ways
provide a service. It provides a service to the
international community that is in some ways similar to
the job done by the fire department — that is the most
common analogy used. Fire departments traditionally

react whenever a fire breaks out anywhere, at any time.
But as we know — indeed, Ambassador Corr
mentioned this — the Security Council has been more
selective in its responses. Such selectivity can in the
long run damage its credibility, and that is something
that we need to address if we are trying to improve the
Council.
We also believe that it is important for the
Council to understand where it derives its legitimacy
from. It does not derive its legitimacy on its own.
Indeed, if we took the 15 Member States out of the
United Nations complex and created an independent
global security council with the same members, it
would not have the legitimacy that we have sitting
here. It is the United Nations fabric that provides
legitimacy to the Council — the United Nations
Charter, the regular elections by the 191 Member
States of the 10 elected States members of the Council
and, indeed, the general recognition that the Security
Council is part of the United Nations family. But that
relationship with the United Nations family must be a
two-way street. The Council cannot just claim its
legitimacy from the United Nations family without
giving something back in return. And what it needs to
give back is a sense that it is accountable to the United
Nations family for its actions. Let me stress here that,
given the Council’s recent success stories, it has a very
proud and positive record, and for that reason we
should welcome the idea of accountability, rather than
shy away from it.
In conclusion, I would like to join my colleagues
from Mauritius and Ireland in thanking the States
Members of the United Nations for having given us the
opportunity to serve on the Council. We hope that we
have not let down those who elected us.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Let me at the outset stress
that I appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, to
provide the members of the Council with an
opportunity to briefly reflect on the year that is almost
over and to consider what lessons have been learned
that might be useful for the year ahead. This
opportunity is particularly appreciated by my
delegation, which — along with those of our
colleagues from Ireland, Mauritius, Singapore and your
own country, Colombia — is leaving the Council. The
permanent five members of the Council can draw on
their extensive institutional memory, but the elected
members have to start almost anew every time they
serve on this body. Norway last served on the Security

9

S/PV.4677

Council in 1979 and 1980, and both the world and the
Council were very different in those days.
Our first lesson learned is thus the need for new
elected members to be assisted in every way possible
by other members of the Council. Elected members
should therefore do their utmost to give their
successors a flying start by sharing their experiences,
not only on the substantive issues before the Council
but also on procedural questions and on the working
methods of the Council.
Another lesson learned is the importance of unity
in the Council. It is when we are able to speak with one
voice that the impact of our decisions is greatest. This
has been demonstrated on several occasions during the
past year. Unity is particularly important with regard to
one of the most difficult issues before the Council —
the situation in the Middle East. Decisions made by the
Council in 2002 might not have had an immediate
impact on the situation on the ground in that very
troubled part of the world. However, the Council has
been able to express views that will be important when
the parties are again able to sit down and negotiate a
peace agreement that will benefit the peoples on all
sides. The fact that the Council has expressed a vision
for a Palestinian State is important. We should continue
to strive for unity in our deliberations on the Middle
East. The Council will have an opportunity to do so
again this afternoon and, I am certain, on several
occasions in the coming year.
A third lesson learned is the need for Council
members to assume a special responsibility for certain
issues. The Council’s workload has now become so
great that we all depend on the expertise not only of the
excellent United Nations Secretariat but also of other
members to provide information and insight that will
be useful to us all. Norway has tried to carry its share
of this responsibility by trying to coordinate the
Council’s work on the Horn of Africa. In Ethiopia and
Eritrea the Council has been instrumental in helping
the parties to move towards sustainable peace, but
there is still a lot of work to be done to complete the
peace process and reconcile the two countries. The
Council’s continued engagement is needed to ensure
implementation of the Border Commission’s decision,
and the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
still plays a crucial role in maintaining peace along the
border.

10

In Somalia, the Council has tried to support the
peace process, led by the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development, and to focus on attempts to limit the
flow of arms to the country. However, even if the
warring parties agree to a peace agreement in Eldoret,
there is a distinct need for continued and coordinated
pressure and assistance from the international
community to ensure stability and security. We
anticipate stronger coordination efforts concerning the
Somalia conflict to be carried out within the United
Nations framework, as well as in a regional context.
The Council continues to have an important role to
play in this connection, and we encourage it to act
resolutely on forthcoming recommendations from
United Nations experts monitoring the arms embargo.
A fourth and final lesson learned as we look to
2003 is the need to continue the work with so-called
thematic issues and to make our deliberations on these
issues as relevant as possible to the good work being
done in peace operations around the world. Norway
believes strongly in the importance of issues such as
protection of civilians in armed conflict and children
and armed conflict. Debates in the Council and reports
by the Secretary-General on these and other issues are
important in and of themselves. However, the impact is
much greater if we follow up with concrete action.
Norway did so in March of this year when it produced,
in cooperation with the United Nations Secretariat and
others, an aide-mémoire on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We hope that in 2003 the Council
will also approach thematic issues with the aim of
translating words into concrete action.
Finally, the Norwegian delegation would like to
express its gratitude to the other members of the
Council for the cooperation they have extended to us. I
would like also to thank the Secretariat, and I would
like to like to express special thanks to my own staff
for their dedication and hard work throughout our two
years on the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Colombia.
I should like to begin by expressing my gratitude
to all of my colleagues for these two years during
which we have tried to contribute, with enthusiasm and
dedication, to the work of the Security Council. I
should like also to thank in particular the members of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States for

S/PV.4677

having placed their trust in Colombia throughout the
period 2001-2002.
This is an opportunity for the members of the
Council to reflect on the work that we have done in the
past year. Having come to know well the colleagues
who have already spoken and to appreciate their
abilities, those of their teams and, of course, their
dedication, and having shared with them their vision of
the Council - which I would like to endorse after
having heard their presentations - we would prefer on
this occasion to reflect on one single theme: to suggest
that the functions of the Council be adapted to the new
challenges that are facing it in the fulfilment of its
responsibilities.
We believe that in recent years the concept of
international peace and security has undergone a
fundamental transformation. Historically, the Council
has dealt with threats stemming from inter-State or
intra-State conflicts, as was the case during the cold
war and the post-cold-war period, respectively. It is
clear that the Security Council still defines many
threats to international peace and security on the basis
of these traditional international concepts.
Nevertheless, since the beginning of the new
millennium, an additional and very important step has
been taken in defining these threats, whose
implications we still have not fully grasped. Indeed, we
have included within this group of threats those of
global scope which, because of their nature, are not
limited to a specific territory or to the inhabitants
thereof. This has been the most notable consequence
that international terrorism has had for the concept of
security that is now being increasingly shaped by
Council decisions.
We can easily identify the cases in which this new
approach has been applied, even though our actions
sometimes give rise to doubts and involve a lack of
definition; this is something that the Council must
remedy if it wishes to be the ideal instrument for
addressing these threats.
Within these new global threats, we have
included the cases of 11 September and, more recently,
the terrorist attacks in Bali, Indonesia; the hostagetaking in Moscow; and the attacks in Mombasa, Kenya,
against Kenyan and Israeli citizens. In other words, the
Council has gradually fallen into a case-by-case
management of the global threats posed by terrorist
acts, which could indicate its own inability to act.

Which cases of terrorism should be characterized as
threats to international peace and security, and which
should not? Is this categorization useful? Are we not
running the risk of become involved in very intensive
political discussions in specific cases on which there is
no consensus within the Security Council? Should such
a divisive issue be brought before the Council?
Everything seems to indicate that the Security
Council’s ability to act in accordance with its
definitions of threats to international peace and security
is uneven. In inter-State conflicts, it has played, and
continues to play, a constructive, effective and
important role, as we saw recently with respect to the
conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia. In intra-State
conflicts, it has also played, and can play, a
constructive, effective and important role, as we saw
recently in the case of Sierra Leone. Both cases involve
a series of problems, many of them identified by the
Secretariat and also by the members of the Council.
But, in any case, a certain know-how exists that makes
it possible to accumulate experience and produce
results.
However, the Security Council has no experience
in managing global threats, and, what is more
worrisome, the little experience that it has acquired
seems to highlight its worst shortcomings as an
institution.
We feel that the Security Council should
thoroughly and systematically discuss its own ability to
perform its functions in the face of these global threats,
with at least the same intensity with which it discusses
its reaction to threats to international peace and
security that stem from inter-State or intra-State
conflicts.
However, discussions are not enough. The
Council must take strong and robust measures in order
to enhance and fine-tune its ability to react. The cost of
not doing would be to sacrifice the validity of
multilateralism as an instrument for responding to
international terrorism and to weaken the image of the
Council in the eyes of the peoples of the world, who
would see their own personal security jeopardized.
With respect to this item, we would like to stress
the urgency of revising the mandate set out in
resolution 1373 (2001), strengthening the universality
of resolution 1390 (2002), and exploring options to
create new instruments that would improve the
Council’s capacity to respond.

11

S/PV.4677

In the light of global threats that are not confined
to a specific territory — as have been the ones that the
Council is accustomed to considering — the United
Nations must be more innovative, more sophisticated
and more professional.

situations, the concerted will of the international
community and the interested parties ultimately
enabled us to agree to a common cooperating
framework to help improve our diagnostic work and
find the appropriate cure.

The Secretariat, which largely coordinates the
implementation of Council decisions, must overcome
its shortcomings and help to work effective to combat
these new global threats to international peace and
security. This Organization must not be afraid to call
terrorism by its name. Leadership and ability must
come from New York, because the point of reference
must be here.

Even with our successes, we must not forget that
many conflicts still exist, particularly in the African
continent. In this respect, we are duty-bound to
continue our thinking in order to find a successful
outcome for each case, which is our primary calling. To
do this, a participatory approach, founded on
international law and enjoying the support of all of the
actors, both within the United Nations system and
within regional and subregional organizations, is the
best strategy and one that should be strengthened. This
approach should obviously include a true internal, nonexclusive dialogue, a careful programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and a
vision extending to the entire region or subregion at
issue.

I should like to conclude with what is, perhaps, a
basic thought on the future of the Security Council. We
are ending our tenure as non-permanent members with
the absolute conviction that this body is crucial for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
precisely this characteristic that require that we
produce results.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in
French): First of all, Mr. President, I should like to
convey the gratitude of our delegation for the initiative
that you have taken in convening this end-of-year
wrap-up meeting for the Security Council. It gives us
yet another opportunity to engage in a wide-ranging
exchange of views on our activities and to assess the
progress that has been made with respect to the
objectives set. This exercise should allow us to identify
the obstacles that are strewn along our path, so that we
can take the necessary corrective action and thereby
enhance the effectiveness of our future actions.
Before getting into the heart of the matter, I
would like to say how much my delegation appreciates
the skill, talent and effectiveness with which you
guided the Council’s proceedings in December.
There is not a shadow of doubt that the year just
ending has been full of challenges for our Council,
challenges that we were determined to tackle in unity
in order to preserve international peace and security.
We have had to deal with a number of questions; some
of them proved to be more complex than others. In this
vein, we had tremendous success in eliminating certain
trouble spots, in Angola, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste
and Eritrea/Ethiopia, for example. In all of these

12

The strategy just initiated by the Council along
these lines to settle the Liberian problem is responding,
in our view, to this approach and should be encouraged.
We would like to make special mention of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa, which through its initiatives and suggestions
has enabled us to develop a framework that, if
conscientiously used by the Security Council, will
allow us to overcome the obstacles and find a solution
to a number of delicate situations.
On another level, the sanctions Committees have
contributed effectively, in their methodologies and their
actions, to the recent implementation of an intelligent,
targeted sanctions policy, and they have helped restore
peace through pressure brought to bear on the different
actors. The Groups of Experts, formed to survey the
implementation of sanctions, also played no small role.
In some cases, nevertheless, a great deal still needs to
be done, and the experience of our success should
inspire us. We have to look at how we follow up on
integral implementation of sanctions.
Since 11 September 2001 the fight against
international terrorism has become more essential than
ever. In this respect, we commend the tremendous work
done by the Counter-Terrorism Committee, whose
work should be strengthened further and adapted to the
different insidious forms of terrorism.

S/PV.4677

Peacekeeping operations, for their part, have been
largely positive. They have allowed us to create an
environment that is conducive to negotiation and
dialogue, while restricting temptations and excesses
and have led, in many cases, to a final peace being
established. The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP), which
have just concluded their mandates, are eloquent
examples of this. Nevertheless, there are still many
other conflicts, where peacekeeping forces have been
present for many years without a solution in sight. It is
up to us, in these specific cases, to re-define our
strategy by adapting it to on-the-ground realities, which
presupposes, in our view, a better coordination between
the troop-contributing countries and the effective
implementation of the recommendations from the
Brahimi Report.

was a significant increase in the number of Council
meetings, both formal and informal consultations. This
year the Council adopted more than 100 resolutions
and official Presidential Statements. We dispatched
three Council Missions to Eritrea and Ethiopia, the
Great Lakes region and Kosovo. We believe that the
Security Council did an admirable job with an
increased workload. The meetings were topical and
thematic in nature and focused on achieving specific
outcomes. A result of our joint work was the adoption
of a whole range of important decisions on a number of
sore points on the international agenda. Still, at the
forefront of the Council’s work in 2002 was the topic
of the fight against international terrorism. A
significant part of our work involved African issues as
well. The Council paid quite a bit of attention to a
Middle East settlement, to problems in Afghanistan and
the situations regarding Iraq and the Balkans.

During the year under review, our Council greatly
improved its working methods and established greater
transparency in its activities. We increased the number
of our public meetings, which allowed Member States
to communicate their views on the questions under
consideration. We also initiated a number of other
forms of communication that enabled us better to
evaluate what we are doing. Also, the Council has
taken greater interest in topical themes, some of which
are perhaps not, some say, within its purview, even
though they do help us better understand the nature of
some conflict situations. An example of this would be
the questions of food security and HIV/AIDS in
conflict areas. It would seem to be a good idea to us to
stress the importance of Security Council missions on
the ground, which should be encouraged.

Today we are bidding farewell to five delegations
who are concluding their work at the Council. We are
grateful to them for the concerns they have articulated
about the Council’s work and for their wish to finetune this work. We share many of these concerns. On a
number of them we do not have completely congruent
positions, which is natural, since in addition to the
goals and principles of the United Nations Charter that
bring us together, we also have national interests. The
important thing is that we are united in our wish to
increase the effectiveness of the Council’s work as the
United Nations body that has the major responsibility
for international peace and security.

Another very important sphere has to do with the
implementation of resolutions we adopt. What we see
is not very encouraging, because there are a number of
decisions not yet implemented. We must make an effort
to avoid selectivity and change this state of affairs.
All of these ideas are for us a way of maintaining
international peace and security. To reach this goal, we
say once again that we must have more determination
and greater will, and we must be guided in our daily
actions by the idea that we can only succeed in unity,
which is the foundation of our credibility.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The work of the Security Council in 2002
was highly intensive, particularly in December. There

In speaking about the contribution to the work of
the Council of the departing delegations, I would like
to note the following contributions. The tireless and
painstaking work of our Irish colleagues in searching
for mutually acceptable solutions and consideration of
the most serious problems faced by the Council is
deeply appreciated by all Security Council members.
Ambassador Richard Ryan and the Irish delegation
overall merit the highest praise for successfully guiding
the Security Council Committee on sanctions against
UNITA.
We take note of the active and thorough work
done by the delegation of Mauritius, particularly on
African issues. The discussions in Ambassador Jagdish
Koonjul’s Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, too, helped us
focus on many problems on the African continent and
helped us generate fresh, innovative ideas.

13

S/PV.4677

The effective and active work of the Norwegian
delegation, headed by Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby,
made a significant contribution to the successful work
of the Council over the past two years. Concise and
concrete Norwegian proposals on various problems
before us helped us reach prompt consensus among
members of the Security Council. The efforts of the
Norwegian delegation and of Ambassador Kolby in
heading the Council’s sanctions Committee on Iraq
deserve high marks.
I would like to note the valuable contribution
made by the delegation of Singapore, and by
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani personally, in finetuning the working methods of the Security Council.
Singapore’s approach was highly organized and
concrete. We will be able to make use of many of the
ideas of our Singaporean colleagues in our future work.
The current presidency is further confirmation of
the high degree of professionalism of our Colombian
colleagues. The Colombian delegation’s work in the
Security Council was very professional and focused on
finding solutions acceptable to all members, even when
confronted with severe differences among Council
members. We note and commend the high level of
leadership provided by Ambassador Valdivieso and the
entire Colombian delegation in the Security Council
committee on sanctions against the Taliban.
I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate all Security Council colleagues and to
wish them a happy new year for 2003. To all Member
States present here today and to our colleagues from
the Secretariat, we convey our sincere best wishes for
good health and success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for his kind
words to the outgoing members of the Council.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): In
September, President Bush challenged the Security
Council to live up to its mandate to address Iraq’s noncompliance with its disarmament obligations. The
Council was entrusted with finding a solution to meet
that challenge. That ultimately resulted in the adoption
of resolution 1441 (2002). During eight weeks of
negotiation, the Council not only included the
perspectives of its members but also provided the
opportunity for all States to contribute to this
extremely important and ongoing process. In so doing,
the Security Council has reaffirmed its important role

14

in dealing with Iraq’s threat to international peace and
security.
On African issues, the Council made outstanding
contributions, many of which did not make the front
pages of newspapers here in the United States, but
which remain extremely relevant and important to vast
numbers of people on this planet. For example, the
Council’s swift endorsement of the July Pretoria
Agreement helped maintain the momentum behind the
Agreement. Our decision to expand the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and authorize phase III operations signalled
our support for the peace process.
Contributing to those decisions of the Council
was the Council’s innovative approach to developing
information on those issues. For instance, in August,
the Foreign Ministers of the signatories to the Pretoria
Agreement met with the Council in a formal open
meeting to reaffirm their support for the Agreement
and to answer members’ questions. The decision not to
have Council members make statements in that forum
kept the focus on the Foreign Ministers and gave the
Council’s eventual presidential statement greater
political weight.
In Sierra Leone, the Council’s work in urging the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone to play a role in the
successful May elections was crucial. The Council
needs to give the same amount of attention now to the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, which is moving
towards issuing its indictments in early 2003. The
security, extradition and social issues that this will
raise will require the Council’s consideration. The
Court, which is a unique institution, independent of the
United Nations system but created by the United
Nations and Sierra Leone at the Security Council’s
recommendation, will need the political support of the
Council during the upcoming months. How we respond
will determine the Court’s eventual success.
On the Middle East, the Council made an
important contribution in 2002 by providing an agreed
endgame to this enduring conflict in resolution 1397
(2002), in which, for the first time, the Security
Council affirmed a vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side within secure and
recognized borders. That resolution was forwardlooking and has now become enshrined in the pantheon
of historic resolutions which form the basis upon which

S/PV.4677

peace will be negotiated. The Secretary-General and
key partners in the international community are deeply
involved, as members of the Quartet, in bringing the
parties back to the negotiating table.
The challenge for the Council on the Middle East
is now before us. We can remain on a constructive path
that supports the efforts of the Quartet and others
intricately involved in mediation in the Middle East, or
we can return to the destructive practice of seeking to
pass one-sided resolutions, heaping criticism on one
party — that is to say, Israel. We completely disagree
with an approach whereby draft resolutions seek to
highlight the issue of occupation while neglecting
Palestinian responsibility for eliminating terrorism. In
2002, the Council made several steps forward in
acknowledging the obvious: suicide bombings destroy
prospects for peace, as well as innocent lives. I would
ask the question: will the Council have the courage in
2003 to take aim at those groups and their supporters
that promote and perpetrate that violence and terror?
Finally, on counter-terrorism, I would like to call
attention to the important work of the committee
effectively chaired by you, Mr. President, in addressing
the terrorist threat posed by Al Quaeda and also the
continuing work of the groundbreaking CounterTerrorism Committee chaired by my colleague Sir
Jeremy Greenstock.
I would like to close with thanks to the
Colombian presidency for creating an opportunity
today for us to reflect, in perhaps the first quiet
moment of the month, about the challenges and
achievements over the past year and in the year ahead.
Indeed, as five of our colleagues leave us, I salute the
contributions that all have made during their
presidencies, as well as during the entire period of their
tenure.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the United States for his comments
addressed to outgoing members.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the end of the year, five members of the Council
will finish their term on the Council. It is very
significant that you, Mr. President, have organized this
wrap-up session, and we are very grateful to you for
that.
I also wish to congratulate you on the outstanding
manner in which you have presided over the work of

the Council this month. Although the Council’s
working days were reduced in December due to the
holidays, the relevant items of the programme of work
scheduled at the beginning of the month were discussed
in depth. Some of the very complicated and difficult
questions were also appropriately addressed. The fact
that the Security Council has been able to carry out its
task in a transparent, efficient and fruitful way reflects
your hard work and thoughtful planning, Mr. President,
and that of the Colombian Mission. The President, in
particular, gave detailed information to the members
each day about the following day’s work and the
following stage of work, which was very useful in our
preparation. I express my appreciation for that.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our sincere thanks to the outgoing members —
Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius, Norway and Singapore.
In the past two years, they have actively participated in
the consideration of various questions before the
Council and have presided over the work of the
Council’s subsidiary organs in an outstanding manner.
We will not forget their important contributions to the
work of the Security Council.
Once again, I wish to welcome Angola, Chile,
Germany, Pakistan and Spain to the Council. We
believe that those countries will bring fresh vitality to
the work of the Council. The Chinese delegation will
cooperate closely with them.
Throughout the year that will soon end, the
Council has considered a series of questions in a timely
manner, which has included anti-terrorism, Iraq, the
Middle East and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It has adopted more than 100 resolutions and
presidential statements. When I say that, it does not
mean that the more documents the Council can
produce, the better. I merely want to emphasize that we
have made substantive progress. For example, in the
area of anti-terrorism, the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee have done an enormous
job overall in cooperating and carrying out joint efforts
to fight terrorism. We have laid a very solid
foundation. That work has far-reaching impact.
Regarding the Iraqi issue, the Security Council
has made fruitful efforts, and continues to do so, for
the disclosure of information on the destruction of
weapons of mass destruction in order to settle the
question politically within the framework of the United
Nations and to avoid war. Here too, therefore, we

15

S/PV.4677

believe that the work of the Security Council has been
productive. It is worth mentioning that striving to
achieve consensus through consultation has become a
prominent characteristic of the work of the Council.
We hope that that trend will be maintained.
African issues have accounted for almost half of
the Council’s agenda items. Some progress has been
made this year on African hotspot issues and, in some
cases, it has been groundbreaking and very significant.
In the coming year, the Working Group on African
issues and the Security Council can consider in greater
depth and reflect on ways of strengthening
coordination and cooperation with the African Union,
African regional organizations and concerned African
countries, so as to adopt effective measures to promote
the early resolution of African issues and consolidate
the progress achieved.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
wish the President and other members of the Security
Council, including the general membership of the
United Nations, a Merry Christmas and a Happy New
Year.
Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): My delegation would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for this excellent initiative that makes it
possible for our outgoing members to produce a kind of
last work based on a two-year experience at the heart
of this unique world body that, through a resolution
consisting of a few paragraphs, can decide on peace or
war.
At a time when much attention is focused on the
Security Council, this experience reveals more than
ever its usefulness and importance. Cameroon will
certainly be in a better position to participate more
meaningfully in evaluating the Security Council in 12
months, when it, like all five departing members, will
be free from the constraints and obligations of
solidarity, even complicity, that binds people who
belong to the same club.
This morning I would like to focus primarily on
two or three concerns. The first has to do with the
decision-making process within the Security Council,
and in particular the role that elected members are
expected to play in the Council. The presence of
permanent members in an institution is in itself a
decisive advantage. It implies an almost perfect
mastery of issues, procedures, practices and even of
what is not said. When that permanent membership is

16

accompanied by a particularly favourable relationship
of power, there is a tendency to take advantage of that
position to advance one’s views and interests,
sometimes to the detriment of missions of general
interest that led to the establishment of the institution
in the first place.
Despite appearances, there is a pattern of
behaviour that is shared by the members of the
Council, who, willingly or not, are often tempted to
believe that agreement between five is the same as
agreement between 15. The Security Council would
benefit from returning to its initial composition. It is
composed of 15 members, but little by little, it is
becoming a body of five plus 10 members. That
dichotomy can only affect the transparency and the
legitimacy to which we all aspire. The most tangible
example is resolution 1441 (2002). It was adopted by
the 15 members unanimously and responsibly.
However, as soon as it was voted on, we returned, in
the implementation, to our reflexes as a club of five, of
10, of 2, and so forth. That remark is meant less to
criticize the Security Council than to alert it to a
problem. During the open meeting on Iraq in October,
the General Assembly got itself invited — there is no
other way to describe it — to the Council to say, in
particular, that missions to maintain international peace
and security had been entrusted to the Council more for
reasons of effectiveness and pragmatism than anything
else. The Charter does not give anyone a blank check,
because, in the long run, it is the body that includes all
Members of the Organization and has full legitimacy.
The obligation to be accountable must be maintained
by all of the principal bodies of the United Nations.
This should also remind us that it is the members
elected by the General Assembly that give Security
Council decisions their democratic legitimacy. In the
absence of sound practice, the Council would risk
losing its legitimacy and credibility.
The other concern that I should like to emphasize
at this wrap-up meeting concerns the problem of
sanctions that the Council imposes against certain
States that violate the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Council is still
searching for a global strategy for exiting sanctions
regimes. It is also struggling to find effective ways of
countering strategies aimed at bypassing sanctions that
are used increasingly by organized crime networks.
The growing criminalization of economies under
sanctions also makes that difficult. The Council must,

S/PV.4677

therefore, find balanced formulas that avoid pushing
the situation to the breaking point, because, once a
conflict has erupted, it becomes increasingly difficult
to return to normal economic and social life in the
countries concerned.
That just balance, in our view, is also
indispensable for the management of sanctions in a
strict sense. Indeed, many examples show that
sanctions generally have a more devastating impact on
vulnerable populations — women, children and the
poor — than on the regimes in place. Thus, we must do
a better job of taking the humanitarian dimension into
account when the Council makes decisions concerning
sanctions. A formula that is beginning to bear fruit —
and that we should certainly stress more — is the
targeting of sanctions at very specific objectives. In
any case, the sociological tailoring of such targeting
should be discussed. The Council must have a
substantive debate in the near future on the impact of
sanctions on the populations and economies of thirdparty States whose only mistake is to be a neighbour of
States that are at fault.
In conclusion, I should like to raise a subject that
is important to my delegation and is particularly
topical. In addressing situations of civil war or internal
conflicts that pit democratically elected Governments
against rebel movements or, more generally, against
armed oppositions, the Council has — because of its
passivity and a certain complacent condescension —
sometimes left the impression of having surreptitiously
legitimized certain rebel movements. That problem
needs to be explored; it is a source of great concern to
which the Council should find an ethical and adequate
response.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this wrap-up meeting to
discuss the work of the Council. We have listened
attentively, particularly to the statements of the
representatives of delegations whose Council tenure
will conclude at the end of this year. We reiterate our
thanks to your delegation for presenting accurate daily
information to Council members concerning our work
programme, a practice that we believe should become
permanent within the framework of improving the
Council’s working methods.
This meeting coincides with the end of the year,
which allows us to review and assess our work, not

only over the past month but throughout the year. Here,
we should like to express our appreciation to the
representatives of the five States that will leave the
Council in a few days’ time for their great
contributions to its work, particularly in the area of
developing its working methods and procedures and in
carrying out its responsibilities through the adoption of
many important and historic decisions. Because Syria
still has a full year and a few days until the end of its
tenure in the Council, we promise to present further
comprehensive views with regard to the Council’s
performance at this time next year.
The importance of today’s meeting is based on
our deep conviction that we all must strive to improve
the Council’s performance and its working methods, so
that its work can become more transparent and more
effective, which in turn will enable it to address the
challenges that are included on its agenda, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter. Here, we
must add that respect for the Council’s working
methods and equal treatment of all its members are
crucial in order to preserve the Council’s unity and
credibility. We would have liked to have had the
compulsory procedures and working methods of the
Council followed in dealing with the Iraqi declaration,
since we made our position clear in that regard in a
letter that was circulated as a Council document. We
are hopeful that the Council will rectify the error that
was made, particularly since a large number of its
members stated in our recent consultations their desire
to receive a full copy of the Iraqi declaration in order
to form their opinion and views independently and
responsibly. This is also important in order to maintain
the unity of the Council’s work with respect to
significant issues, as has been affirmed by many
Council members.
It is well known that we have achieved tangible
progress in the area of the transparency of the
Council’s work. The Council has held an
unprecedentedly large number of open meetings, and
non-member States have participated in the Council’s
work more than ever before. They had the opportunity
to express their views with regard to the political issues
being discussed and to express their vision for finding
solutions for these issues. The Council has also held a
number of wrap-up meetings in which members and
non-members reviewed its work.
The Council has achieved tangible improvements
in the past period. Having regular briefings on the

17

S/PV.4677

situation in the Middle East was one of the
achievements that deserve mention here. The Council,
throughout its working years, did not have such an
opportunity to discuss the situation in an explosive
region that constitutes a real threat to international
peace and security. At the same time, we should all be
aware of the fact that the Council has not followed up
on the implementation of a number of its resolutions
which negatively impacts its work and prevents the
achievement of real progress to reach a settlement in
this and other regions that are conflict-ridden.
Dealing with Council resolutions and the
importance of implementing them should be based on
equality and a single standard. Syria considers
international legality, as represented by the United
Nations and all its bodies, including the Security
Council, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as one of the main
pillars on which it relies in seeking a comprehensive
and just peace, particularly in the Middle East, and
generally in other conflict-ridden areas of the world.
In this context, Syria views any attempt to keep
the Council from dealing closely with the issues
relating to the Middle East, under different pretexts, a
matter that is not just improper, but actually contradicts
the concept of collective security, the Charter and the
willingness of the international community to
cooperate to find solutions for the challenges faced by
our world.
We believe strongly that any attempt to equate the
Palestinian people, who are subject to a hateful and
continuous Israeli occupation with the terrorist policies
of the Israeli Government that contradict a just and
comprehensive peace is a clear and flagrant
contradiction of the Charter. This is an unacceptable
violation of the United Nations role, and of that of the
Security Council.
The Israeli occupation of our land, which
constitutes the highest form of terrorism, is a question
that our Council should confront when there is a
discussion of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is a matter
that should be terminated as a matter of priority in the
Council’s work in order to reach a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, instead of
talking about alleged terrorism undertaken by the
Palestinian people, who are the real victims of Israeli
terrorism.

18

The Security Council has made great efforts to
deal with African issues in order to reach a settlement
for conflict-ridden areas. The establishment of the
Working Group on the prevention and settlement of
conflicts in Africa, which was headed by Mauritius
very seriously and efficiently, helped to consolidate the
role of the Council and contributed to dealing with
African issues. The Council has followed up on the
developments that have occurred in Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Sierra
Leone, and has given specific importance to Somalia
during the period under consideration. We still have a
lot to do in this area. We would like to state here that
the Security Council’s missions to conflict-ridden areas
have contributed largely to ending these conflicts and
to reaching a settlement, because it has allowed
members to get acquainted with the real situation there.
The Council has also discussed many substantive
issues in the areas of peacekeeping, women, security,
peace, children and civilians in times of war, as well as
the issue of terrorism. The Council has achieved many
successes in dealing with many of these issues and has
achieved progress that cannot be overlooked.
Syria will continue to work actively to
consolidate transparency in the Council’s work and
looks forward to more serious work to improve the
machinery of the Council and to make it more credible
and responsive to what the Charter states.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria): Allow me first of all, Mr.
President, to join the previous speakers in extending to
you and to the entire team of the delegation of
Colombia our warmest congratulations on your able
guidance of the work of the Security Council during
the month of December. You have coped with the
challenging tasks before the Council in a remarkable
manner, in spite of the fact that the Council’s
programme during the month was a truly busy one.
This wrap-up session of the Council has, in a
way, a unique and symbolic character, since it is being
held at the end of the year, when the time is most
appropriate to look retrospectively at what has been
achieved and what has not during the past year. In
addition, it is time to listen to the views of those nonpermanent members that are leaving the Council. These
views are truly valuable, since they give a succinct
review of a two-year experience, on which the Council
could build in its future activities. Since the previous
speakers have already covered most of the areas

S/PV.4677

relevant for this discussion, I would like to focus
briefly on several issues that we deem important.
With regard to the programme of work, we share
the view that during the past year the Council has dealt
on a continuous basis with a series of complex political
and security situations, achieving positive results on a
number of cases. The most convincing of these are the
progress achieved in East Timor, the excellent work on
Afghanistan, the improvement of the situation in Sierra
Leone, and the progress in the Balkans in the context
of the successful completion of the United Nations
missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Prevlaka.
The enormous amount of work done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established under resolution 1267 (1999) aimed at
insuring
the
necessary
conditions
for
full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) also definitely deserves a positive assessment.
The biggest portion of the Council’s work was devoted
to conflicts on the African continent, although with
mixed results.
Significant progress was achieved in the
resolution of the conflict in the Great Lakes region,
which is probably the most complex of all conflicts in
Africa. This is a conflict where the Security Council
can make a difference. The Council remained,
throughout the year, in constant contact with the
parties. The mission to the region in May, and the highlevel meeting with the parties in September in New
York, were positive contributions to the coordinated
efforts of the international community to bring peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
as a whole. In 2003, we have to continue to be
proactive on this issue in order to consolidate the peace
process.
While the situation in Sierra Leone in 2002 has
considerably improved, thanks to the action of the
Council, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Sierra Leone and the commendable efforts of the
United Kingdom, the Council will have to follow
closely the unstable situation in neighbouring Liberia.
Considerable strides were made in the peace process in
Angola. The United Nations peacekeeping efforts with
regard to Ethiopia/Eritrea are encouraging too. We
have to continue to work hard on all these issues next
year.
Despite the achievements of the “facilitation and
the regional” initiative, the situation in Burundi still

demands close monitoring by the Council. We also
have to closely follow the developments in Côte
d’Ivoire.
The commencement of the second phase of the
Somalia reconciliation process is a significant step
forward. The Council should continue to attach priority
attention to the situation in this country with a view to
finding the appropriate means to reverse the process of
sliding into turmoil in that part of Africa.
On the activities of the sanctions committees, we
listened carefully to the briefings of the outgoing
chairmen only yesterday. The views expressed, the
lessons learned and the recommendations on possible
improvement of the methods of work should definitely
be taken into consideration in the Council’s future
activities. Important contributions in this direction
could be made in the working group on sanctions,
which has resumed its work but still has not achieved
real progress on the recommendations made.
With regard to its working methods, the Council
should definitely continue to build on the positive
results already achieved, namely in the area of more
openness and transparency, as well as in its interaction
with the media. Strengthened cooperation with the
other United Nations organs and bodies on the basis of
a comparative advantage and adherence to the
respective mandates should also be commended. In this
regard we consider that the positive experience of the
work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Africa and its
interaction with the Economic and Social Council
could be explored further.
Finally, on the issue of conflict management, we
support more focused attention on the Council’s future
activities on the connections between conflict
prevention and conflict resolution and the work to
promote sustainable development. In this context
devising appropriate exit strategies is of critical
importance
for
the
successful
post-conflict
reconstruction and development.
In conclusion, I would like to use the words of
Mrs. d’Achon of France delivered last year at the
4445th meeting, on the same occasion, when Bulgaria
was sitting at the side bench and preparing for
membership in the Council:
“This is a time for saying au revoir —
though certainly not adieu — to the five nonpermanent members that are leaving the Council;

19

S/PV.4677

of course, we will continue to work with them
outside the Security Council and use to the
maximum their experience and expertise.”
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Colombia for having included in the
Security Council’s programme of work for December
this public meeting to have a wrap-up of this body’s
work during 2002 as well as to identify the challenges
and pending tasks of the Council for 2003. This
meeting has also been an ideal occasion to listen to the
assessment of the non-permanent Council members
who are leaving this body on the last day of December.
The Council is made up of 15 members who
represent their countries and regions. In carrying out
the Council’s tasks, they try to reconcile their national
interests with the collective interest and the joint
responsibility of enabling this body to defend
international peace and security above particular or
specific national interests. This tension between
national interests and collective responsibility — which
we all have in the Council — has been a recurring
theme in the course of this year. We have to
acknowledge the valuable contributions made from
their national perspectives by the five countries leaving
the Council at the end of this month.
In this respect, I would like to state the gratitude
of my delegation for the sustained and persevering
work of the delegation of Colombia in several items
and for the leadership that has shown in some of them
and that has taken on a particular importance. We
would like to thank Colombia for the work in the area
of small arms and light weapons, which is a legacy that
cannot be abandoned by this Council.
In the year 2002, the Security Council stepped up
its meetings and important responsibilities and made its
working programme broader and more inclusive. This
is something that comes up year after year. The
Council assumes these responsibilities with the
experience and desire to participate actively in the
tasks of peace and the promotion of international
security. At the same the Council this year has perhaps
become much more visible than it has ever been in the
past. The attention of the world’s mass media is sharper
and more sustained with regard to the Council’s daily
work on the specific matter of Iraq.
This has given the Council an identity in
international public opinion which perhaps it did not

20

have before. But it has also placed the Council under
the scrutiny of the Members of the United Nations,
who today more than ever would like to see the
Council respond with a greater sense of responsibility
and with transparency to the tasks entrusted to it. The
members of the United Nations also hope that there
will be closer communications between the Security
Council, other United Nations bodies and the different
States that are not members of the Council but whose
concurrence is essential in carrying out our tasks.
In this respect, Mexico is firmly in support of
greater transparency in the Security Council’s working
methods, particularly with regard to the deliberations
on substantive items of the programme of work. We
have not achieved the transparency in our working
methods that the United Nations community would
like. But we have made important progress this year in
having a large number of information meetings on
different items, at which the Secretariat shares its
points of view with the Council, become public. We
would also like the substantive deliberations to become
more public to the extent that that is possible and
desirable. With respect to working methods, the
Council has made progress in looking for formulas that
would make it possible to streamline its decisionmaking process, to make it more democratic, and —
why not say it — more subject to controls and
responsibility.
In this respect we must note the work done by the
delegation of Singapore this year, and throughout its
two years on the Security Council. This was a special
contribution that leaves an important legacy: the
delegations that must continue the tasks of the Council
should maintain this intensive quest for more effective
working methods, to broaden the scope of our work,
ensuring that it more properly reflects the realities,
with better information systems for the Council, while
fostering a more flexible exchange of ideas and points
of view. Part of the ongoing concern of Ambassador
Kishore Mahbubani and his entire delegation during
the past year has been to ensure that the Security
Council would be able to responsibly comply with its
tasks.
To that end, they sought initiatives and working
methods that were different. There was also a central
concern that the Security Council have closer links
with the General Assembly through its reports and
through its ties with other United Nations bodies. We
have to continue working along these lines. We have to

S/PV.4677

go further in many of the initiatives which were
outlined and are on the table, and on which
Ambassador Mahbubani and his team provided
leadership that left a very important mark on the
Security Council.
This year the Security Council took decisions on
major conflict situations, maintaining the principle of
unity and consensus. This is perhaps one of the most
important achievements that we have to celebrate here.
There were very few occasions on which the Council’s
votes were divided. The unity and consensus achieved
by the Council reflect the maturity with which States
shoulder their responsibilities, as well as the
introduction of working methods and formulas which
make it possible to achieve such consensus.
In this respect, Mexico has supported and
advocated the idea that the Middle East, including the
Palestinian situation, would be considered periodically
by all the members of the Security Council, both in
public briefings and in consultations. The presence of
the situation in the Middle East as an ongoing item on
our agenda undoubtedly represents important progress
in the search for agreement and consensus in that
region, which is afflicted by a conflict which
sometimes seems to be unresolvable. We hope the
Security Council, by keeping its finger on the pulse of
the Middle East and by holding monthly consultations,
will provide elements to increase peace and stability in
the area. Through these regular consultations, perhaps
we can make a contribution to the peace process which
is being promoted by the Quartet in the search for a
just and lasting solution which could be achieved
through the recognition of two States living side by
side within secure borders and in conditions of peace
and understanding.
We are also pleased with the fact that in the
course of the year the Security Council has given
timely follow-up to the situations of other countries or
regions in conflict, such as the Great Lakes region,
with an emphasis on the political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
region of West Africa.
The Security Council has had an important role in
the progress made in the peace process in Sierra Leone
as well as on considering the internal conflict in
Liberia and the emergence of new areas of tension in
Madagascar and in Côte d’Ivoire.

We would like to emphasize the importance of
mediation efforts, whether related to specific Member
countries or to regional or subregional organizations in
Africa, in finding solutions to crisis situations in the
region. Here, we would like to mention the work done
by the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa. We believe that the
leadership shown by Ambassador Koonjul of Mauritius
and his entire delegation fully justifies the
establishment of the Working Group and makes it
necessary that it continue its work in order to establish
the links between the Security Council, regional
organizations and the countries of the region, with a
view to anticipating events and to promote initiatives
and attitudes which would strengthen the capacity of
African organizations and countries to reach
agreements and to achieve peace and stability in the
region.
As it considered the various situations of
countries in conflict, in 2002, the Security Council
highlighted the need for greater cooperation and
coordination among the various actors in order to deal
with the dramatic repercussions of these conflicts, and,
in particular, in order to tackle the humanitarian
situation of the flow of refugees and internally
displaced persons and especially the situation of
women and of child soldiers.
In this context, Mexico would echo the
statements of those delegations who have said here that
we need greater coordination and cooperation between
United Nations agencies and regional and subregional
organizations. In the same vein, we should make
special mention of the fact that the international
community must continue to support programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants in post-conflict situations, in order to
prevent the re-emergence of tension and of factors
which would endanger progress in the peace processes.
In this respect my delegation would like to
acknowledge the tireless efforts carried out by the
delegation of Norway and by Ambassador Kolby in
dealing with specific situations and in stressing the use
of the Security Council’s capacities in areas related to
peace in Africa, in particular with respect to Somalia,
Ethiopia and Eritrea. Ambassador Kolby’s departure
will leave a leadership gap in this area which the other
members of the Security Council will have to make an
effort to fill.

21

S/PV.4677

With respect to promoting human rights and
humanitarian causes, we must make special mention of
the delegation of Ireland which made an ongoing
contribution to the Security Council’s work in this area.
Here, we should also stress the Irish delegation’s
important work in the Angola sanctions Committee,
which enabled the Committee successfully to conclude
its work recently.
One of the success stories of the United Nations
and of the Security Council in 2002 has been the
situation in Timor-Leste. Undeniably, the United
Nations has made a beneficial contribution to the
establishment of a new independent State and to the
formation of a Government and of administrative,
security and defence structures.
We regret the recent events that have taken place
in Timor-Leste, but we believe that the institutional
basis set up by the United Nations provides a guarantee
that those clashes and any subsequent ones can be dealt
with peacefully and with respect for the rule of law. We
must, however, keep the Council constantly involved in
that region.
Lastly, I would like to comment on the sanctions
regimes established by the Security Council. I, in my
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee for
Sierra Leone, and my delegation visited the Mano
River Union region last June, when we had the
opportunity to speak with regional players in that
country and in Guinea and Liberia. As a result, we
gained a much greater understanding of the scope and
the functioning of the sanctions regimes, as well as the
conditions in which the sanctions are implemented and
the violations that they are subject to.
I would like to stress the importance of the
Chairmen of sanctions Committees becoming directly
involved in the work by visiting the region and
becoming familiar with the specific circumstances
there. As Ambassador Mahbubani said, there is
sometimes a great deal of confusion and ambivalence
in the public’s perception of the work of those
Committees and of the meaning of sanctions. We must
bear that in mind and constantly review them in order
to keep those regimes active.
In this context, we support the statements made
by various members of the Council that the Secretariat
be provided with adequate human and budgetary
resources to enable it to support the work of the
sanctions Committees and monitor the sanctions

22

regimes, to draw upon lessons learned and to develop
an institutional memory — an archive based on the
research of expert groups and the work carried out by
various committees. In strengthening the institutional
tasks of the committees and setting up mechanisms to
ensure common understanding of responsibilities, my
delegation promoted the tripartite meetings between
the sanctions Committees related primarily to
diamonds.
One pending item for Security Council
consideration in 2003 is the validity and relevance of
the criteria and objectives of the sanctions regimes
imposed on Liberia and Sierra Leone in the light of the
political progress made in those countries.
The recent discussion that the Council held
following the lifting of sanctions on UNITA in Angola
should provide a model for other countries in West
Africa. We must prevent sanctions regimes from
becoming permanent or dysfunctional, and we must
therefore revise, taking timely and proper measures in
that respect.
In conclusion, I would like to express the support
of Mexico for the practice of holding wrap-up
meetings, which I hope will be continued in 2003. It is
also desirable for us to hold annual wrap-up meetings
such as this one in order to strengthen transparency,
which directly benefits the members of the Security
Council and strengthens our Organization and our ties
with the other States Members of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Mexico for his kind words addressed
to me.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
would like to focus — as you, Sir, have asked us to —
on the institutional aspects of our work over the past 12
months, to pay particular attention to what the outgoing
members of the Council have said this morning and to
make some additional comments. By way of preamble,
may I also say how much we appreciated the freshness
and vigour which the outgoing members of the Council
brought to the discussions of the Council. They have
made us think about how we are doing our work in a
way which we do not often do — and we are
continuing that this morning under your presidency,
Sir.
The agenda is becoming overloaded and I very
much share the feeling of the Irish delegation that there

S/PV.4677

needs to be a way of continually filtering what we do. I
think that we have had some useful innovations this
year. More of the management of the agenda is going
to coordinators and there have been fewer obligatory
meetings with the Council presidency at the beginning
of the month to go over the agenda, which can be done
before we reach the beginning of the month. I also
found the daily e-mails of the Colombian delegation,
sent by Andrés Franco, to be extraordinarily helpful in
pushing us towards what needed to be done each day
and giving us notice of the changes in the mind of the
presidency about how we needed to deal with the
agenda. All of that was innovation in the right
direction.
I would also like to pay tribute to our experts.
There is an increasing tendency to deal with texts
outside informal consultations and for ambassadors not
to spend their time and competence on them; our
experts seem to do it better. The fact that that tendency
is increasing is also very welcome.
This morning several members — particularly the
outgoing members — have referred to unity in the
Council. I think that, when we can get it right, this is a
very real evolution of compelling impact. But we must
not forget that unity of result depends in the end on
what happens in capitals and the perceptions there. We
need to go on ensuring that our ministers understand
the need for collective action through the Council as
much as we appreciate it among ourselves, because we
cannot produce unity if we do not get instructions to do
so.
That element has to be remembered. I think that
resolution 1441 (2002) was a striking example of that,
not least because, if I may say so, the two countries at
either end of the spectrum of debate on that issue —
the United States and Syria — both came to conclude
that unity in the Council was what they were looking
for. If we learn the lessons of that and apply them —
not only on that subject — in the future, then I think
that we will increase the power, effectiveness and
legitimacy of the Council.
We are not just an isolated Council. We have to
deal with the Secretariat, people on the ground and
Governments, as well as other organs of the
intergovernmental system. I think we have made
progress on the relationship between the Council and
the Economic and Social Council this year. I
particularly appreciate the fact that the Guinea-Bissau

mission was a combined mission, reflecting also, if I
may say so, the excellent work done by Ambassador
Koonjul with the Ad Hoc Working Group on Africa —
another innovation, which he steered very successfully
this year and which needs to be taken forward.
How we organize that sort of thing has an effect
on our follow-up. Ambassador Mahbubani said this
morning that the cultures of action, innovation and
reflection were very important to the Council, and that
the Council was not good on all of them. I actually
think that we have been quite good at innovation and
reflection, as well as action. What we have not been
good at is follow-up and implementation. That is where
the Council is really being tested as we become more
professional in our mandates and in our discussions. I
think we need to talk a little more about that and,
indeed, act on it. I may come back to that in one or two
respects.
In your intervention, Mr. President, you referred
to the Council’s work in combating terrorism, because
we lacked time for a more considered discussion of that
is sure when you had the breakout meeting the other
morning. I want to share and, indeed, reinforce, your
view. The Counter-Terrorism Committee is doing quite
a lot of bureaucratic work on counter-terrorism, which
is important. I am not trying to downplay that; why
should I try to do so? But the Council is in danger of
taking its eye off the ball that really matters, which is
stopping terrorists.
I am not sure that the Council is grappling with
the phenomenon of terrorism in all its aspects as
substantively as it should. I think that we should have a
discussion of this in January, if the French presidency
will allow it, because, if and when the next really big
incident happens and the Council has not proved yet to
be particularly active in stopping terrorism on the
ground, people will start throwing stones at us.
Therefore, Mr. President, I fully agree with your
focus on that particular issue. It has to be a concern of
the Council beyond the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.
Allow me to get myself into trouble over the
question of the permanent five, which the Ambassador
of Guinea in particular focused on. He did continue a
bit of a myth about the amount that the permanent five
do before we come into the Council, which we have
done only on Iraq this year, and necessarily on Iraq, as
I think most members of the Council have realized. But

23

S/PV.4677

I do not think that the split, if you like, between the
permanent five and the elected 10 affects, or is related
to, transparency.
I think that the Council has become more
transparent, and that is not a permanent five issue. With
respect to legitimacy — if one wants to underline the
politics of this, and that is why the United Kingdom
supports reform and enlargement — we must not forget
that an element of the political legitimacy of the
Council is also professionalism. That is something
which it is obligatory for the permanent five to
introduce and which we discussed in the break-out
meeting the other morning.
Non-permanent members of the Council talk
about this, but I am not sure that they do very much
about it. That is why I think that we should pick up the
suggestion made by Norway — on which Ambassador
Kolby and I agree — that there should be more of a
tendency to take lead nations for a particular subject,
and the non-permanents should be in the lead on that.
In my observation of the Council’s work over the
past four years, and in our own experience in the
United Kingdom, it is extremely difficult for
delegations on the Council to cover every subject
evenly, fully and professionally. There is too much
going on, and therefore there ought to be a division of
functions, so that the professionalism of spending more
time on a particular subject comes through.
Therefore, rather than just talking about it and remouthing it every time we have a wrap-up session, we
ought to do something about it. I wonder whether the
non-permanents at the beginning of next year might
like to get together among themselves and see whether
they would like to take that forward, because I think
that it would help.
Ireland made a suggestion that we should have
more meetings away from Headquarters, of the kind
that was held the other day. I remember one or two
comments at the end of that meeting about the
usefulness of what we had just been doing and the role
of informal consultations. We behave in informal
consultations rather as we behave in here. In fact, I
rarely see any difference between the style of our
presentations between the two meetings, and the real
purpose of informal consultations has drained away.
We think that we are doing something, but actually we
are not doing as much as we often do in open meetings.

24

Therefore, Mr. President, I think that is a theme
that came out of your meeting, which you have
commented on in your excellent paper — written in
brilliant English, if I may say so — which we should
take forward. There are themes here that you have
written down for us which should not just go on the
shelf. I would like to continue these discussions,
perhaps, with a lunch early in the new year, so that the
old members exiting can come and join us and share
their experiences again. But I think that we need to talk
a bit about how we use informals and whether we need
to get really informal by getting away from
Headquarters now and again.
Finally, Ambassador Mahbubani of Singapore,
says, paradoxically, that we have not done much by
way of innovation, when he, perhaps, has been the
most innovative of all 15 of us over the past few years.
But let us not look for institutional innovation; that is
too difficult in this Organization. Let us look for
practical innovation, which he has been so good at, and
then we might actually be getting somewhere – get
away from the institutional habits and get into practical
innovation of what needs to be done, because there is a
situation on the ground that needs it. There, I think, our
growing habit of outside discussion would actually be
exceedingly useful.
I have used up my 10 minutes, but I think that
there is a lot there to follow up, and let us see if we can
do it in the new year.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom for his kind words,
especially those addressed to the outgoing members.
Ms. d’Achon (France) (spoke in French): I will
probably not use my full 10 minutes, because, within
the framework of the progress that we are making with
respect to enhancing the methods of work of the
Security Council, later on we will be having a lunch
with the Council coordinators at which we will have an
exchange of views on the programme of work for
January.
I would, however, like to thank you, Mr.
President, for having convened this meeting. I would
like to associate myself with the tributes that have been
paid to your presidency, and we will, of course, take
into account any ideas you can give us for next month.
We believe that this meeting has been particularly
useful, although it is, of course, a sad occasion to see

S/PV.4677

our Security Council colleagues leave — colleagues
with whom we have forged bonds of friendship and
of — I hope — productive work in many areas. Each
delegation, with its areas of specialization and its
particular sensitivities, has brought to the Council an
interesting and productive vision, and, as our colleague
from the Russian Federation has stated, each one made
a major contribution.
Many very important ideas have been expressed
today by our departing colleagues. As Ambassador
Greenstock said, we must make sure that they do not
remain a dead letter but ensure that they are taken into
account and, going beyond a conceptual framework, we
must try to translate them into reality next year.
I will not go back to many of the areas that were
alluded to by several delegations, but I would like to
recall, in the context of the work that we have done in
2002, the great attention that the Security Council has
focused on the question of Africa. Each month these
questions make up almost two thirds of our work. True,
as many delegation have stressed, many successes have
been recorded — Angola, Sierra Leone, Ethiopia/
Eritrea, and the African Great Lakes region, to which
the French Ambassador led a third mission.
It is true that these questions will remain on our
agenda in 2003. We are concerned in particular by the
situation in West Africa at this time. Indeed, the
questions of Liberia, the Central African Republic and
Guinea-Bissau, as well as Côte d’Ivoire — topics we
will begin to deal with this afternoon — will continue
to be a great concern to us.
As has been noted by many delegations, we have
made quite a bit of progress in the fight against
terrorism and on the questions of Afghanistan and
Timor-Leste, but even there the Council must remain
extremely vigilant. We fully agree with the proposal
made by Ambassador Greenstock that we should
examine in January what we have done in terms of
fighting terrorism.
As to the challenges that we will be facing next
year — you had asked us to think about this issue,
Mr. President — one does not need to be a visionary to
see that, at the beginning of the year, we will continue
to be seized of all the questions of which we have
spoken.

Mr. President, you asked us to think about the
challenges of next year. One does not need to be a seer
to know that all the files we have mentioned will
continue to keep us occupied from the start of next
year.
I would like to pick up on what the Ambassador
of Singapore said about continuing to give some
thought to a permanent sanctions mechanism. This
would allow us to better share information, as he
emphasized, and it seems important to us that the
Council should continue to think about the sanctions
sector.
Finally, I wish to note that there has been greater
transparency in the Council’s proceedings this past
year. We have made a great deal of progress, which
was partially recognized by the members of the
General Assembly when the annual report was
presented, and we have to continue the good work that
we initiated in this area.
As other delegations have said, it is true that the
Council’s workload is such that we are practically at
the saturation point in our monthly programmes of
work. As the Norwegian Ambassador said, we must
continue to think about this so that we can progress in
the rationalization of the work that we do, including
trying to find better working methods. We have to be
more imaginative; we cannot remain content to
continue applying the same methods as our workload
continues to grow.
I do not know if it is through the Working Group
on Documentation and Procedures that we will be able
to do this, but it might be accomplished on a daily
basis, through practical thinking, and maybe, as some
delegations have said, by asking some countries to take
the lead in discussions on specific topics — the matter
of “lead nations” — and maybe also by ad hoc working
groups of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before
concluding this meeting, I would like to inform
Council members that the special document which was
spoken of here on 11 December will be distributed as
an official document, especially for the benefit of the
non-members.

25

S/PV.4677

The Security Council has thus concluded the
meeting. Simply to give you an idea of the timing, I
must tell you that, on average, we did comply with the
maximum 10-minute period for each statement. We
would have liked it to have been shorter.

26

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
