S/PV.7977

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7977

th meeting
Tuesday, 20 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17659 (E)
*1717659*

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting. Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General;
His excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States; Mr. Michael
Doran, Senior Fellow at the Hudson Institute; and
His Excellency Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, member of The
Elders.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give Mr. Mladenov the floor.
Mr. Mladenov: Today I devote my regular briefing
to the Security Council to reporting, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) during the period from 25 March to
19 June. I will focus on developments on the ground
in accordance with the provisions of the resolution,
including on regional and international efforts to
advance peace.
Let me once again note that nothing in the report
can be divorced from the broader context in which it is
occurring — the half century of occupation, the stalled
peace process, the lack of dialogue between the parties,
as well as the continued illegal settlement activities,
terror, violence and increased radicalization.
Allow me to note that this month’s briefing
coincides with the fiftieth anniversary of the ArabIsraeli war, which resulted in Israel’s occupation of
the West Bank, East Jerusalem, Gaza and the Syrian
Golan. Achieving a negotiated two-State outcome is the
only way to lay the foundations for enduring peace that
is based on Israeli security needs and the Palestinian
right to sovereignty and statehood. Now is not the time
to give up on that goal. Now is the time to create the
2/29

20/06/2017

conditions for a return to negotiations so as to resolve all
final-status issues based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, mutual agreements and international law.
Resolution 2334 (2016), in paragraph 2, calls on
Israel to take steps to
“cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem”.
No such steps were taken during the reporting period.
In fact, since 24 March there has been a substantial
increase in settlement-related announcements as
compared with the previous reporting period, with
plans for nearly 4,000 housing units moving forward
and 2,000 tenders issued. The United Nations considers
all settlement activities to be illegal under international
law. Resolution 2334 (2016) states that the international
community will not recognize any changes to the
4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem,
other than those agreed to by the parties themselves
through negotiations.
Plans for approximately 3,200 units were advanced
through the various stages of the planning process in
22 settlements in Area C of the occupied West Bank.
Those plans include 2,000 housing units in the major
population centres of Ma’ale Adumim and Ariel, and
over 800 units in Kerem Reim, Oranit and Beit El. One
hundred units were advanced for the new settlement
of Amihai, established in the eastern Shiloh Valley
for the former residents of the Amona outpost, where
the Israeli authorities also declared 241 acres as State
land in the same zone. Both acts would further sever
the territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian State,
thereby solidifying a line of settlements dividing the
northern and central West Bank. As construction on
the new settlement began today, the Prime Minister
stated that
“There will never be a Government that is more
pro-settlement than our Government”.
Separately, tenders were issued for close to
2,000 housing units in four settlements close to the
1967 line — Alfei Menashe, Beitar Illit, Beit Arie
and Kamer Shomron. Infrastructure tenders for the
future construction of more than 200 settlement units
in Kochav Yaakov, located between Ramallah and
Jerusalem, were also re-issued. In East Jerusalem 770
housing units in the Gilo southern slopes reached the
final approval stage, and building permits for more
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

than 360 housing units were granted in Ramat Shlomo,
Pisgat Ze’ev and Ramot.
Meanwhile, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
reporting period witnessed a sharp decline in the
number of demolished Palestinian-owned structures
in Area C. Twenty-nine structures were demolished
or seized — down from 149 in the previous reporting
period. East Jerusalem saw a less pronounced decrease
in demolished structures, from 49 to 32. However, the
monthly average of demolitions in East Jerusalem since
the beginning of 2017 remains at the same level as in
2016, when demolitions reached a 15-year record.
Allow me to turn to the problem of violence, which
remains a hallmark of the conflict. Resolution 2334
(2016) calls on all sides to refrain from such acts and
undertake efforts to combat them. During the reporting
period, the security situation on the ground remained
relatively calm. No rockets were fired from Gaza
towards Israel, and the Israeli Defence Forces did not
conduct any air strikes in Gaza.
However, according to OCHA, 17 Palestinians
were killed by Israeli security forces in various
incidents, including reported terror attacks, clashes
and military operations. One Israeli soldier was killed
in a car-ramming attack on 6 April outside the Ofra
settlement, to the north-east of Ramallah, and, on
16 June a policewoman was killed in a shooting and
stabbing attack by Palestinian assailants in the vicinity
of the Old City of Jerusalem. On 14 April, a British
exchange student was killed by a Palestinian assailant
in a stabbing attack in Jerusalem.
The Israeli security forces killed a Jordanian
citizen reportedly involved in a stabbing incident in the
Old City on 13 May, and a Palestinian fisherman off
the coast of Gaza on 25 May. The reporting period also
witnessed the shooting of two Palestinian men during
protests at the fence along Gaza’s northern border.
On 24 March, a senior Hamas military commander
was assassinated by unknown assailants in Gaza City.
That was followed by a lockdown of Gaza by Hamas in
which the de facto authorities did not allow Palestinians
or internationals to leave the Strip for several days. In
April, Hamas executed six Palestinian men for alleged
collaboration with Israel — an act that was condemned
by the international community.

S/PV.7977

Settler-related violence continued during the
reporting period, as well. According to OCHA,
31 incidents were documented, resulting in one
Palestinian killed, 10 injured and damage to Palestinian
property. Much of the violence has centred around the
West Bank settlement of Yitzhar near Nablus — a
recurrent source of violent actions against neighbouring
villages in the past. Against the backdrop of Israeli
security officials reportedly warning of the increased
risk of another terror attack by Jewish extremists, like
the one against the Dawabsheh family two years ago,
a Rabbi from Yitzhar was indicted for incitement to
violence against Palestinians, while a number of others
were arrested.
In paragraph 7 of resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council called on both parties
“to refrain from provocative actions, incitement
and inflammatory rhetoric”
and, in paragraph 6,
“to clearly condemn all acts of terrorism”.
Regrettably, such calls continued to go unanswered
during the reporting period. Palestinian officials
and media outlets affiliated with Fatah continued to
commemorate the lives of perpetrators of past terror
attacks against Israeli civilians. One community centre
was recently named after a Palestinian woman who was
involved in an attack in which 38 Israelis, including 13
children, were killed in Tel Aviv in 1978. UN-Women
and Norway withdrew support from the organization.
Hamas leaders have also continued their deplorable
practice of celebrating recent attacks against Israeli
civilians as heroic, including the 1 April stabbing in
Jerusalem’s Old City in which two civilians were injured,
and only a few hours following the complex attack at
Damascus Gate last Friday, in which a policewoman
was killed, Hamas was quick to praise “the three
martyrs from today’s heroic Jerusalem operation”.
Some Israeli officials have also employed
provocative rhetoric. Politicians have repeatedly
declared that there will never be a Palestinian State,
while pledging to take the idea of statehood “off the
agenda”. In a regrettable incident, an Israeli Minister
spoke at an event attended by other members of the
Knesset, celebrating the publication of a book promoting
abhorrent views concerning Israel’s Arab citizens. The
book was condemned by the Anti-Defamation League

17-176593/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

as dangerous and inhumane, and a number of the
participants expressed regret at their attendance.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the call by the
Middle East Quartet on both parties to take affirmative
steps to reverse negative trends on the ground that
are imperilling the two-State solution. In May, Israel
approved a number of positive measures to improve
the Palestinian economy. Those included the 24-hour
opening of the Allenby Bridge for a three-month period
effective as of today, as well as extended operating
hours at the Tarkumiya, Ephraim, Gilboa, Maccabim
and Reihan crossing points and the construction of a
vehicular crossing point at Eyal. Furthermore, the
package envisions the development of an industrial
zone that includes bonded warehouses and a natural
gas and fuel terminal aimed, at enhancing Palestinian
authority over trade and customs issues.
The measures also included the demarcation of
approximately 4,000 acres of land in Area C, including
next to three major Palestinian cities — Ramallah, Nablus
and Tulkarem — in which the regulation of planning
and zoning will undergo changes with potentially
positive implications for Palestinian development.
The Palestinian and Israeli Finance Ministries
held a number of meetings to discuss fiscal leakages,
which is a critical issue given the Palestinian
Authority’s $800 million-financing gap. The parties
have progressed in discussions on value-added tax
clearance revenues. In early June, in accordance with
the electricity agreement signed in September, Israel
transferred $30 million to the Palestinian Authority
in lieu of equalization levies and health stamps, and
agreed to conduct monthly transfers in the future. In
May, the Joint Water Committee held its first meeting
in seven years.
During the reporting period, the situation in Gaza
heightened intra-Palestinian tensions, thereby creating
an increasingly dangerous humanitarian situation
and raising serious concerns about the prospects of
another conflict. By establishing an administrative
committee to run civilian affairs, Hamas tightened its
control of Gaza and further antagonized the legitimate
Palestinian authorities, reducing the prospects for
reconciliation. Meanwhile, a stand-off between Fatah
and Hamas over the payment of taxes on fuel led to
the shut down of the only power plant in Gaza, leaving
residents with four hours of electricity per day. Basic
services, including health facilities, water supply and
4/29

20/06/2017

wastewater management have almost ground to a
halt, increasing the risk of health and environmental
disasters. Today Gaza depends exclusively on Israeli
electricity lines, which normally provide 60 per cent
of supply, on Egypt and on a United Nations-managed
emergency fuel operation that, given the funding
available, will expire in two to three months.
On 15 May, the Palestinian Authority informed
Israel that it would reduce its payment for the electricity
supplied to Gaza by 30 per cent. One month later, Israel
agreed to the Palestinian request. An initial 5 per cent
reduction was implemented on 19 June, and further
cuts are expected to have catastrophic consequences for
Gaza’s population.
Going beyond the scope of today’s report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), once again, I
would like to warn all parties that Gaza is a tinderbox.
If and when it explodes, it will have devastating
consequences for the population and derail all efforts at
advancing peace. Two million Palestinians in Gaza can
no longer be held hostage by divisions. They have lived
under the control of Hamas for a decade. They have
had to deal with crippling Israeli closures, Palestinian
divisions and have lived through three devastating
conflicts. Perpetuating that situation breeds radicalism
and extremism. We have a collective responsibility
to prevent that situation; we have a duty to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe.
Returning to resolution 2334 (2016), during the
reporting period there were no developments related
to Member States’ distinguishing, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied in 1967. There were, however,
continuing efforts by the international community to
advance peace.
On 29 March in Jordan, at the Summit of the League
of Arab States, Arab leaders committed to relaunching
serious peace negotiations on the basis of a two-State
solution, establishing a Palestinian State “on the lines
of June 4, 1967 with its capital in East Jerusalem” and
reaffirmed their commitment to the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative. In May, on his first trip abroad, United
States President Trump visited Israeli and Palestinian
leaders and made clear that resolving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is critical to combating the threat
of violent extremism and terrorism. He expressed his
personal commitment to helping both sides achieve a
peace agreement that would begin the process of peace
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

throughout the region. The Secretary-General looks
forward to working with the United States, Russia,
the European Union and regional partners towards
improving the environment for peacemaking, including
by engaging with all sides to improve the Palestinian
economy in the West Bank and Gaza.
In conclusion, I would like to share some broad
observations on the reporting period.
First, once again, I must stress the urgency of
addressing the rapidly deteriorating situation in
Gaza. We must acknowledge the significant budget
constraints the Palestinian Authority is currently
facing and the need to support the Government in
addressing them. However, all decisions must be taken
with due consideration of their humanitarian impact. I
therefore call on Palestinian leaders to urgently reach
the necessary compromises that will return Gaza to the
control of the legitimate Palestinian authorities. Last
month, I warned the Security Council that the crisis
was leading us towards another conflict — a conflict
that no one wants. I urge all parties to act before it is
too late.
Secondly, the policy of continued illegal settlement
construction in the occupied Palestinian territory
contravenes resolution 2334 (2016). The large number
of settlement-related activities documented during
the reporting period undermine the chances for the
establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State
as part of a two-State solution.
Thirdly, the continuing terror attacks, violence
and incitement remain a very serious concern to all.
Leaders have a responsibility to implement measures
demonstrating their commitment to combating violence
and any acts of provocation and inflammatory rhetoric.
Fourthly, while Israeli initiatives to improve the
Palestinian economy are positive steps forward, it
remains to be seen whether or not they will significantly
increase Palestinian civil authority, in line with Quartet
recommendations and prior commitments between
the parties.
In this symbolic month, it is time to turn the
challenges of the past into opportunities for the future.
As the Secretary-General recently stated,
“The occupation has shaped the lives of both
Palestinians and Israelis. It has fuelled recurring
cycles of violence and retribution. Its perpetuation
is sending an unmistakable message to generations

S/PV.7977

of Palestinians that their dream of statehood is
destined to remain just that, a dream; and to Israelis
that their desire for peace, security and regional
recognition remains unattainable”.
Every day that passes without peace is another day
we neglect our collective responsibility to advance a
meaningful strategy towards a negotiated two-State
solution that meets the national and historic aspirations
of both peoples. The United Nations will continue its
determined engagement with the parties and all key
stakeholders to achieve that objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now give the floor the Mr. Aboul-Gheit.
Mr. Aboul-Gheit (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and members
of the Security Council for holding today’s debate and
for inviting me, as representative of the League of Arab
States, to participate in the debate.
The truth is that I am deeply saddened as I speak
before the Council today, exactly 50 years since the
start of the Israeli occupation of Arab and Palestinian
lands in June 1967. I was a young Egyptian diplomat
at the time, and in those 50 years, I have held many
positions of responsibility. Unfortunately, the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories continues without
the occupying Power showing any genuine attempt at
reaching an acceptable settlement that would end the
conflict once and for all.
We note the number of lives and opportunities that
have been lost, and the wounds that have worsened
in the past 50 years. We are left only to wonder
about the negative effects that the conflict has had
on Arab societies — how it has depleted our energy
and increased our problems, exhausted our ability to
develop and caused volcanoes of anger to erupt inside
so many of our Palestinian and Arab young people.
That anger is then expressed in several ways — some
of them so vile that they strip people of their humanity.
The Arab side was defeated in June 1967 by Israeli
aggression against its lands and it continues to pay
the price even now. Despite the fact that the 1973 war,
which I also witnessed, ccreated a new landscape and
military situation, Israelis continued to use any pretext
to maintain control of Palestinian territories — that is
in fact at the heart of the conflict. It has made a fair
and permanent settlement extremely difficult. The

17-176595/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian people in particular find themselves in
an extremely complicated situation. Unfortunately,
after the occupation of the remaining 22 per cent of
Palestinian territory under the British Mandate, they
have no space that they can call their own independent
State. It is an extraordinary situation that is unparalleled
in modern history, but yet it has continued for half
a century. Unfortunately, some Israelis continue to
believe that this situation can continue for years and
decades into the future.
A few months after the military operations in 1967,
the Council adopted resolution 242 (1967), which rejects
the occupation of the territories of others by force, as
per the Charter of the United Nations. The resolution
also created the basis for any acceptable settlement of
this conflict, that is, the complete withdrawal by Israel
from the occupied territories in return for normal,
peaceful relations with Israel. That approach remains
the only means to address the Palestinian issue. This
logic is, in fact, what the Arab States adopted at the
Summit of the League of Arab States in Beirut in 2002,
in the form of the Arab Peace Initiative, which calls for
the complete withdrawal by Israel and the settlement of
all pending issues in return for complete and peaceful
relations. That equation seems easy, acceptable and fair
to everyone. It was supported by the entire international
community, with the exception of Israel. To date, we
have not heard of a single Israeli politician or official
who has accepted the Initiative.
It is unfortunate that in return Israel presents only
one alternative: continued occupation. We, in practice,
have two modes of life, subjected to the authority of the
Israeli State. In that alternative there is no Palestinian
sovereignty over any territory. In that alternative the
Palestinian Government is more like a municipal
Government that manages the affairs of citizens under
Israeli sovereignty. Unfortunately, Israel has buried the
hope generated by the 1993 Oslo Accords. That hope
has practically died, affirming the bitter reality in the
West Bank and the open prison that is the Gaza Strip.
This painful reality is taking place before the eyes
and ears of the world year after year. Despite how
painful this reality is for the Palestinians, who are
losing their lives and their time in checkpoints and
behind the separation wall, this represents a complete
condemnation of the international order, of which
the Council is a great expression. We must all accept
and admit that this system has failed after 50 years
of occupation. It has failed to end this conflict, and I
6/29

20/06/2017

cannot deny that deep disappointment is overcoming
the Palestinians due to the failure of the international
system to support them and transform their dreams and
aspirations into reality.
The peace treaties signed between Israel, on one
side, with Egypt and with Jordan, on the other, represent
hope and show us that peace is not impossible. These
are beacons of light in the long dark tunnel of conflict
and violence. There is no doubt that they have stood the
test of time; and the fact that the parties to those treaties
have held onto them show that they were based on a
solid foundation.
Today, after countless rounds of secret and public
negotiations, after sincere efforts from all parties to
arrive at a fair settlement, and after numerous interim
agreements, as well as detailed agreements signed
during different rounds of negotiations that I have
personally witnessed, after this long history of failure
to end the conflict, I say that we must be honest with
ourselves. All those plans and attempts did not succeed
because they did not address the heart of the conflict.
They have been concerned with creating interim
settlements and arrangements that do not address the
heart of the matter. Practically, this has only led to
prolonged conflict.
The heart of the matter is the occupation of territories
in 1967. No solution will be achieved without directly
and decisively addressing this matter, based on the
principle of land in return for peace. Any negotiations
not based on this assumption will be doomed to fail.
Our long experience in addressing this complicated
conflict drives us to speak honestly about previous
failures and how we must not repeat them. We must
immediately address the final settlement issue. I
reiterate that the goal must be to address the details
of a final settlement — which is the heart of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict — most important of which
are the borders, Jerusalem, security and refugees. In
that regard, I would like to present to the Council the
following points.
First, the relevant parties are, in general, unable
to manage successful negotiations alone, without
consistent and strong international support. If the two
parties, the Israelis and the Palestinians, were to be left
without international support, they would most likely
be unable to achieve any settlement or agreement,
particularly in light of the grave imbalance of power
between the two parties. In that regard, I would like to
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7977

pay tribute to every State that has attempted throughout
the history of this conflict to bring the viewpoints
of the parties closer together. In particular I wish to
mention the United States of America, the successive
Governments of which have performed different roles
that are significant. I hope that this positive engagement
with the parties will continue in a balanced manner in
order to achieve the desired settlement.

Fourthly, the Arab Peace Initiative offers Israel a
historic opportunity to normalize relations not only
with its Arab neighbours but also with Muslim nations.
The Amman summit of 29 March 2017 reaffirmed this
initiative as a strategic Arab choice. However, I am
compelled here to reaffirm the position of the Arab
Summit: that Israel cannot reap the benefits of peace
before achieving peace.

Secondly, any serious negotiation must have
an agreed framework of reference. Without that,
the negotiations will not succeed. That framework
includes Council and General Assembly resolutions,
the principle of land in return for peace, and the Arab
Peace Initiative. That framework of reference must
govern any negotiation process so that we do not engage
in any random attempts or negotiations that go round in
a vicious circle while achieving nothing.

Fifthly, Arab States have noted of late continuing
efforts on the part of Israel, which remains, under all
norms of international law, an occupying Power, to
normalize its situation in the United Nations and its
specialized agencies. Most significant in this respect
are Israel’s efforts to become a member of the Security
Council in 2019-2020. Israel is in consistent violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, and, accordingly, it fails to meet the minimum
conditions required to become a member of the
Council. Accepting Israel as a member thereof would
strike at the heart of the Council’s credibility and give
impetus to Israeli extremists and settlers. If Israel can
normalize its international status so easily, what will
induce it to engage in serious negotiations aimed at
ending the conflict?

Thirdly, the current Israeli Government is adopting
a strategy that will render impossible the two-State
solution. That Government is following a systematic
plan of building settlements, choosing the locations of
those settlements in a way that makes a viable Palestinian
State of connected territories almost geographically
impossible. We heard our friend Mr. Mladenov speak
on this minutes ago. We may have heard the statement
made by the Israeli Minister of Defence a few days ago
in which he boasted that the number of building permits
issued since the beginning of this year in the Jewish
settlements in the West Bank and in East Jerusalem
was the highest since 1992. This year alone the Israeli
Government has approved 8,354 new residential units,
3,066 of which, an unprecedented number, are slated
for immediate construction. In 1967, there were 12,000
settlers; in 1996, 150,000; and today there are 400,000,
in addition to another 200,000 in East Jerusalem.
This situation leaves no doubt as to the fact that the
plan of and the approach adopted by the current Israeli
leadership is a plan for settlement, not a plan for peace.
Resolution 2334 (2016), of December 2016, which was
adopted with unprecedented unanimity following a
long-standing failure to address the conflict, was a step
in the right direction on the path towards delegitimizing
the Israeli settlements by bringing increased pressure
to bear on Israel to change course. Other resolutions
must follow suit, particularly in terms of requesting
that the Secretary-General submit a report on its
implementation every three months.

It is bewildering, really, that Israel can find the
courage to submit its candidature for membership in
the Council. It never misses an opportunity to weaken
the credibility of the United Nations. We may have
heard that a few days ago the Israeli Prime Minister
called for the dismantling of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, accusing it of working against Israel. This is no
surprise, because the Agency represents an international
commitment to refugees. The Israeli Government is
trying to bury this issue completely and erase it from
the international agenda.
Sixthly, addressing the issues of the border, security,
Jerusalem and refugees is the basis for an acceptable
and lasting solution, but the current Israeli Government
continues to excel at framing the most complicated
issues as though it were trying to kill all prospects
for peace, for example requiring the Palestinian side
to accept what is called a Jewish Israeli State and
providing a minimum level of security guarantees. It
is absurd, really, for a Government whose members
do not accept the Palestinian right to an independent
State to require that the Palestinians accept its State as
a condition for negotiations.

17-176597/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/06/2017

It is painful to recall that 50 years have passed since
the occupation of the Arab territories. It is time to end
the nightmare of occupation, which is the underlying
cause of the increase in violence, radicalization and
terrorism throughout our region. I have said for many
years that violence and terrorism are the direct result of
our failure to resolve the Palestinian issue.

the Arab world, including the Palestine Liberation
Organization, loudly echoed. Israel responded to this
threat with a set of lightning attacks against Egypt,
which prompted King Hussein of Jordan to open fire
on Israel, a fateful decision that ended with the West
Bank in Israel’s hands. Make no mistake, however:
from beginning to end, this was Nasser’s war.

The world needs us to arrive at a just and lasting
solution to the conflict, in order to pave the way for
peace and development and enable the Palestinians to
regain their rights. The Security Council must uphold
its responsibilities in this regard. I hope that it will be
able to restore confidence and hope to the Palestinians
and show them that the world will not abandon them
and that they will not become forgotten statistics.

For all that the world has changed, Israel today
still faces adversaries that operate according to the
Nasserist playbook. The greatest of those adversaries
is Iran, which has created an anti-status-quo coalition
made up of itself, Syria, and their proxies, Hizbullah,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Hamas, among others.
Like Nasser’s Egypt, Iran aspires to be the leading
Power in the Middle East, a goal that it pursues in
multiple theatres simultaneously, including the ArabIsraeli arena, where it openly advocates the destruction
of Israel.

The Arab League is fully ready to work with the
Council to achieve the long-desired peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Aboul-Gheit for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Doran.
Mr. Doran: It is an honour to appear before the
Council today to discuss the fiftieth anniversary
of the 1967 war and the current state of ArabIsraeli peacemaking.
Permit me to focus my remarks on the key factors
that prompted Israel to take control of the West Bank in
1967, and to discuss the continued significance of those
factors today.
The 1967 crisis began with a lie. In May of that
year, the Soviet Union falsely accused Israel of massing
troops on the Syrian border. That lie gave Egyptian
president Gamal Abdel Nasser a pretext to overturn
the status quo in Egyptian-Israeli relations. Reacting
to the Soviets’ false claim and recognizing that it was
a green light from Moscow to heat up the Arab-Israeli
conflict, Nasser demanded the immediate departure of
the United Nations Emergency Force from the Sinai
Peninsula. He quickly massed the Egyptian military in
the Sinai, closed the straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping
and organized an anti-Israel coalition with Jordan
and Syria.
Nasser knew full well that Israel would regard
these steps as a casus belli. Indeed, his propaganda
machine boasted that Egypt had given Israel no choice
but to attack, and that, moreover, the destruction of the
Jewish State was imminent, a theme that leaders around
8/29

The Security Council should indeed work to
advance Israeli-Palestinian relations, but, in doing so,
it must avoid policies that work to the advantage of Iran
and its proxies, or that allow the Palestinians to duck
direct negotiations. In recent years, three prevailing
fallacies have prevented the United Nations from
fashioning policies that meet these needs.
The first of is the idea that the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict is the core of the larger Arab-Israeli conflict
and, moreover, a centre of gravity in regional politics.
If Palestinian-Israeli relations were truly so influential,
then we would expect the relations between Israel
and the Arab States to fluctuate in accordance with
changes in Palestinian-Israeli relations. Such a pattern
is not, and never has been, discernable. While Jordan
and Egypt have both found it wise to make peace with
Israel, Syria has refused. No knowledgeable observer
would ever suggest that it was the Palestinian factor that
prompted Syria to reject peace. If Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas
were to sign a peace agreement tomorrow, neither
Syria — nor Iran, for that matter — would honour it.
This point is so self-evident that it hardly seems
worth noting, yet in its discussions of regional peace
and security the United Nations routinely accords
Palestinian-Israeli relations a special status that hardly
seems justified on the basis of objective observation.
At the same time, it has paid comparatively little
attention to, for example, Iran’s arming, training and
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7977

equipping of Hizbullah in contravention of Security
Council resolutions.

withdrawals served only to increase the bloodlust of
Hizbullah and Hamas.

Iran, the Al-Assad regime and Hizbullah have
exploited the fixation of the international community
on Israel to deflect attention from their wider regional
aspirations — aspirations that they are pursuing with
particularly murderous consequences in Syria today.
More people have died in Syria at their hands in the
last six years than have died on both sides in the ArabZionist conflict from its inception in the 1920s until
today. Many more people have been made homeless
in Syria than were ever turned into refugees by the
Arab-Israeli wars. If the United Nations had worked to
deter Iran and its allies in the last five years, how many
Syrian lives would have been saved, and how many
families would have remained safe in their homes?

The lesson was not lost on the Israelis. Any
withdrawal from territory on the West Bank, therefore,
must come with ironclad guarantees of Israeli security.
Given the unsettled state of the region in general, the
advances of the Iranian alliance in Lebanon, Syria,
Iraq and Yemen, the persistence of Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and the split
among the Palestinians between Hamas and Fatah, no
Israeli Government could take severe risks with respect
to Israeli security on the West Bank and still hope to
remain in power.

The second fallacy is the idea that Israeli settlements
on the West Bank are the primary impediment to
peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. The
experience of the George W. Bush Administration, in
which I served, taught us the opposite. It was a relatively
easy matter for a President who is sympathetic to Israel’s
security concerns to convince the Israeli Government
to limit territorial expansion of Israeli settlements.
Early reports coming from the Trump Administration
suggest that President Trump may have reached, or is in
the process of reaching, a similar accommodation with
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
Historically, however, it has proven much harder
to convince the Palestinian Authority to cease its
incitement of its own population, whether through
the naming of squares after terrorists, encouraging
anti-Israeli attacks, glorifying terrorism in children’s
textbooks, or paying Government compensation to
terrorists and their families. The extensive resources
that the United Nations and its Members contribute
to the upkeep of the Palestinian Authority give them a
right to insist that those funds be used to foster a culture
of tolerance based on a vision of two States living side
by side in peace.
The third fallacy is the idea that Israeli intransigence
is the key stumbling block in Arab-Israeli relations,
and that, therefore, Israeli concessions are the key
factor that will create the conditions for a settlement.
The Israeli withdrawals from Lebanon in 2000 and
Gaza in 2005 should have dispelled this idea forever.
Rather than having a calming effect, however, those

Israelis are already intensely aware that in a very
short period of time they might find themselves peering
across the Golan Heights at Iranian soldiers ensconced
in Syria. How can the world ask them to take steps that
could potentially lead to the Iranian penetration of the
West Bank as well?
Those three fallacies foster a general perspective
that places an exaggerated importance on Israeli
actions. It misinterprets the behaviour of Arab and
Muslim actors as a reaction to the Jewish State rather
than as a product of their own regional strategies
and perceptions. It encourages the Security Council,
unconsciously perhaps, to reward the Palestinian
Authority’s efforts to internationalize the conflict — to
look to the United Nations to intercede on its behalf in
negotiations with Israel.
This drift toward internationalization is fraught
with danger. When the United Nations replaces the
Palestinians as the interlocutor with Israel regarding
the final status of the West Bank, it reduces the chances
for peace, because it does nothing to allay the very
real security concerns of Israel. A better path forward
is to urge the Palestinians back to direct negotiations.
While the likelihood that those negotiations will
result in a quick resolution of the final status issues
is small, there is reason to be optimistic about interim
accommodations that are manifestly in the interests of
both sides. The new willingness of Sunni Arab States,
which share Israel’s concerns about Iran, to support
constructive solutions is especially heartening.
I would like again to remind the Security Council
of the example of Gamal Abdel Nasser. A revisionist
school of historiography claims that he never wanted
war in 1967. His best military units were bogged
down in Yemen, his economy was a shambles and his

17-176599/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/06/2017

relations with Jordan and Syria, his putative allies,
were abysmal. Why would a leader in such a precarious
position behave so recklessly?

Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem, little of consequence
has been done to bring about a viable Palestinian State
on those territories.

The revisionists have much of the story correct,
but they miss a crucial factor. Nasser was applying
lessons that he had learned a decade earlier, during the
Suez crisis. Then, as in 1967, he had precipitated a war
that he could not possibly win militarily, but which he
believed he could win politically, because, he gambled,
the super-Powers and the United Nations would
intercede on his behalf. In 1956, that proved a very
smart bet. In 1967, however, it utterly failed — with
disastrous consequences for Egypt — to say nothing of
the Palestinians. How much better would it have been
for all parties if, back in 1956, the United Nations had
insisted that, in return for an Israeli withdrawal from
Egyptian territory, Nasser must grant Israel meaningful
security guarantees?

I am sure that many Council members read Nathan
Thrall’s 2 June article in The New York Times. With
regard to the ongoing occupation, he says that this

The key lesson of the 1967 war is that peace is best
achieved not by United Nations intercession but by
facilitating direct negotiations between the parties.
I thank the Council again for the honour of
addressing it on this important issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I have taken
note of Mr. Doran’s statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brahimi.
Mr. Brahimi: I am deeply grateful to the President
for his kind invitation. I am greatly honoured to be back
in this Chamber, this time as a member of The Elders.
Our founder, Nelson Mandela, was passionate about
Palestine. He spoke about it repeatedly and always
forcefully. He discussed his views with Jewish leaders
in South Africa and the United States, and he thought
he had convinced some of them that his support for the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and freedom was politically and morally right. When
he launched The Elders, he gave our group three
priorities. Palestine was one of them. In response, The
Elders visited Palestine and Israel four times in the
past eight years. Neither Prime Minister Netanyahu
nor any member of his Government has ever agreed
to meet them. We fully share Mandela’s view that the
Palestinians should have their State, that the two States
of Israel and Palestine should live side by side in peace
and that the security of all States in the region should be
assured. The sad reality, however, is that 50 years after
the start of Israel’s occupation of the West Bank, the
10/29

“resilient and eminently sustainable arrangement
has stood on three pillars: American backing,
Palestinian weakness and Israeli indifference.
Together, these three ensure that for the Israeli
Government, continuing its occupation is far less
costly than the concessions required to end it”.
I believe that the article implies that there is a fourth
pillar sustaining the situation, and that is the neartotal paralysis of the Security Council. Which of those
pillars might change in order to break the deadlock?
Apparently, not America’s unconditional support for
Israel. Thrall says,
“Americans are told that Israel will have to
choose, and very soon, to give Palestinians either
citizenship or independence, and choose to either
remain a democracy or become an apartheid State.
Yet none of these groups calls on the United States
to force this supposed imminent choice, no matter
how many times Israel demonstrates that it prefers a
different, far easier option: continued occupation.”
Since 1967, the Palestinian people have endured
grave acts of oppression, violence and collective
punishment. During that time, Israel has built
approximately 125 settlements and more than 100 socalled outposts on occupied Palestinian land, all in
violation of international law. They have placed roughly
650,000 illegal settlers in Palestine, with 350,000 in the
West Bank and 300,000 in East Jerusalem. They have
imprisoned 800,000 Palestinians and destroyed 48,000
homes. They have revoked the residence permits of
250,000 Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza
and more than 14,000 in East Jerusalem. The West Bank
is fragmented by the separation wall and a multitude of
other Israeli-imposed controls that affect Palestinian
dignity and prevent the people from going about their
normal business unhindered.
The Palestinian population is indeed extremely
vulnerable and in desperate need of protection from
the international community. That protection should be
provided for under international law, notably the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Regrettably, however, in the
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian territories today the Geneva Conventions
are referred to more in the breach than the observance.
I would particularly like to draw the Council’s attention
to the dire situation in the Gaza Strip. There, another
dismal milestone is being marked this year, the tenth
anniversary of the imposition of a blockade that
amounts to collective punishment of all of Gaza’s
1.7 million people.
I have participated in only one of The Elders
visits to Gaza, and that was in 2010. The misery in
that unhappy, overcrowded strip of land is difficult to
describe and more difficult to endure. A young woman
student told us,
“Israel put us in a concentration camp. Those who
call themselves our leaders are taking away the air
we breathe”.
Only through the tireless efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, the World Food Programme and
other United Nations agencies, as well as persistent
interventions by the Secretary-General’s Special
Coordinator for the Middle Peace Process, are Gazans
able to survive. But what kind of life is it for them — a
densely crowded environment, half-destroyed cities, no
work, undrinkable water, electricity available for only
a few hours a day when it is available at all, and their
basic humanity robbed by constant humiliation and the
need to depend for survival on the charity of others?
To add insult to injury, the irresponsible failure of
the Palestinian leaders, especially those of Fatah and
Hamas, to reconcile and unite is a huge hindrance both
to the daily life of the people and to the struggle of
civil society, prisoners and others to mobilize national,
regional and international support for the fight
against occupation.
Despite James Wolfensohn’s personal commitment
and commendable efforts, the Quartet achieved little
before the appointment of Mr. Tony Blair, and since
then has been totally absent. As I am sure the Council
knows, many today think that the Quartet has outlived
its usefulness. Nevertheless, there is a crying and
urgent need for the Security Council to play an active
role in that regard. The Council might wish to begin
by organizing a visit of all its members to Israel and
Palestine. Remarkably, considering the longevity of
this issue on the Council’s agenda, and the frequency of
its visits to other conflict zones, there has been no field
visit for many decades. On that trip, the members could

S/PV.7977

take the opportunity to talk to all parties, but above all
to civil-society representatives in Israel and Palestine.
They could thereby see for themselves all the harm
that has been done to the Palestinian people, as well
as what the occupation is doing to the psychological
and moral fibre of the men, women and children of
both the occupying Power and the occupied people.
In that connection, I would like to put on record The
Elders appreciation for the work of the peace movement
in Israel and its brave human rights defenders such
as B’Tselem, Breaking the Silence, and the Israeli
Committee against House Demolition, as well as the
writings of such outstanding authors as Gideon Levy
and Uri Avnery.
If the Council could make such a visit, its members
would see how urgent it is to enforce the many binding
resolutions that the Council has adopted since the June
1967 war, starting with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and including the most recent, resolution 2334
(2016), which focused on the illegality of settlement
building. In that connection, is there any need to remind
the Council that resolution 2334 (2016) is already being
flouted? The recent Israeli Government decision to
legalize the so-called outposts in the West Bank once
again demonstrates its disregard for international law
and the Council’s decisions.
The not-so-discreet contacts of the Israeli Government
with some countries in the region cannot be a substitute
for peace with the Palestinians. Only a genuine, just
solution to the Palestinian problem will open the way
to lasting peace and cooperation between Israel and all
its neighbours.
The Arab Peace Initiative provides a sound basis
for that to happen. Issued at the Arab Summit in
Beirut in 2002, the Initiative has been ignored by the
Israeli Government all these years. Unanimously, Arab
countries called on Israel and all Israelis
“to accept this Initiative in order to safeguard the
prospects for peace and stop the further shedding
of blood, enabling the Arab countries and Israel
to live in peace and good neighbourliness and
provide future generations with security, stability
and prosperity.”
Israeli politicians of the left and of the right and the
media in Israel and civil society routinely speak of the
danger of apartheid. Some warn that their country may
become an apartheid State; others denounce practices
that are already creating an apartheid system. Be that as

17-1765911/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

it may, Palestinians have rights. They have individual
rights like all human beings and they have collective
rights like any other people in the world. And they have
the right to fight for their rights with all the legitimate
means available to them.
The Charter of the United Nations, international
law and international humanitarian law, as well as
all norms of international solidarity, call for effective
support to be given to the legitimate struggle of the
Palestinian people against occupation and oppression.
Such support will in fact help liberate both Palestine
and Israel.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I sincerely thank
Mr. Brahimi, member of The Elders, for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank all
of our briefers who spoke with us today.
First, the United States condemns in the strongest
terms the cowardly terrorist attack last week in
Jerusalem. This stabbing attack left one Israeli border
guard dead and wounded several others. We express our
deepest sympathies to the victims and their families.
The United States reiterates its commitment to stand
with Israel against these forces of terror.
Hamas is one of those forces of terror, which yet
again showed its true colours to the world earlier this
month. It is a terrorist organization so ruthless that it
will not hesitate to put the lives of innocent children
on the line. A few weeks ago, United Nations officials
discovered a tunnel underneath two schools run by the
United Nations in Gaza. It was the exact type of tunnel
that Hamas has used for years. Those tunnels are what
Hamas uses to smuggle in the materials they need to
make rockets or to sneak into Israel to attack civilians
or kidnap them in the dead of night. Imagine children
playing in their schoolyard while Hamas moves
explosives underneath their feet. Imagine children
trying to learn while a few feet below terrorists might
have been crawling towards Israel. All of this was
happening under a building flying a flag of the United
Nations. It is an outrage.
But when we consider Hamas and the other terrorist
organizations that operate in Gaza, the existence of
that tunnel should not be a surprise. This is the way
Hamas does business. Tunnels in heavily populated
civilian areas are its signature. Hamas hides military
12/29

20/06/2017

infrastructure in and around apartment buildings,
hospitals and, as we saw again this month, United
Nations compounds. In this way, Hamas consciously
plots and plans to attack civilians and it uses the cover
of civilian buildings to launch those attacks. It is a sick
and cynical strategy.
There is a terrible humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
We remain a strong supporter of Gaza’s recovery and
reconstruction. I myself was at the Gaza border earlier
this month, where Special Coordinator Mladenov
briefed me on the latest chilling developments. What
is happening to the people of Gaza is heartbreaking,
and it is so preventable. Gaza is prime real estate on
the Mediterranean Sea. It has enormous potential, but
the potential is being squandered by the terrorists who
govern it.
Make no mistake: Israel did not cause the problems
in Gaza, even though it is often the usual suspect around
here. Ten years ago every Israeli soldier was withdrawn
from Gaza, and for the past 10 years, there has not been
a single Israeli settler in Gaza. Other outside countries
and political factions are also not the cause of Gaza’s
problems. We all would like to see Palestinians in Gaza
receive the aid they so desperately need, and we will
continue to work to find avenues to get aid safely to
them. But we should never forget that the responsibility
for this humanitarian crisis rests squarely with the one
group that actually controls Gaza: Hamas.
Hamas has exercised control over Gaza since 2007.
After 10 years of Hamas rule, life for the people of Gaza
is worse than ever before. Rather than govern, Hamas
chooses to devote its resources to building a terrorist
arsenal. Rather than pursuing peace, Hamas chooses to
provoke destructive wars. Rather than allowing help to
reach the Palestinian people, Hamas chooses to divert
untold amounts of aid to feed its military enterprise.
I saw how this works firsthand. I walked through
one of the terrorist tunnels coming out of the Gaza
Strip, which Israel discovered and has since secured.
The top and sides of the tunnel were lined with solid,
sturdy concrete. We know how badly Palestinians in
Gaza need concrete to rebuild their homes. But there,
in that tunnel, we see how Hamas uses the concrete
Gaza receives — not to help the people, but to fortify
its terrorist infrastructure. Hamas remains a terrorist
organization bent on Israel’s destruction. Its goal is to
defeat Israel by force. It will use all the resources it can
to continue the fight.
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7977

The Security Council must stand up to condemn
Hamas’ terror. Hamas represents yet another regional
threat that the Council far too often ignores. While
United Nations agencies and Member States dissect
Israel’s actions, few speak out against the terror that
Hamas continues to plot. Some States Members of the
Organization even maintain ties to Hamas and other
terrorist groups that flourish in Gaza.

anyone who has seen what I saw — the current terrorist
activity in that area — would understand that every
ounce of what we say in the Council, pitting the two
sides against each other, is only strengthening the
terrorists. Every ounce of what we do should combat
Hamas. They are a dangerous actor that has no care
for the Palestinians, no care for the Israelis, and is
determined to destroy everything in their path.

The Security Council must unite to say that enough
is enough. We need to pressure Hamas to end its tyranny
over the people of Gaza. We should condemn Hamas
in the Council’s resolutions and statements. We should
name Hamas as the group responsible when rockets are
fired from Gaza or when fresh tunnels are discovered.
And we should designate Hamas as a terrorist
organization in a resolution, with consequences for
anyone who continues to support it. That is how we can
help build a more peaceful Middle East, and how we
can fulfil our responsibility on the Council to actually
maintain international peace and security. And while
we must do whatever we can to ease the suffering of
the people in Gaza, we must also recognize that the
suffering will not be fully addressed until the terrorists
lose their grip on power.

Once again, we are having this meeting, and once
again we will hear speeches on whether a country is
for Israel, against Israel, for Palestinians or against
Palestinians. But I would ask that each country address
the real threat that is causing so many people harm — the
threat of Hamas.

All States have a role to play here. We must do
much more to show Hamas that we will never tolerate
terrorism. We must show that when Hamas uses homes
and schools to hide its terrorist infrastructure, there
will be consequences. Those who give Hamas the arms,
money and political support to operate must cease. And
if they do not, Member States of the United Nations
need to come together to put real pressure on supporters
of Hamas to stop. Together, we can show Hamas that
their terrorist tactics will lead only to more isolation.
Together, we can show Hamas that their terrorist tactics
will fail. We should act now, before Hamas puts the
people of Gaza at risk again by building more tunnels
under their feet.
I want to conclude by saying that I spent a lot of
time in Israel and also in Palestinian areas. I spoke
with Israeli and Palestinian leaders. I went to schools
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. I went to every
border of Israel. I saw the threats. There are threats that
completely surround Israel from every single side.
The Council can go and do what it always
does — pick a side, bashing either Israel or the
Palestinian Authority. That will get us nowhere. But

Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming our briefers this morning and I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov for
his second report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) and for all his tireless work.
As each briefer made clear, the Middle East
continues to face an unrelenting human tragedy of
multiple conflicts and rising tensions. For many in
the region, it is a tragedy that has gone on for over
half a century. We recognize that the anniversary of
the Six-Day War holds great significance for all sides
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. For Israelis, it marks
the anniversary of a war from which Israel emerged
victorious against all the odds. For Palestinians, it
marks an enduring tragedy of 50 years of occupation,
50 years without self-determination.
Let us be clear: half a century of Israeli occupation
in the West Bank and Gaza is a tragedy for all sides — a
tragedy for Palestinians, who yearn for independence,
and a tragedy for Israelis, who yearn for peace and
security. It is a tragedy that has been exploited, with
terrorist groups such as Hamas and Hizbullah cynically
manipulating the narrative of occupation for their
own ends.
So many decades of violence, loss, anger and
hate only prove that conflicts cannot be managed
or contained in perpetuity. This year we must move
towards peace, with the support of the region and
the international community, rather than towards an
uncertain and dangerous future. Support for a twoState solution is the only way to ensure a just and lasting
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. If we are
to make that a reality, it is incumbent upon both sides

17-1765913/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/06/2017

to refrain from any steps that damage the prospects of
a two-State solution.

humanitarian situation in Gaza with over 65,000 people
currently displaced.

That means the people of Israel must live free from
the scourge of terrorism and anti-Semitic incitement,
which gravely undermine the prospects for a two-State
solution. We condemn the horrific murder of Hadas
Malka, a 23-year-old Israeli policewoman last Friday.
We condemn the recent discovery of part of a tunnel
passing under two United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East schools
in Gaza. We call on Hamas to renounce violence and
dismantle its tunnel network. They cannot be allowed
to pose a threat to Israel’s security.

The ongoing energy crisis is particularly concerning.
Energy supplying Gaza will soon fall to just three
hours per day. That is having a serious humanitarian
impact, disrupting basic services, including water
treatment and essential medical operations. This latest
crisis underlines the need for de-escalation, dialogue
and a durable agreement between Palestinian actors
that results in the Palestinian Authority’s full control
over the Gaza Strip.

If the two-State solution is to become a reality,
it also must mean Israel refraining from further
settlement expansion. Only last week, the United
Kingdom’s Foreign Secretary condemned Israel’s
latest announcement to build over 3,000 settlement
units throughout the West Bank. The number of units
planned for construction this year is now at its highest
in a quarter of a century. Those moves undermine the
physical viability of two States for two peoples.
Despite those challenges, the United Kingdom’s
long-standing position on the Middle East peace
process remains clear and unchanged. We support a
negotiated settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
State based on 1967 borders — with agreed land swaps,
with Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States and
a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.
But that vision has proved elusive for far too long.
The changing regional context in converging Arab and
Israeli interests presents a unique opening to develop
Arab-Israeli relations and create the conditions for
serious Israeli-Palestinian talks to resume. With that in
mind, we welcome the reaffirmation of the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States of the Arab Peace
Initiative here today. We must support the leadership
and engagement that President Trump and his
Administration have demonstrated in reinvigorating
the Middle East peace process.
We call on the region, Israelis and Palestinians to
seize the opportunity that this presents and turn 2017
not just into another anniversary of occupation but a
new anniversary of peace. We cannot afford to fail.
As Special Coordinator Mladenov made clear, there
is an urgent need to address the dire and deteriorating
14/29

Before I conclude, let me turn briefly to the
situation in Lebanon. We welcome the new electoral law,
ratified by the Lebanese Parliament on 16 June. It is an
important milestone towards continued governance and
stability, which paves the way for new elections. But
we must not forget the importance of ensuring stability
flowing across the whole of Lebanon. In that regard, we
are concerned about the increase in Hizbullah rhetoric
along Lebanon’s southern border and we call on both
sides to abide by resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559
(2004). Renewed conflict is in neither side’s interest. We
call on all actors to take steps to de-escalate tensions.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
all of the briefers for their contributions this morning,
particularly the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and I
assure him of the full support of Uruguay in carrying
out his work.
Uruguay welcomes the presentation of the second
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We regret that there is no accompanying written report,
as it contains a great deal of information that requires
a careful reading. As such, we must now wait two or
three days for the oral version to be transcribed into
the Security Council meetings records. We do not
understand why no written report was submitted and
why we must wait for the records to be published.
Fifty years of war. Fifty years marred by violence,
serious military clashes, terrorist attacks, abductions,
killings and the death of tens of thousands of innocent
civilians, as well as the suffering of millions. The roots
of this conflict stretch far back into the pages of history.
The people’s hopes of living in peace and security were
dashed by inequality, lack of opportunities, intolerance
and mutual accusations in which one side is always
right and acts properly and the other side is wrong and
acts perversely.
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Thus, tensions mounted every few years and clashes
resulted in maximum destruction and death. Until one
day, perhaps exhausted by the pointless shedding of
so much blood and having understood that they could
continue for years without either party emerging
victorious, they had the courage to cease hostilities, sit
down for talks and opt for peace.
It is clear that I am talking about the peace process
in Colombia. Members will ask why I am referring
today to Colombia. The answer is simple. Colombia
best exemplifies that peace can be achieved after a long
conflict if the parties involved show a real and firm
commitment to negotiate and reach an agreement and
have the courage to risk everything so as to abide by
the agreement.
The Peace Agreement in Colombia sent a powerful
message of hope throughout the world at a time when
numerous armed conflicts continued to take place,
including one of the most prolonged and complex of
them, which has confronted Israel and Palestine for the
past 70 years.
The United Nations and the Security Council
have stood witness to the conflict between Israel
and Palestine since its inception. For seven decades,
unilateral, regional and multilateral efforts have been
made to advance peace in the Middle East. There
have been moments of real hope and milestones, such
as the Oslo Accords, the Quartet’s road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative, among others, whereby it seems
that the progress achieved is rapidly dissolved by the
decisions and actions of one or both parties, thereby
heightening tensions and only encouraging the most
extremist positions.
Regrettably, for years, we have witnessed an
unsustainable situation that risks voiding efforts made
thus far to achieve peace. In that context, six months ago,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016),
aimed at stabilizing and reversing negative trends on
the ground that jeopardize the prospects of peace and
the two-State solution. It was a clear demonstration
of the importance that the international community
places on the peaceful and successful conclusion of this
process. Despite that, to date, Israel has stepped up its
announcements to continue its settlement policy in the
occupied territories, which flouts that resolution and
resolution 242 (1967), which affirms that the acquisition
of territory by force is inadmissible.

S/PV.7977

Similarly, the continuation of violent incidents and
terrorist attacks, the silence of complicity, the lack
of censure and punishment in connection with their
incitement and glorification and the incomprehensible
policy of financially compensating the families of
prisoners or those who die in the commission of such
acts does not in any way advance peace by seriously
placing in jeopardy the possibility of achieving the
two-State solution. Uruguay has condemned and will
continue to condemn such acts vigorously.
Together with the overwhelming majority of the
international community, Uruguay strongly supports
the solution of two independent States and is convinced
that that is the only option that will lead to the peaceful
coexistence of Israel and Palestine. For that to happen,
the parties will have to facilitate conditions for finding
a negotiated settlement that is mutually acceptable and
resolves pending issues related to the conflict.
As we have done unequivocally since 1947, we
once again reaffirm our unconditional support for the
right of Israel and Palestine to live in peace, within
secure and recognized borders and in an atmosphere of
renewed cooperation, free of any threats or actions that
would jeopardize peace.
It is essential to reverse current trends on the
ground that will make establishing a Palestinian State
extremely difficult. It is also necessary that the Israeli
and Palestinian authorities fulfil their obligations
under international law and pursuant to the Council’s
resolutions and send a clear political message so as to
break free from the vicious cycle of mutual mistrust.
After the 70 years during which Israel established
itself as an integrated and modern State and a full
Member of the Organization, Palestine continues to face
serious difficulties in connection with its development,
international integration and consolidation of its
territory, which entail serious repercussions for its
people and increased tensions in the entire region.
Furthermore, the Israeli occupation of territories,
which constitutes a clear violation of international law
and the relevant resolutions of the Council, has also
contributed to causing a serious humanitarian situation
for the Palestinians remaining in those territories and
for those seeking refuge in other countries of the region.
That is a historical injustice that must be righted by the
parties with the support of international community
and the Council.

17-1765915/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Uruguay welcomes all international, regional and
unilateral initiatives that will allow for progress in the
quest for solutions in the peace process in the Middle
East so as to achieve a peaceful, fair, negotiated and
lasting solution in line with international law, thereby
enshrining the legitimate aspirations of both parties.
We continue to call on both parties to resume direct
bilateral negotiations as soon as possible without
preconditions as an essential step towards achieving
peace and the two-State solution — a goal shared by
the vast majority of Israelis and Palestinians and denied
to them thus far by their leaders.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his video briefing. I
also thank Secretary-General Aboul-Gheit, Mr. Brahimi
and Mr. Doran for their presence and briefings.
The question of Palestine has dragged on for years
and has defied resolutions owing to its complexity.
Palestine and Israel have been neighbours for ever,
and their lots are closely linked. They in effect share
a common destiny. Only by resolving disputes and
differences through dialogue and consultations and
turning their swords into ploughshares will they be able
to find an answer to the Palestinian question and the
more fundamental issues concerning the Middle East.
The international community should act with a
renewed sense of urgency and collectively shoulder
the responsibility of defending the legitimate rights
and interests of the Palestinian people. There is an
urgent need for both sides to exercise restraint and take
concrete actions to resume peace talks without delay so
as to realize the two-State solution as soon as possible.
First, an independent State of Palestine and the
peaceful coexistence between Palestine and Israel
is the correct path for the efforts of the international
community. The establishment of a fully sovereign
State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders with East
Jerusalem as its capital is the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people, as well as the key to resolving the
Palestinian question. Based on the principle of land-forpeace, the two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, all
parties should determinedly promote the peace process.
Secondly, both sides should continue to demonstrate
good will and resume talks without delay in line with
the interests of the two peoples. Both sides should
effectively implement resolution 2334 (2016) and, in
both words and actions, demonstrate their sincerity
16/29

20/06/2017

to return to peace talks and rebuild trust. Violence
directed against innocent civilians must stop. Israel
should cease its settlement expansion and its closure of
the Gaza Strip, and, at the same time, step up efforts to
improve the livelihoods of the Palestinian people.
Thirdly, the international community should build
consensus and synergy, which are an indispensable
external condition for resolving the Palestinian issue.
China welcomes the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and countries
with influence as they play a greater role and step up
their efforts with both parties to consolidate the will for
peace talks and build momentum. The leading role of
the United Nations should be brought into full play and
any results of such efforts should be endorsed by the
Security Council.
China supports all international efforts aimed
at promoting peace between Palestine and Israel.
Recently, the relevant parties engaged in diplomatic
efforts to promote the resumption of talks. We hope
that both parties will continue their positive response in
order to relaunch negotiations at an early date. China is
a staunch supporter of the just cause of the Palestinian
people and an active mediator for peace between
Palestine and Israel. In 2013, Chinese President Xi
Jinping put forward a four-point proposal for resolving
the Palestinian issue. In 2016, Foreign Minister Wang
Yi proposed three steps and deadlines for relaunching
the peace process. China’s Special Envoy on the Middle
East Issue recently visited Palestine and Israel to
encourage both sides to meet each other halfway. China
is ready to step up its efforts with all relevant parties
to promote an early, comprehensive and just solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli issue so as to realize peace and
stability in the Middle East.
Today, 20 June, is World Refugee Day. The
international community should not forget the plight of
millions of Palestinian refugees and should continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to them. We commend
and support the efforts of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and laud the refugee-receiving countries on their
contributions. China will continue to provide assistance
to Palestine, including by helping Palestine to achieve
social and economic development under the framework
of the Belt and Road Initiative.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mladenov,
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General;
His Excellency Mr. Aboul-Gheit, Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States; and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
member of The Elders, for their detailed briefings.
The fiftieth anniversary of Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory on the West Bank of the Jordan
River and the Gaza Strip occurs at a time of turbulent
transformation of the Middle East and North Africa.
Russia condemns terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations. We are outraged and express our
condolences to all who have fallen victim to such
heinous crimes.
With the rise of international terrorism to the
centre stage of global affairs as the main threat, the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict has been unfairly pushed
into the background. In that adverse context, the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict continues to deepen. The
two-State prospect is waning. Rather than addressing
it, destabilizing factors fraught with risk of escalation
have only worsened. They now loom large over Gaza.
The absence of a political horizon is due to a chronic
stalemate in the peace process. It has reinforced a sense
of despair for the average person, first and foremost in
Palestine. As a consequence, radicals have been given
additional room for manoeuvre.
Russia’s position on the Middle East conflict has
remained guided by principle and consistency. We
firmly believe that a just solution to the Palestinian
problem is of key importance for improving the
situation in the entire region. If not solved, the ongoing
conflict between Israel and Palestine will continue
to taint international affairs, frustrate efforts to
settle other regional crises and fuel terrorism. In that
regard, we advocate a comprehensive, fair and lasting
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict on the basis
of international law. That includes Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which was
just affirmed by His Excellency Mr. Aboul-Gheit.
We are sure that a lasting solution to the conflict
can be found through direct talks between sides,
without preconditions. Such talks should lead to an end
to Israel’s occupation of Arab land that began in 1967.
They should lead to the creation of an independent,
viable Palestinian State with contiguous borders,
existing side by side in peace with Israel, within safe
and recognized borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital and West Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

S/PV.7977

We see no alternative to the two-State solution. We
believe that it is the only realistic manner in which to
halt the face-off between Israel and Palestine and the
claims they levy against each another. We call upon
Palestinians and Israelis to refrain from using violence
and unilateral actions that might skew the outcome
of the peace process. That pertains to the building of
Israeli settlements on occupied Palnestinian territory.
We are sure that, more than ever today, there is a need
to take practical steps to break the dangerous deadlock
in the peace process.
To that end, we continue to make efforts to bring
about the resumption of direct political dialogue
between Palestinians and Israelis, bilaterally and in
other formats. Our initiative to convene a meeting
between President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu in Moscow remains on the table. We would
like to see a speedy resumption of activity from the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators. Let us
not forget about the issue of inter-Palestinian divisions.
Regrettably, such divisions are also at their 10-year
mark. Effectively overcoming divisions on the basis
of the political platform of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative is in line
with the national interests of all Palestinians and will
serve to improve the situation in Gaza and create a
sound basis for the success of a future political process.
Russia is making its contribution to reinstating
Palestinian unity and notes the efforts of other States,
in particular the Arab Republic of Egypt.
We would like to call the attention of the Security
Council to the fact that the destabilization of the
situation in the Middle East and North Africa has a
most serious impact on the Christians living there and
on other religious and ethnic minorities. Extremists
draw upon ethnic and religious factors to incite hatred
and fill their own ranks. Russia continues its efforts
to curb attacks on Christians and other minorities, as
well as to prevent the fragmentation of civilizations
and religions. That is the very lens through which we
should consider the joint statement of February last
year issued by Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and all Rus’
and Pope Francis in Havana. It was an appeal to take
swift steps to halt the mass exodus of Christians from
Middle Eastern countries. That was also the goal of the
7 April Tashkent joint statement issued by the Foreign
Ministers of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
with regard to the inadmissibility of discrimination and

17-1765917/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

intolerance against Christians, Muslims and membersof
other religions.
History has many nuances but one thing remains
clear. We established the Security Council to bring
Member States together, not divide them. Today’s
review of the situation in the Middle East underscores an
indisputable fact — resolving the numerous problems,
new and old, in this long-suffering region is possible
only through political and diplomatic means and
collective efforts. A choice must be made for dialogue
and engagement, rather than isolation and animosity.
We think that pooling cooperation between the Security
Council and the League of Arab States would serve this
cause. The joint meeting between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States in Cairo in May 2016
created a necessary foundation for these endeavours.
However, we must realize that the situation in the
Middle East can be improved only with the formation of
a broad front of States working to suppress the terrorist
threat. Today the relevant initiative — presented by the
President of Russia, Mr. Vladimir Putin, to the General
Assembly in September 2015 (see A/70/PV.13) — is
gaining even more relevance. Russia stands ready to
engage in collective work, and it is in constant contact
with all States of the region.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our
appreciation to the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his
comprehensive and objective briefing. We also thank all
the invited briefers for their thoughtful and important
contribution to this significant issue.
As we continue to witness unprecedented, grave
crises in the Middle East, which have been a major
destabilizing factor in global security for five decades,
we believe that now is the time to seriously address
those issues. Kazakhstan’s position on the Middle
East process is crystal clear and remains unchanged.
We support negotiations that would result in a twoState solution and call for the prompt resumption of
such negotiations, especially in the bilateral format,
without preconditions. The ultimate goal should be
the restoration and promotion of the peace process, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1067) and 338 (1973),
the Madrid principles, the land for peace formula and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
Kazakhstan strongly believes that the Security
Council and individual United Nations institutions
should work together to develop a new, more detailed
18/29

20/06/2017

road map reflecting the demands and wishes of Israelis
and Palestinians. Such a road map could help to
facilitate direct talks between the sides. There should
be a stop to settlement enlargement on the Palestinian
territories, which could lead to a new cycle of violence
that nobody wants.
My country underscores the importance of
achieving inter-Palestinian unity. There should be
a unified Palestinian voice in negotiations with
Israel and the international community. The difficult
humanitarian situation in the region, which includes,
inter alia, extreme poverty, growing unemployment
and the chronic economic backwardness of Gaza,
contributes to instability and frustration, which can,
in turn, create conditions that lead to the resumption
of the conflict. Kazakhstan is particularly concerned
about the gravity of the Palestinian situation and calls
for urgent international action to mitigate suffering.
The blockades and checkpoints imposed on Gaza
only aggravate the social, economic and humanitarian
situation and diminish the prospects for peace.
We welcome and support Israel’s decision to
provide some economic concessions to the Palestinians
to facilitate and ease the conditions of daily living in
the territory of the Palestinian Authority.
Finally, Kazakhstan is convinced that the efforts of
the co-sponsors of the peace process, international and
regional organizations, as well as the good will of all
sides and actors in the negotiating process, should bring
a political solution to the Middle East.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would also
like to thank the briefers for their informative briefings.
I appreciate Mr. Mladenov’s briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
deals with prominent obstacles to achieving just
and sustainable peace in the region. I would like to
stress that the resolution must be taken as a whole,
and all efforts must contribute to the re-launching of
political dialogue, which is a fundamental method of
conflict resolution.
Japan continues to support a two-State solution
based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed swaps,
in a way that will achieve the peaceful co-existence of
a viable Palestinian State and Israel within secure and
recognized borders. The obstacles mentioned in the
resolution continue to exist and hamper the peace process.
In the last three months, we heard announcements of
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the building of a new settlement, and the expansion of
housing units within existing settlements in the West
Bank. Japan remains firm in its position that settlement
activities are in violation of international law, and has
repeatedly called upon the Government of Israel to
fully freeze settlement activities.
Cases of violence, such as the shooting and stabbing
attack in the vicinity of the Old City of Jerusalem last
week, cannot be justified for any reason. Such attacks
intensify the cycle of violence, and Japan is concerned
about the further cases of violence that followed. Japan
condemns all acts of violence and rejects incitement and
the glorification of violence, as they are fundamentally
incompatible with a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
In that regard, Japan is increasingly concerned about the
deteriorating situation in Gaza, which was mentioned
by Mr. Mladenov in his briefing. Extreme power
shortages in Gaza are affecting every aspect of human
life, including health, water, sanitation and municipal
services. Desperation and frustration felt on the ground
may cause a further unstable security situation, and the
risk is increasing as we speak today. The crisis points to
the importance of promoting reconciliation among the
Palestinians. Furthermore, it points to the importance
of working towards easing and eventually lifting the
Gaza blockade, while duly taking security concerns
into account.
Japan, for its part, has provided economic
assistance worth $34 million to Palestine so far this
year, half of which is used to assist the livelihood of the
people of Gaza. Resolution 2334 (2016) also calls upon
the parties to exert collective efforts to launch credible
negotiations on final-status issues. Japan appreciates
the efforts made by various parties to promote dialogue
between the parties. We are especially encouraged by
the dialogue between the United States and the relevant
parties at the highest levels, and believe that it is
essential to promoting the peace process.
Japan is contributing to confidence-building efforts
between the Israelis and the Palestinians, which will
form the basis for credible negotiations. The Jericho
Agro-Industrial Park, which is celebrating its tenth
anniversary, currently hosts six Palestinian firms,
creating jobs on the ground. This was only possible
because of cooperation among Japan, Israel, Palestine
and Jordan. Through cooperation, mutual trust is
fostered and the know-how of economic development is
gained. There is potential to enhance the collaborative
nature of the project. We are currently encouraging

S/PV.7977

other States to visit the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park
and to consider the participation of private-sector firms
in the project.
Fifty years of occupation and nearly 70 years of
unresolved conflict should remind all of us of the heavy
cost incurred in the region and of the opportunities
that were missed. Japan reiterates that peace would
unlock new political, economic, security and cultural
opportunities, to the benefit of the region and beyond.
To that end, Japan will continue its engagement through
political dialogue with the parties, confidence-building
in the region and economic assistance to the Palestinians.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit; the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov;
and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for their briefings and for
their tireless efforts striving for peace. I also thank
Mr. Michael Doran for sharing his perspective with the
Council today.
This month marks 50 years since the 1967 SixDay War, which resulted in the occupation of the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, Gaza and the Syrian
Golan. Since then, the Palestinian question has rarely
been far from the top of the Council’s agenda, with
the Council, in successive resolutions, calling for the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East that includes the withdrawal of Israel from the
occupied territories.
The hardships faced by generations of Palestinians
during the Israeli occupation are numerous, not least
for those forced to leave their homes to seek refuge
elsewhere. The United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
has supported Palestinian refugees since 1950, now
faces a chronically difficult financial situation. As a
major donor to the Agency, Sweden fully supports the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
recent report on sustainable funding. To mobilize the
much-needed political and financial support, we look
forward to hosting a high-level meeting, together with
Jordan and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
on 21 September during this year’s session of the
General Assembly.
Today I would like to make three points on what we
believe is needed now to move forward.

17-1765919/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

First, the international community remains clear in
its stance on the occupation and the need for a two-State
solution. But we must act before it is too late; otherwise,
the solution that the Council is striving for — two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security — will move beyond our reach, resulting
in a one-State reality and perpetual occupation.
A renewed peace effort between Israelis and
Palestinians is needed. After decades of violence and
suffering that has affected both sides, this anniversary
reminds us that the parties alone are not able to resolve
the conflict. Together with the Israelis and Palestinians,
the international community and the Council have a
responsibility to remain engaged to end the occupation
and achieve peace.
The United States has always played a leading role in
efforts to resolve the conflict. United States leadership
to revive the peace process is key, and we welcome the
efforts made by the United States Administration in
this regard.
Regional partners also have a key role to play. The
Arab Peace Initiative, as Secretary-General AboulGheit has outlined today, is essential. Any regional
effort should build on this initiative, as it could
contribute to a new dynamic benefiting all actors.
The support and active engagement of the people
directly affected, particularly the youth of Israel and
Palestine, is also much needed. Generations have
grown up shaped by recurring cycles of violence and
retribution. People-to-people contacts are now at a
record low. Sweden, actively engaged with civil society
in both Israel and Palestine, calls for a re-engagement
with young people, in line with resolution 2250 (2015),
and the revival of a public debate on the prospects for
peace and a two-State solution. We must show the postOslo generation that there is an alternative to violence
and occupation; after all, it is their future that is at stake.
The purpose of Sweden’s recognition of Palestine was
to contribute to making the parties less unequal and to
give hope and belief in the future to young Palestinians
and Israelis alike.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
is deteriorating by the day. The civilian population,
particularly women and children, is bearing the brunt of
the suffering. The decision of the Israeli Government,
with the consent of the Palestinian Authority, to further
reduce electricity supplies to Gaza is adding to the
suffering and risks, leading to a dangerous escalation.
20/29

20/06/2017

A new conflict in Gaza would be in no one’s interest,
and we must prevent it from happening. We continue
to call on all Palestinian factions to engage, in good
faith, in a reconciliation process leading to a unified
Palestinian leadership and a reunification of Gaza with
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Thirdly, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
quarterly report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). The resolution contains clear messages to
both parties, and both parties have a duty to implement
its provisions, including by ensuring accountability
for acts of violence against civilians. The continued
construction and expansion of settlements as well as
violence and acts of provocation will, if not reversed,
render the two-State solution impossible.
It is therefore vital that the issue of settlements
be addressed without delay. As clearly stated by the
Council, settlements in occupied territory constitute
a flagrant violation of international law and a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution.
Furthermore, in resolution 2334 (2016), the Security
Council reiterated its demand that Israel immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities.
The recent Israeli announcement of the
construction of 3,000 new settlement units is worrying
and contradicts Israel’s commitment to the two-State
solution. In line with resolution 2334 (2016), we also
call on all States to distinguish between the territory of
the State of Israel and the territories occupied in 1967
in their dealings.
Ending the occupation will improve the lives of
both Israelis and Palestinians as well as contribute to
wider peace and security in the region. This must be
our common goal. The Council must stand ready to
assist, and we must spare no effort.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I should like to thank you and your
country for your initiative of holding a meeting of the
Security Council to mark the fiftieth anniversary of
the Israeli occupation of Arab territory, particularly
Palestinian and Syrian territory. I thank Mr. Ahmed
Aboul-Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, with whom I have had the honour and privilege
of working here in the United Nations in a previous
capacity, and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for the very
comprehensive briefings they delivered to the Council.
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Today’s meeting indeed represents an important
fresh appeal for peace in the Middle East based
primarily on resolving the core issue in the region,
that is, the Palestinian question. Our discussions today
have served to remind the world of the outlines for a
resolution to this issue, in particular the need to put an
end to the longest-standing occupation in the modern
history of humankind, an occupation that began on
5 June 1967.
The sheer length of the occupation of the
Palestinian territories and the decades-long absence of
justice for the Palestinian people has led many to doubt
the effectiveness of the international Organization, the
international system as a whole and the Security Council
in preserving and upholding the rights enshrined in
the Charter of this House, as well as to deliver on the
purposes that led to the creation of the United Nations,
that is, the right of peoples to self-determination.
Some are questioning the effectiveness of
addressing this issue within the United Nations going
forward, saying that this hinders prospects for a genuine
resolution or represents an attempt to impose a fait
accompli on certain parties. We reiterate that the actions
of the United Nations, including the Security Council,
have never, since the very outbreak of the crisis, had
the purpose of acting as an aggressor against, isolating
or besieging a State or of detracting from its legality.
Rather, the goal has been to complement the efforts
made by the Organization for the past 70 years, since it
decided to establish two States: Israel, which has been
duly established, and the second, which we hope will
soon enjoy full sovereignty over its own territory.
We have never asked the United Nations to, or
hoped that it would, impose a solution, which would be
unrealistic and impossible. We remain convinced that
negotiations remain the best means of bringing about a
just and lasting peace in the region.
Until a peace agreement is reached, our international
Organization must remain the key organ with respect
to, and the legitimate guarantor of, the inalienable legal
rights of the Palestinian people and the parameters for
the hoped-for negotiations.
Against that backdrop, we would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his very comprehensive
briefing this morning. We would also like to thank him
for having presented the second report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), and his comments on the resolution’s provisions

S/PV.7977

and parameters. We have followed very closely and with
a great deal of interest the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) and we would call upon both parties — once
again, the Palestinian and Israeli sides — to listen very
carefully to Mr. Mladenov, to be guided by him, to
implement the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) and
to refrain from any unilateral measures, in particular the
current unprecedented and illegal settlement activity we
are seeing in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
risks the prospects for the two-State solution. We would
also recall the various Security Council resolutions that
set out the key parameters agreed by the international
community, in particular the two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
We thank all those who are working on the
humanitarian track to try mitigate the suffering of the
Palestinian people in that territory, and indeed outside
the borders of this territory, namely, those who are
refugees. These humanitarian workers provide crucial
services to successive generations of Palestinians
who have known no other fate than the occupation
and its nefarious practices. We particularly thank the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which, for a
long time now, has provided services to millions of
Palestinian refugees.
I call upon all current stakeholders concerend to
work to overcome the financial crisis facing UNRWA
via the options put forward by the Secretary-General in
his report. Mitigating the suffering of the Palestinians
under the boot of occupation is the very least that the
international community should and could do currently.
It would be a key step forward towards a definitive
solution of the question, and failing to do so would have
a very adverse impact.
In the past, some have tried to relieve the suffering
of the Palestinian people through partial solutions,
which is how they have tried to heal the wounds, but
this has essentially been a cover for preserving the
status quo. An attempt to preserve things as they
currently stand will only have the impact of leading
to greater division, discord and deterioration of the
relationship between the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, and it will also lead to the further embedding
of a de facto situation that jeopardizes a bright future
for both parties, including the Palestinians. The right
to live in safety is the right of all peoples in the region,
including, we acknowledge, the right of the Israelis to
live in peace within their duly agreed borders and in the

17-1765921/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

framework of a policy of good-neighbourliness with the
States in the region, particularly the Arab States, which
are Israel’s neighbours.
But I am sure that members of the Council will also
agree with me that the equality of rights of all peoples
is the bedrock of justice and stability. All must enjoy
full equality. It is impossible to imagine peace, security
and prosperity being enjoyed by these people as long as
the suffering of the Palestinian people continues.
A reduction in the levels of violence, which are
very high in this conflict, even when compared with
other conflicts in the region, means grappling with the
importance of the Palestinian issue, really giving it is
just due and understanding the risks that surround it.
But those who believe that the Palestinian question is
any way lesser than other conflicts in the region are
mistaken in that belief. We believe that dealing with the
Palestinian question is vital for the freedom of millions
of people around the world, including in particular
people in the region. It would also be upholding justice
as it is truly to be seen on the global stage.
The injustices meted out for so long now against the
Palestinian people are evidence of a most deeply rooted
crisis and point to dysfunction in terms of the delivery
of justice in this region. We must always keep this
background in mind and remember that this has been
the truth for some time now, as the Palestinian people
have aspired to freedom and liberty for so long, having
been forced out of their homes, faced with destruction,
forced to live as prisoners, blockaded and separated
from one another physically, given that their territory is
physically divided between the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, which has become a ticking time bomb. We must
bear in the mind the successive generations for whom
this has been the plight, who have been imprisoned in
this way throughout their lives without any political
solution in sight that might allow them to dare to hope
for a brighter future.
I do not want to touch upon, or give any weight to, the
jumble of facts that we heard in today’s meeting during
the intervention by one of the speakers. That speaker
ignored the injustice endured by the Palestinians and
the seizure of their land during the period from 1948
to 1967, and even before the capture of the West Bank
and Jerusalem. He also ignored the global movement
that President Nasser led against colonialism all over
the world, especially in Africa and in the Arab World.
22/29

20/06/2017

We are not here to discuss historical facts full
of conflicts. I am deeply surprised that the speaker
ignored the fact that Egypt was the first country to
conclude a peace treaty with Israel. I am also surprised
at his boldness in justifying the occupation of others’
land by force and at his support for the ongoing forced
deportation, demolition of houses and crimes against
humanity committed by Israel against Palestinians
for decades. Regrettably, that extremist approach for
justifying crimes is in itself capable of rekindling
conflicts once again, despite all efforts towards peace.
The historic appeal launched by the Arab States
remains the best proof that we are commited to the
principles of peace as upheld by the international
community, and we see it as the basis for ending the
conflict and ushering in a land of peace. The most recent
Arab League Summit reiterated the determination
of the Heads of State and Government in the region
to stand behind the Arab Peace Initiative, as they
marked the fiftieth anniversary of the occupation of the
Palestinian territory.
We would like to reiterate our congratulations to
the United States Government for its determination to
find a lasting solution to this issue. Egypt will support
those to forge contacts with Israeli and Palestinian
partners so that this laudable goal may be achieved.
Finally, it is high time for those who have a stake in
this conflict to understand that the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples share a common destiny and a common future,
as they live side by side. The aspirations of the two
peoples are for peace and security, and those aspirations
can be met only by accepting the reality that the two
peoples are neighbours and that they must therefore
live side by side and coexist as two independent States
living in peace — an Israeli State and a Palestinian
State, whose capital would be Al-Quds Al-Sharif — on
the basis of the 1967 borders.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank all the
briefers for their contributions to today’s debate.
Before delivering my statement, I wish to condemn
in the strongest terms last Friday’s terror attack in
Jerusalem and the murder of the Israeli police officer
Hadas Malka. We wish to extend our sympathy to the
victims of the attack and to their families.
Fifty years have passed since the 1967 war.
There must be no room for fatalism or resignation.
On the country, this anniversary must reinforce our
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

collective resolve to work for a peace deal between
Israelis and Palestinians. Regardless of the length
of the historical controversy or the complexity of the
geopolitical situation, where there is a will there is a
way. We are encouraged by the level of engagement
that the United States Administration is showing on the
Middle East peace process, and we support its efforts.
Any new approach that can lead to a just and lasting
peace will be welcome, and Italy will contribute to it
as long as it remains within the Oslo framework and is
aimed at a two-State solution, which in our view is the
only achievable possibility.
Although we maintain that peace must ultimately
be attained through direct negotiations between the
parties, we believe that the support of other actors is
also of paramount importance. I refer in particular to the
role of the Middle East Quartet, which has the ability
to contribute effectively to creating new momentum for
the peace process. In that regard, I should stress that the
European Union, as a member of the Quartet, continues
to consider the peace process one of its top priorities.
Similarly, a credible path towards peace requires the
direct involvement of the main Arab partners, which
recently reaffirmed the importance of the Arab Peace
Initiative as a strategic tool in helping to achieve peace
between Israel and Palestine and bring about a future
of cooperation and prosperity for the entire Middle
East. Besides that, intensifying and accelerating those
international diplomatic efforts is an integral aspect
of resolution 2334 (2016), about which we have just
received the second quarterly report of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
The resolution is very clear on violence. There is
no justification whatever for any acts of violence or
terror of any kind by anyone, nor for any incitement to
such violence. All those in charge have a fundamental
obligation to take a clear stance against any kind of
violence, take all possible measures to prevent and end
such violence or incitement to it and firmly condemn
any attacks and their perpetrators. Provocations and
inflammatory rhetoric should also be avoided by all
concerned. With regard to settlements, we continue to
believe that they are an obstacle to a two-State solution
and that they give rise to further tensions and do not
contribute to achieving peace.
Any diplomatic initiative relies on solid partners
and their willingness to make bold decisions. That is
why we support Palestine’s President Mahmoud Abbas
as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian

S/PV.7977

leadership, which has the responsibility to engage
constructively in order to advance peace negotiations.
It is time for the Palestinian Authority to retake
control of the Gaza Strip, where living conditions have
deteriorated dramatically thanks to years of neglect,
political clashes and conflict. In the process of restoring
the whole of Palestine under a single democratic and
legitimate authority, it is absolutely essential to ensure
that the humanitarian imperative is taken into account.
In the light of that complicated environment, I
would like to express Italy’s deep appreciation for the
hard work that has lately been done by the Special
Coordinator and his staff, and by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and all United Nations entities in the
region in general. I would once again like to stress the
invaluable contribution that the United Nations has
made to the lives of Palestinians in the region and to the
security of Israel itself. In that spirit, we encourage all
United Nations agencies operating in the area to further
strengthen the vetting and accountability mechanisms
relating to their own employees.
In conclusion, we firmly believe that the twoState vision remains the only achievable goal that can
bring this long conflict to an end and the only one that
will help the international community rally for the
stabilization of the entire Middle East.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Like others,
Mr. President, the Senegalese delegation would like
to thank you for organizing today’s monthly briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and in particular for producing
the concept note that has helped us to focus our
discussion this morning. I would also like to thank
today’s briefers — Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States; and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
member of The Elders — and to acknowledge the
participation of Mr. Michael Doran of the Hudson
Institute. The information they have given us sheds
light on the enormous challenges that, sadly, are still
to be overcome if we are to put the Middle East peace
process back on track.
Seventy years after the General Assembly’s
adoption of resolution 181 (II) and 50 years after the
occupation of the Palestinian territories began, we are

17-1765923/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

dealing with two entities in the Middle East. On the one
hand we have a democratic and prosperous Israeli State,
as the resolution envisaged, and on the other the people
of Palestine, who are still seeking the fulfilment of their
legitimate aspirations for an independent and viable
State. Because the tensions have been exacerbated by the
lack of tangible progress in the political process and the
reality on the ground, we should recall Mr. Mladenov’s
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
to the effect that the international community, and the
Security Council first and foremost, has no alternative
but to redouble its perseverance and creativity on the
issue if we are to achieve a two-State solution. What
is at stake is not only ensuring international peace and
security but also enabling the forces of moderation to
triumph in a context where extremism and terrorism are
in the ascendant. We believe that an Israeli-Arab peace
could be a powerful antidote to the plague of violent
extremism and terrorism that is devastating the region
and spilling over well beyond it. I would therefore like
to reiterate our call to the parties to work resolutely
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions
to reverse the negative trends on the ground that are
threatening the possibility of a two-State solution.
That is why there must be an end to the occupation
and incitements to hatred and violence, wherever they
originate, whoever are their perpetrators and whatever
their motives. In that regard, we welcome the efforts of
Israeli and Palestinian civil society aimed at building
greater understanding between their peoples at a grassroots level, with a view to using innovative ideas to
contribute to the only valid solution, which is a twoState solution.
With regard to the explosive and intolerable
situation in Gaza, including the persistent electricity
problem, which affects 2 million people, half of them
children, we urge the Palestinian political stakeholders
to work to find a definitive solution with the help
of the parties concerned. In an area that is already
dealing with extraordinarily difficult humanitarian
and socioeconomic issues, a lasting settlement of
Gaza’s infrastructure problems of water, sanitation and
electricity must be achieved. We reiterate our support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
is continuing its vital work, particularly in the areas
of education and health, for more than 5 million
Palestinian refugees. We also call on the international
community to urgently provide sufficient, predictable
and ongoing financing to UNRWA.
24/29

20/06/2017

The diplomatic initiatives undertaken by several
countries — such as France, Egypt, Jordan and the
Russian Federation — have now been joined by the
efforts currently being made by the United States.
In Senegal’s opinion, the reaffirmation of the Arab
Peace Initiative at the most recent Summit of the League
of Arab States was a considerable step forward. Senegal
strongly encourages and supports all such initiatives.
Along the same lines, the forum marking 50 years
of occupation that the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People is planning
to organize in New York from 29 and 30 June is part of
the efforts to achieve greater understanding among the
parties and a peaceful negotiated political solution to
this dispute.
In conclusion, I call on the international community,
in particular the Security Council, to redouble its efforts
with a view to returning to the spirit of the partition
plan so that, like the Israelis, the Palestinians will also
have a viable and sovereign State, on the basis of the
1967 borders.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General of
League of Arab States, Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit; the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov; Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, member
of The Elders; and Mr. Michael Doran, Senior Fellow
at the Hudson Institute, for their briefings. The picture
they have painted of the situation in both Israel and
Palestine, and throughout the region, is very bleak.
In a regional environment marked by numerous
and deadly crises, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
stands out for its longevity and its structural aspects.
Beginning with its longevity, a few months from now
we will commemorate the seventieth anniversary of
the partition plan adopted by General Assembly via
resolution 181 (II), which was immediately followed by
the first Israeli-Arab war. This month is also the fiftieth
anniversary of the June 1967 war and the occupation
of the Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem, which
came in its wake. We must not view this moment as
a simple moment of remembrance or as an exercise in
resignation, but rather it should compel us to look to
the future and to breathe new life into our endeavours.
That is particularly true because the second
hallmark of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is its
structure. The lack of a solution to the conflict, which
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is serious in and of itself, is also an ongoing threat to
international security. As a result of the very serious
nature of the conflict, its symbolic aspect and the
place it has taken in the collective imagination, the
scope of this unresolved conflict is structural and goes
well beyond the territory of Israel and Palestine. Any
escalation in the conflict risks destabilizing the region
uncontrollably. That is why we cannot resign ourselves
to a fake status quo, which conceals daily erosion on the
ground and of the spirit. The goal of this path is clear:
to put an end to the two-State solution as being a mirage
in the desert, which would be a leap into the unknown
and into the risk of a worse situation.
I believe we all share the view that the current painful
situation has gone on for too long. It has gone on for too
long for the Palestinians, who, for too long, have been
deprived of their legitimate right to pursue statehood as
a result of the occupation and see that prospect slipping
further from their grasp and disappearing with the
expansion of the settlement policy. The announcements
at the beginning of the month of nearly 3,000 new
housing units built in the Israeli settlements in the West
Bank are part of a worrying trend and represent an
increase of 70 per cent in settlement construction this
year, as compared with last year, according to figures
just published by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics.
With nearly 600,000 settlers in East Jerusalem and the
West Bank, we are reaching the point of no return and
we are faced with the question of the possibility of
the two-State solution slipping away, without another
viable solution. We must remember that the occupation
is illegal under international law and makes achieving
peace impossible.
This situation has gone on too long for the Israelis
as well, because the prospects for a never-ending
pursuit of occupation and colonization contradicts the
democratic foundations of the State of Israel, because
the full regional integration of Israel into the wider
region is possible only once peace has been reached
with the Palestinians and because violence flourishes in
the void presented by the dearth of a political solution.
The attack that took place on Friday in Jerusalem,
which claimed the life of a young female member of
the Israeli police force and which France robustly
condemned, is another tragic example of my point.
The waves of violence that follow one after another,
especially in Jerusalem, serve only to harden
mutual defiance.

S/PV.7977

Yet, while the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is now the
oldest of the conflicts that are ripping the Middle East
apart, it is also the only one whose solution is known
and widely shared within the international community.
Despite the constant deterioration of the situation on
the ground, the parameters of a future agreement have
not changed: two States living in peace and security
with contiguous, secure and recognized borders drawn
on the basis of the 1967 demarcation lines and mutually
agreed land swaps; with Jerusalem as the capital of both
States; and with an agreed, realistic, just and equitable
solution for Palestinian refugees.
There is no viable alternative to the two-State
solution, neither for the Israelis nor for the Palestinians.
The past 50 years have taught that the fates of these two
peoples are intertwined, and that no one can sustainably
fulfil their national aspirations by denying those of the
other side.
Finally, I wish once again to publicly express
France’s concerns about the situation in the Gaza Strip.
The ongoing humanitarian crisis in which this territory
is entrenched has been aggravated by the blocking of
the electricity supply, which has lasted for about two
months. The inhabitants of Gaza today live with an
average of two to four hours of electricity per day, and the
energy crisis has serious consequences for the medical,
sanitation and water treatment infrastructure facilities
in particular. We must therefore take action to improve
the situation in Gaza, particularly at the humanitarian
level. All stakeholders must take responsibility to
ensure that a lasting solution can be found in and for
Gaza. This is urgent. If nothing is done, the ongoing
tensions could lead to a new deadly conflict, like those
that the Gaza Strip experienced three times in the past
nine years. We cannot allow that to happen. Israel
must therefore fulfil its responsibilities by alleviating
the restrictions it imposes on the access to goods and
people into and out of Gaza, which should be the
precursor to a lifting of the blockade and which must
be accompanied by robust security guarantees. It is
also crucial that the Palestinians reach a reconciliation
agreement, as we know that there will be no viable
Palestinian State without Palestinian unity on the basis
of the two-State solution.
France is a friend of both Palestinians and Israelis.
That is why it can speak to them truthfully and
repeatedly call on them to return to the negotiating
table, and that is why my country will never give up.

17-1765925/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/06/2017

We will continue to act in furtherance of that goal with
our main partners.

known difficulties in overcoming the deadlock, where
it happens to be at the moment.

In the region, the Arab Peace Initiative remains
the essential framework for making peace with
the Palestinians the first step towards the regional
integration of Israel. We hope that the commitment of
the United States Administration, through its renewed
diplomatic effort, will help to restart the negotiation
proces between Israelis and Palestinians. With our
European Union partners, we stand ready to help the
parties resume negotiations.

We are certainly quite far from that goal. The
parties have a long road ahead before they find a way
to resolve the conflict. However, the good news is that
for the last two months we have seen a number of highprofile visits to Israel and the Arab world. We hope
that the groundwork that has been laid recently will
provide the necessary impetus to restart the negotiation
process. The key is for the parties to correctly interpret
that message and seize the opportunity. One thing to
avoid, however, is setting conditions and waiting for
the other side to make unilateral concessions. Moves to
reinvigorate the political track will have to be reciprocal.

Fifty years of occupation means two successive
generations of Palestinians and Israelis who have lived
through the current conflict. The situation is both
physically and psychologically devastating. It is time
to put an end to it.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me thank all the
briefers for their valuable insights.
Year after year, members of the Security Council
attest to the grim reality of a seemingly perpetual
deadlock in the Middle East peace process. The
composition of the Council changes, but the messages
and signals heard around the table remain basically the
same, amid little change in the overall situation. The
reasons for this state of affairs are well known, so there
is no need to turn to the name-and-shame game again.
The recipe for breaking the stalemate is also known.
Each side knows what exact steps are expected of them.
Yet again, we have to signal our strong concern
about the continuous recurrence of violence. The
terrorist attack that was thwarted on 16 June near the
Damascus Gate in Jerusalem is a clear reminder of the
very dangerous situation that we are currently facing.
We condemn all manifestations of terrorism and praise
the professionalism of the police forces that did not
allow civilians to be hurt.
Time and again, the international community hears
declarations of goodwill and readiness to explore peace
options. However, what is missing is the follow-up to
those declarations in the form of concrete actions. All
available venues and opportunities must be exhaustively
explored and attempted with a view to achieving greater
security for Israel and Arab States.
We continue to believe that the Middle East peace
process can and will be successful. The principle of a
two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine coexisting
in peace and security, remains valid despite well26/29

In that context, we welcome the meeting held
between top Palestinian and Israeli officials, during
which the two sides agreed on a number of measures
to improve the economic situation in the Palestinian
territories, to enable more Palestinian development
in Area C, to adjust Israeli enforcement policies and
to expand the working hours of the Israeli-controlled
Allenby Bridge border crossing between Jordan and
the West Bank. Such steps benefit both parties, as they
improve the atmosphere to facilitate the renewal of
negotiations. We highly appreciate the renewed efforts
of the United States to bring them together.
While we applaud those measures, we must not
overlook the importance of focusing on a political
solution. Otherwise, if the sides continue to dig in their
entrenched positions, we will witness the repetition of
the past five decades. It is hardly anybody’s wish to
see, in 50 years, in the Chamber, a repeat of today’s
meeting, albeit with different participants. To avoid
such a scenario, we reiterate that the way forward lies
in elaborating a workable Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement built on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
of 2002, the Quartet road map and the agreements
previously reached between the parties.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit and Mr. Michael Doran for
sharing their insights and perspectives. They all spoke
with passion — and rightly so — and their briefings
were very useful. I am very appreciative.
We understand that there is one historic fact, as
many have already mentioned, that gives context to
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the briefing on the Middle East this month — that
June 2017 marks 50 years since the 1967 Arab-Israeli
conflict, with all of its implications. There is no doubt
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been one of
the disputes at the core of the dangerous situation that
essentially has defined the Middle East region for the
past several decades
Today’s meeting provides the Council an
opportunity to reflect on efforts that have been made
thus far and renew its commitment to helping to
resolve this long-standing dispute. The Council and
the international community cannot claim to have done
enough in that regard. We have all failed.
For what it is worth, Ethiopia’s position has been
very clear — we fully support the goal of two States
living side-by-side in peace and security as the only
viable option to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
Unfortunately, peace has so far remained elusive, to the
detriment of Israelis and Palestinians, as well as to the
peace and stability of the Middle East region. Actions
of both sides that run counter to the achievement of a
negotiated peace have not only continued to increase
frustration and mistrust but also undermine the very
viability of the two-State solution.
We know full well that ultimately it is up to the
two parties to achieve peace and resolve the conflict.
It is therefore absolutely imperative that the two sides
resume direct and meaningful negotiations in order to
reach a comprehensive, just and lasting solution on the
basis of mutual respect and the spirit of compromise
that ensures Israel’s security and Palestinian aspirations
for Statehood. We believe the Council has a duty and
responsibility to support and encourage that process
with a view to ensuring the viability of the two-State
solution and the achievement of lasting peace. The loss
of the opportunity to realize the two-State solution
would be a tragedy of historic proportions. The Council
has the responsibility to make sure that does not happen.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
I wish to thank the briefers for their presentations,
including Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit, Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States and Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General. I also welcome to today’s meeting
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, member of The Elders, the

S/PV.7977

Secretary-General’s Chef de Cabinet, as well as
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča.
Bolivia reaffirms its support of the selfdetermination of the Palestinian people and its right
to a free, sovereign and independent State within the
pre-1967 internationally recognized borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Bolivia is constitutionally a pacifist State that
promotes the right of peoples to cultivate and achieve
peace as well as cooperation among the peoples of
the world, and, in the most strident terms, condemns
all forms wars of aggression as means of reolving
disputes and conflicts between States. In that vein,
we believe that the sole alternative for ensuring a just
and lasting peace with regard to the conflict between
Israel and Palestine is through direct negotiations,
using the existing mechanisms enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and in compliance with the
Organization’s own resolutions.
Bolivia would like to take this opportunity to recall
that, on 22 of November 1967, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 242 (1967). The
resolution states that one of the fundamental principles
for achieving peace in the Middle East is the withdrawal
of the Israeli armed forces from the territories they
have occupied since that time. Similarly, we would like
to highlight that there have been various initiatives
in recent years to try to resolve the situation through
dialogue: the Camp David talks, led by then-President
of the United States Jimmy Carter in 1978, the Madrid
Peace Conference in 1991, the Oslo Accords in 1993,
the Arab Peace Initiative in 2002, advanced by the
League of Arab States, and, in 2003, the Quartet, made
up of the United States, Russia, the European Union
and the United Nations, drafted the road map, which
laid the foundation for negotiations between Israel and
Palestine and the recognition of the Palestinian State.
The issue, however, is not of a purely bilateral
nature. The entire international community has voiced
an opinion on this subject. In that regard, I would like to
join the Heads of State and Government of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries in what they expressed in the
declaration of the seventeenth Summit of Heads and
State and Government of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries on the Island of Margarita, just a few months
ago. I would like to recall that the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries brings together approximately

17-1765927/29

S/PV.7977

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

two thirds of the international community. This is a
topic that does not only concern the Security Council
but, as I said, the entire international community.
Allow me to read out the relevant paragraphs from
the declaration.
(spoke in English)
“The Heads of State or Government express
their hope for genuine, rapid progress to be made
to resolve the final status issues regarding the
question of Palestine, namely, refugees, Jerusalem,
settlements, borders, security, water and prisoners,
underscoring that the just resolution of all of
these issues is imperative for conclusion of a
comprehensive and final peace agreement. They
call for international efforts to support peace
initiatives to overcome the obstacles that have
repeatedly caused the failure of negotiations,
stressing in this regard their grave concern about the
critical political, economic, social, humanitarian
and security situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, as a result of
ongoing unlawful policies and practices by Israel,
the occupying Power, as well as the negative
impact on peace efforts. They express grave
concern in particular at the dramatic deterioration
of the situation in the Gaza Strip due to the Israeli
military aggression in July and August 2014, which
caused widespread human trauma and destruction
amounting to a humanitarian disaster.
“The Heads of State or Government condemn
Israel’s continuing military occupation of the
Palestinian territory in breach of international law
and United Nations resolutions. They condemn the
continuing brutal Israeli military campaign against
the defenceless Palestinian people, by which the
occupying Power has continued to commit grave
human rights violations and reported war crimes,
including by use of excessive, indiscriminate force
that over the years has killed and injured thousands
of Palestinian civilians, including children, and has
caused vast destruction of properties, infrastructure
and agricultural lands. They also condemn
illegal Israeli settlement activities, by which the
occupying Power has continued to colonize the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and to forcibly displace Palestinian
civilians, in grave breach of international law. They
further condemn the provocations and incitement
28/29

20/06/2017

by groups of extremist settlers, including against
the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem and the
vandalization of mosques and churches, which are
fuelling tensions and religious sensitivities that
risk further destabilization. They also condemn
Israel’s imposition of collective punishment
on the Palestinian people by various illegal
measures, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which
has been subjected to an illegal Israeli blockade
since 2007. The Heads of State or Government
reiterate their demand that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately cease all such violations
of international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and fully
abide by its legal obligations, including under the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
“The Heads of State or Government stress the
incompatibility of peace negotiations with Israeli
colonization activities and demand an immediate
cessation and reversal of all such illegal activities.
They express deep concern about the extensive
physical, economic and social devastation being
caused by the Israeli settlements, wall and network
of checkpoints,which are severing the Palestinian
territory into separate areas, including several
walled cantons, isolating East Jerusalem from the
rest of the territory, forcibly displacing thousands
of Palestinians from their homes, including many
Bedouin families, particularly in the Jordan Valley,
and completely destroying some communities.
They stress that such actions gravely undermine
the contiguity, integrity, viability and unity of the
occupied Palestinian territory and jeopardize the
prospects for physically achieving the two-State
solution for peace on the basis of the 1967 borders.
They recall, in this regard, the United Nations
Register of Damage caused by the Construction
of the Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory
and call for the speedy fulfilment of its mandate
in order to redress the losses and suffering being
endured by the Palestinian people as a result of
the wall.”
(spoke in Spanish)
This is a matter of global importance and is at
the heart of the serious situation that the Middle East
is experiencing. Bolivia believes it an inescapable
duty to recall that for 50 years — half a century — a
systematic occupation has been deployed in violation of
international law. This meeting must be scene through
17-17659

20/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

two prisms. First, it must first be seen as a call for
peace and as support for all peace initiatives. Secondly,
it must be seen as recognizing that, for 50 years — if
we are talking just about the occupation — there has
been a collective failure on the part of the Security
Council and the international community, during which
time we have failed more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees. Today is the International Day of Refugees.
Those children who arrived in the first refugee camps
50 years ago have seen their children and grandchildren
born as refugees. The past 50 years have been marked
by the failure of the international community because
the Palestinian situation, the occupation and the spedup construction of settlements show how we have acted
according to double standards. In practice, there are
resolutions that are not being complied with and about
which we do not want to talk. It is a 50-year collective
failure because, today, in this very Chamber, we have
been alerted to the fact that we are on the brink of a

S/PV.7977

humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza. And there is a silence
of complicity in the shadow of the impending tragedy.
It is a 50-year failure on the part of the Security
Council because the construction of settlements
has not only not ceased, but has increased, and our
resolutions, including the latest recently adopted by the
Security Council (resolution 2334 (2016)), have had no
effect. For 50 years we have failed the Palestinian as
well as the Israeli people because, without any doubt,
both peoples want to live in peace and security. For
50 years the international community has similarly
failed itself because we have not been able to comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

17-1765929/29
