S/PV.8575

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8575th meeting

Tuesday, 16 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-21863 (E)
*1921863*

Ukraine

S/PV.8575

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

which regulates the use of Ukrainian as the sole State
language in a broad sphere of Government functions
and services, was adopted by the Verkhovna Rada on
25 April and signed into law on 15 May.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
High Commissioner on National Minorities.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I last briefed the Security Council
on Ukraine on 25 April (see S/PV.8516) following the
election of President Volodymyr Zelenskyi on 21 April.
Today the Council is meeting again only days before
another important election, on 21 July, when Ukrainians
will go to the polls to elect their representatives in
Parliament, the Verkhovna Rada. We hope that the
elections will be equally peaceful and democratic and
that they will be inclusive, including reflecting the
broadest participation of women.
In his inauguration speech, President Zelenskyi
emphasized the need for peace and unity and for rejecting
divisive policies. He underlined his readiness to engage
in dialogue in order to advance domestic reforms and
end the five-year conflict in eastern Ukraine. The United
Nations is encouraged by such statements emphasizing
dialogue, peace and inclusiveness. We welcome efforts
at dialogue at all levels, including bilaterally between
Heads of State, and hope that they can bring greater
momentum towards resolving the conflict.
Today’s Council meeting coincides with the coming
into force of the law on ensuring the functioning of the
Ukrainian language as the State language. The law,
2/23

16/07/2019

It was adopted after two readings and the
consideration of more than 2,000 amendments, 800
of which have been included. While many of its
provisions commence today, the law also prescribes a
transitional period, from six months to up to 10 years,
for the implementation of other provisions. Also, the
law requires the Cabinet of Ministers to submit to
Parliament a draft law on the realization of the rights of
national minorities of Ukraine by January 2020.
While the new law has raised concerns both within
and outside Ukraine, the Ukrainian authorities have
described it as consistent with Ukraine’s Constitution,
particularly article 10, which deals with State and
minority languages, as well as its national legislation
and international commitments.
As part of its regular reporting, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) followed the legislative process and shared
recommendations based on international standards
with the relevant authorities. While many of the
controversial points were addressed in its final version,
the law still raises concerns.
OHCHR recommends that the Ukrainian
Government should elaborate, as established by the
language law, a law on the realization of the rights
of national minorities of Ukraine in order to ensure a
fair correlation between the protection of the rights of
minorities and the preservation of the State language
as a tool for integration within society. That should be
done without undue delay.
The Council of Europe’s Venice Commission is
also analysing the law. The draft opinion is expected
to be discussed by the Commission after the 21 July
parliamentary elections.
In that context, we welcome the previous statement
by President Zelenskyi that a thorough analysis of the
law will be conducted. We hope that that will pave
the way for further measures to safeguard the rights
of minorities.
The Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) High Commissioner
on National Minorities has also advised the Ukrainian
authorities regarding language questions in the interest
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

of ensuring balanced legislation that unites Ukraine’s
diverse society. I therefore welcome the availability of
the OSCE High Commissioner, Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
to brief the Council in person on the issue.
It is the fourth time since the beginning of 2019
that the Security Council is meeting on Ukraine. The
current political transition in Ukraine takes place
against the backdrop of the ongoing conflict in Donbas,
many of whose residents continue to face the serious
daily challenges associated with an active conflict.
In recent weeks, we have seen signs that, with
sufficient political will in the Trilateral Contact Group,
concrete steps to improve the security and humanitarian
situation along the contact line are possible. We welcome
the 26 June disengagement of forces and removal of
hardware at the Stanytsia Luhanska checkpoint, as
reported by the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. Such steps should be further built on. We
hope to see other confidence-building steps, including
the restoration of the Stanytsia Luhanska pedestrian
crossing bridge and the release of detainees.
However, we note with regret the persistent failure
to reach agreement on a ceasefire. We wish to once again
echo the call of the OSCE for all concerned to work
constructively, including during tomorrow’s Trilateral
Contact Group meeting, in order to reach an agreement
on the issue without further delay. The implementation
of a lasting ceasefire should be accompanied by the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from populated areas, the
disengagement of forces and the protection of civilians
and critical civilian infrastructure.
The situation at the contact line remains
unpredictable and volatile. Periodic escalations of
hostilities bring about various levels of intensity of
military engagement. Despite continuing security
incidents and limitations on its activities, the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission, under the leadership of the
new Chief Monitor, Ambassador Halit Çevik, continues
to carry out its crucial mandate.
Meanwhile, the human cost of the conflict is still
growing. Ordinary civilians continue to be targeted
and suffer from indiscriminate shelling on a daily
basis, as well as from the threat of landmines. This year
alone, as of 30 June, OHCHR recorded 91 conflictrelated civilian casualties — 13 killed and 78 injured.
Fighting also continues to damage and disrupt civilian
infrastructure. From May to June, the Donetsk Filter
Station, which supplies clean water to approximately

S/PV. 8575

380,000 people on both sides of the contact line, came
under fire on three separate occasions. So far this year,
water facilities have come under attack more than 60
times. Schools have also come under attack 17 times,
already more than in 2018.
We once again reiterate that parties to the conflict
must take all precautions to avoid civilian harm.
International humanitarian law must be upheld by all
to protect civilians and their access to critical services.
Humanitarian organizations are providing relief to
the most vulnerable communities on both sides of the
contact line, but safe, predictable and sustained access
to all those in need is still a challenge. Their work must
not be politicized or instrumentalized by any party.
The Council unanimously endorsed the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements in resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February
2015. In presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12 of
6 June 2018, the Council once again unanimously
reaffirmed the centrality of the Minsk agreements, and
on 12 February 2019 the Council held a special meeting
(see S/PV.8461) focusing on the implementation of
the Minsk agreements. The United Nations expects
any concerns related to the Minsk agreements to be
addressed through constructive dialogue within the
existing negotiation formats, in full respect for the
spirit and letter of the agreements, and with a view to
implementing the Minsk agreements as a whole.
Ukraine today has the opportunity to build further
on its reform record and to revitalize the diplomatic
efforts to resolve the five-year conflict in eastern
Ukraine. That will require, first and foremost, political
will on the part of all concerned in the critical search
for peace. We hope that, following the parliamentary
elections and the formation of a new Government, the
recent encouraging statements will be followed by
concrete actions by all actors to bring about at long last
a positive dynamic to implement the Minsk agreements.
In his congratulatory message to President
Zelenskyi, the Secretary-General underscored the full
support of the United Nations for the crucial efforts of
the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group and
the OSCE to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine. He
further reaffirmed the United Nations commitment to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.

19-218633/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

In a regional and global environment that is
increasingly fragile, the opportunity for a resolution
of the conflict in eastern Ukraine is also a chance to
achieve greater peace and security in Europe. It should
not be missed.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zannier.
Mr. Zannier: Following your invitation to brief
the Security Council, Mr. President, I am glad to share
some of my considerations on the issue at hand, in line
with my conflict-prevention mandate and to the extent
permitted by its confidentiality clause.
Later this week, in the margins of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development, my
Office will convene a meeting with other regional
organizations to examine how successful integration
policies can help strengthen the coherence of diverse
societies and their resilience to conflicts and crises.
In particular, we will focus on the role of youth and
the importance of balanced policies in the field of
education as tools to promote the full participation of
every member of society in public life.
Over the years, my Office has developed a set of
guidelines and recommendations addressing important
issues, such as education and the use of language,
and those recommendations are at the basis of our
engagement with all relevant States members of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
States (OSCE). It is also based on those guidelines and
recommendations that successive High Commissioners
on National Minorities have cooperated for more than
two decades with the authorities of Ukraine on various
sets of policies related to the integration of Ukraine’s
diverse society, in particular on issues related to
language and education. Since I took office, I have
closely followed the adoption of the law on education
of 2017 and every stage of the process of drafting the
law on ensuring the functioning of Ukrainian as the
State language.
In that connection, I have visited Ukraine a number
of times to engage with the authorities, representatives
of national minority communities and other relevant
interlocutors. As I pointed out on a number of occasions in
my interaction with the Government and the Verkhovna
Rada of Ukraine, Ukraine has indeed every right to
strengthen the role of the State language to enhance
4/23

16/07/2019

a shared sense of belonging. Steps in that direction,
however, should be balanced with concerted efforts to
accommodate the ethnic and linguistic diversity of the
country. Accordingly, minority rights, including in the
sphere of language and education, should be taken into
account and respected, in line with Ukraine’s OSCE
commitments and international standards.
A balanced and pragmatic linguistic policy
should ideally be achieved through positive means
and incentives rather than penalties, as well as take
regional specifics into account, also with a view to
facilitating progress with the resolution of the conflict
in and around Ukraine. That would help to establish
an enabling environment for increasing the use of the
State language as a tool for integration.
Thorough consultations with all relevant
stakeholders, including national minorities, should take
place at every stage of the process to reach a broad
societal consensus, increase ownership and arrive at a
mutually acceptable and inclusive policy. The opinion
and input from relevant international institutions,
including the Council of Europe’s Venice Commission,
can help to ensure that language-related legislation is in
line with international standards. Legislation related to
language and national minorities should be developed
in a comprehensive way to ensure consistency and
avoid gaps in the legislative framework related to
national minorities.
The law on ensuring the functioning of Ukrainian as
the State language was promulgated during my visit to
Kyiv in May. I therefore discussed that and prospective
legislation regulating the use of languages in the
country with the outgoing presidential Administration
and several ministries, as well as with the Chairpersons
of all the relevant Committees of the Verkhovna Rada. I
also shared my considerations with regard to Ukraine’s
language policy in an op ed piece published on the
eve of my visit, as well as in my letter to President
Zelenskyi following my visit, outlining possible ways
forward and pointing out that the language question
should be addressed in a way that unites rather than
divides Ukraine’s diverse society. I also noted that
President Zelenskyi had made the same point in his
own inauguration speech.
Concerning the text of the law, the following are
the main considerations to which I would like to draw
the attention of the Security Council.
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

Compared with the text adopted in the first reading,
the promulgated version introduces differentiated
transition periods for the implementation of language
provisions in various spheres of State language use. I
welcome the fact that the State language law extends
the transition period for the implementation of article
7 of the law on education until 2023 for European
Union (EU) languages. However, the distinction
between EU and non-EU languages, as highlighted
by the Venice Commission in reference to the law on
education, remains a concern. Elements of a punitive
approach remain. The law establishes the Office of the
Plenipotentiary, not only with a mandate to monitor the
implementation of the law on the State language, but
also with the power to issue warnings and fines.
I also took note of the reference in the law and the
commitment of the authorities to adopting legislation
to realize the rights of national minorities within six
months, which I assess as a positive intention. Beyond
that stated commitment, however, the law on the State
language, as it stands, does not ensure sufficient legal
clarity or guarantees for the protection of the linguistic
rights of persons belonging to national minorities.
Therefore, pending the adoption of that prospective law
on the rights of national minorities, the protection of
their linguistic rights remains unclear.
Ideally, Ukraine’s language policy should be
supplemented by a modernization of the overall
legal framework safeguarding the rights of national
minorities, including in the linguistic sphere, through
the introduction of a comprehensive law. All relevant
stakeholders, in particular the representatives of
national minorities, should be effectively consulted on
the development of that legislation.
On the part of my institution, I remain willing
and committed to assisting the new leadership
and the new Government in the development of a
pragmatic and forward-looking policy, including
in the area of education, that would comply with
Ukraine’s international commitments and lay a solid
foundation for the development of a well-integrated and
cohesive society.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Zannier for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

S/PV. 8575

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Peruvian presidency for
convening today’s meeting.
I would like to begin by saying that we absolutely
agree with the fact that protecting and promoting the
language of a titular nation is the responsibility of
all States, including Ukraine. We do not object to the
Ukrainian language, which, incidentally, is understood,
loved and respected in Russia. However, we speak in
defence of the Russian language. The biased Ukrainian
authorities have adopted draconian medieval methods
to eradicate it. They have banned communication in
Russian in the majority of public spaces, which is at
variance with all conventions protecting the interests
of national minorities and basic human rights. It defies
common sense and the basic norms of civilized conduct.
Let us take an example from an interview with
Mr. Mykyta Poturaev, a candidate for the Verkhovna
Rada and adviser to the President of Ukraine on
political issues. In it, he proposes that the Russian
language be renamed “Rossian” and that Russia be
renamed “Moskovia”. He also proposed that the Russian
language be used as a weapon against our country.
In anticipation of the question we will certainly
hear today, how is the language issue relevant to the
Security Council’s agenda? It is directly related to its
agenda. The document signed by former President
Poroshenko on 15 May is a direct violation of the letter
and spirit of the package of measures for the fulfilment
of the Minsk agreements, approved by resolution 2202
(2015). We should all therefore provide a principled
and impartial assessment of the of the new Ukrainian
law. I hope that all of our colleagues can resist the
temptation to shield Kyiv from the warranted criticism
resulting from the adoption of that law and devote
our meeting with other topics. Let us recall that the
main provisions of the document, which provides for
the most brutal forced Ukrainization of all spheres of
public life and gradually introduces fines for failing
to use the Ukrainian language, enter into force today.
The Russian-speaking citizens of the country will be
stripped of an opportunity to be educated in their native
language, including in universities and schools.
I will not repeat myself today and give specific
examples from the text of the law. I already did so on
20 May (see S/PV.8529). Since then neither we nor the
Russian-speaking residents of the country have had any
reason to adopt a different approach to it. The issue is not

19-218635/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

an internal matter in Ukraine. We categorically reject
that interpretation. For those who genuinely understand
recent Ukrainian history, it is clear that the issue of
linguistic and cultural identity lies at the heart of the
tragic fracture that the country has endured since the
Maidan coup d’état of 2014. The threat to ban Russian
as an official language in the south-east was voiced by
the Maidan representatives who seized power. That,
in turn, led to internal divisions and confrontations,
which have resulted in the current ongoing crisis and
territorial division.
Accordingly, if there is no resolution to the problem
in the spirit of public consensus and harmony, there
can be no genuine progress towards cohesion and, as
a consequence, there can be no end to the domestic
fratricidal conflict in eastern Ukraine. Those who
attempt to defend the actions of the Maidan authorities
claim that such action is geared towards supporting the
State language as it pertains to the issue of languages
of national minorities. That also includes Russianspeaking Ukrainians. It might appear logical but any
objective expert on Ukraine would confirm that in that
country such an approach is hardly applicable. The
Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine are not a national
minority in the traditional sense of the term. In spite of
official Maidan statistics, according to which the Russian
language is allegedly no longer spoken in Ukraine, all
other sources and surveys show that Russian remains
the native or preferred language of communication for
the majority of Ukraine’s population.
According to the American analytics company
Gallup, in the late 2000s 83 per cent of respondents in
Ukraine said that Russian was their preferred language
and an extremely important subject taught to children
in school. Google search engine results revealed in
2014 that more than 90 per cent of search queries from
Ukraine were made in the Russian language. Even the
staunchest Maidan propagandists are forced to admit
that, for at least 25 per cent of Ukrainian residents,
Russian is the native language. Do those statistics not
make it clear that restrictive and punitive measures
against the Russian language in that country, at the
very least, stoke divisions and social confrontation?
Incidentally, the new Ukrainian authorities, which
received support from 75 per cent of Ukrainians during
the most recent presidential elections, from the very
beginning expressed doubts about the rectitude of the
policy of the forced Ukrainization of the country and the
formation of what is virtually a language inquisition.
6/23

16/07/2019

The new President, Volodymyr Zelenskyi, and his team
repeatedly made it clear that after the formation of a
new Ukrainian Parliament they intended to scrutinize
the ineligibility of the law on Ukraine’s State language.
The Parliament of Ukraine — the Verkhovna
Rada — also has several questions about the law. On
21 June, parliamentarians registered a petition with
the Constitutional Court of Ukraine with respect to
the law on Ukraine’s State language, as it is at odds
with the Constitution, violates the right of citizens to
use their native language and, consequently, creates
an atmosphere of intolerance in the society. And just
today, in the Verkhovna Rada, a bill was registered to
repeal the language law, which violates the Council of
Europe’s Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities and European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages.
Under those circumstances, a great deal today
depends upon us. Council members can either play into
the hands of the Maidan politicians, who have discredited
themselves, headed by former President Poroshenko,
and pretend that the law on the State language should be
adopted quietly and without criticism, or they can send
a clear message that the struggle for the preservation
of national and cultural identity should not devolve
into the violation of the rights of the Russian-speaking
population in Ukraine. In particular, former President
Poroshenko recently stated that so long as Mr. Zelenskyi
speaks Russian, the country is in danger. Threats to him
in that regard were repeatedly made by other so-called
nationalist Maidan activists. There is no consensus on
the language issue in Ukraine. The adoption of the law
on language was a purely political decision that failed
to reflect the opinion of the Ukrainian population, the
current situation in the country and the unique features
of the multinational Ukrainian society.
In order not to fuel such a distorted and dangerous
mindset for Ukraine, we propose that we send a clear
message today about the Council’s support for unity
and cohesion among Ukrainians, instead of divisions.
That is the only way that we, together, not in words but
in deed, can demonstrate our shared commitment to the
Minsk agreements, with which Ukraine categorically
refuses to comply.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The support
of the United States for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity is unwavering. We are committed
to working with the Ukrainian people to promote
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

democracy and prosperity and root out corruption.
President Trump underscored that message to President
Zelenskyi following peaceful competitive elections that
reflected Ukraine’s vibrant democracy.
Russia’s actions in Ukraine since 2014 have led to
approximately 13,000 conflict-related deaths, including
more than 300 Ukrainian soldiers killed or wounded
this year in the conflict in eastern Ukraine, which was
stirred up by Russia. In the face of Russia’s aggression
and efforts to undermine the country, Ukraine instead
continues to grow more united, more cohesive, more
resilient and stronger.
We welcome the opportunity today to discuss
issues that Ukraine’s minority groups face. Since
2014, Russian occupation forces have carried out a
campaign of violence, including dozens of extrajudicial
killings and forcible disappearances, imprisonment and
torture, against Crimean Tatars, ethnic Ukrainians and
others. We call on Russia to end its systematic abuse
of Ukraine’s Crimean Tatar community and Ukrainian
nationals in Crimea and the Donbas region.
We note with concern Russia’s suppression of
education in the languages of national minorities in
Crimea. Only 249 schoolchildren are being educated in
the Ukrainian language this year, down from 12,694
children in the school year before Russia’s occupation
began, according to data gathered by the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
In contrast, we commend President Zelenskyi’s
support for the promotion of Ukrainian language efforts
to promote national unity. While President Zelenskyi has
promised to take steps to strengthen relations between
Kyiv and Ukrainians living in eastern Ukraine, Russia
perpetually undermines unity, as exemplified recently
by its decision to issue passports to Ukrainians residing
in conflict areas.
Sombrely, we note that, five years ago tomorrow,
298 innocent civilians were killed in the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. The United States
again extends its deepest sympathies to the families
and friends of the victims and calls for justice on behalf
of those who lost their lives.
As the findings of the Joint Investigation Team
made clear, the BUK missile launcher used to bring
down the passenger aircraft was owned by Russia and
was assigned to Russia’s 53rd Anti-aircraft Brigade.
The launcher was brought into sovereign Ukrainian

S/PV. 8575

territory, fired from territory controlled by Russia and
Russian-led forces in eastern Ukraine and then returned
to Russian territory. We recall the Security Council’s
demand that those responsible be held to account and
that all States cooperate fully with efforts to establish
accountability. We call upon Russia to respect and
adhere to resolution 2166 (2014) and ensure that any
indicted individuals currently in Russia face justice.
More recently, Russia escalated its aggressive
activities when it blocked the lawful passage of
Ukrainian naval vessels and attacked them near the
Kerch Strait in November. The United States calls on
Russia to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders,
including its territorial waters, and we reiterate our
call to Russia to immediately release the detained
Ukrainian crew members and naval vessels. That would
be an important demonstration of Russia’s readiness to
engage more constructively with Ukraine.
Russia must end its occupation of Ukraine’s Crimean
peninsula. Our Crimea-related sanctions will remain
in place until Russia returns control of the peninsula
to Ukraine, and our sanctions against Russia for its
aggression in eastern Ukraine will remain in place until
Russia fully implements the Minsk agreements. As
Secretary Pompeo stated in our declaration on Crimea
last year, the United States rejects Russia’s attempted
annexation of Crimea and pledges to maintain that
policy until Ukraine’s territorial integrity is restored.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto Zannier for
their briefings on the difficult situation Ukraine is
facing due to a conflict that has, lest we forget, claimed
more than 13,000 lives.
That situation is not the result of the adoption, on
25 April, of the law on the use of Ukrainian as a national
language. The law is in no way a threat to international
peace and security. It is up to the Ukrainians to make
their own choices regarding linguistic policies, inter
alia, while respecting their European and international
commitments. The early parliamentary elections to be
held next Sunday will contribute to that.
Nevertheless, the multiple violations of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity since 2014 are a
source of great concern and a threat to international
peace and security. I wish to take this opportunity
to reaffirm France’s commitment to the territorial
integrity, independence and sovereignty of Ukraine

19-218637/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

within its internationally recognized borders. France
does not and will not recognize the illegal annexation
of Crimea. I also reiterate France’s condemnation of
Russia’s decision to facilitate the granting of Russian
citizenship to Ukrainian citizens living in certain areas
of the oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk. By doing so,
Russia is deliberately undermining the spirit of the
Minsk agreements.
As we commemorate the fifth anniversary of the
tragic downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
our thoughts are with the families and loved ones of
the 298 victims. They deserve the truth, to have the
perpetrators identified and justice to be delivered in
accordance with resolution 2166 (2014).
Furthermore, France once again calls for the release
of the 24 Ukrainian seamen captured during the naval
incident in the Kerch Strait in November, as was also
demanded by the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea in May.
I would now like to underscore two points.
First, there have been some positive developments
in recent weeks and days. Under the leadership of
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyi, the work of
the Trilateral Contact Group resumed in a constructive
manner as of 5 June. Again, at the initiative of the new
Ukrainian authorities, the disengagement of forces in
the pilot zone in Stanytsia Luhanska was implemented
on 30 June. That is a significant step forward in terms of
security and is paving the way for improvements in the
humanitarian situation. I would also like to commend
the resumption of bilateral contacts at the highest level
between Ukraine and Russia, crystallized by an initial
telephone exchange between the President of Ukraine
and the President of the Russian Federation on 11 July.
My second point is that it is now necessary
to create momentum, on the basis of those first
positive developments, that generates the trust that is
indispensable for the settlement of the conflict. We
bear a responsibility to the 3.5 million people who
suffer daily as a result of the conflict. That is why
France, alongside Germany, remains firmly committed
to the Normandy format. France hosted a meeting of
diplomatic advisers under that format on 12 July in
Paris, marking the resumption of the proceedings
and resulting in encouraging constructive exchanges.
A set of priority measures to be taken by the parties
in the coming weeks was agreed upon. It is now their
8/23

16/07/2019

responsibility to ensure that they be translated into
concrete actions.
It is also particularly necessary to make rapid
progress in terms of prisoner exchanges, the last of
which took place in December 2017, a ceasefire that
is genuinely respected, improving the humanitarian
situation, the withdrawal of heavy weaponry and mine
clearance. Once the necessary legal framework has
been established, democratic local elections will make
it possible to implement the decentralization provisions
provided for by the Minsk agreements.
To conclude, allow me to call for all of us
here to be vigilant. Although encouraging, recent
developments remain fragile. Current circumstances
offer an opportunity to generate new, more positive and
constructive momentum to revive the peace process. It
is incumbent upon us all to seize the opportunity by
taking the demanding path of dialogue and cooperation.
The Minsk agreements will soon be 5 years old — it is
high time that they be finally implemented.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We wish to express our gratitude for
the invitation to this meeting, as well as to Ms. DiCarlo
and Mr. Zannier for their important briefings.
The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity
to salute the new Ukrainian President Volodymyr
Zelenskyi’s
inauguration.
We
welcome
the
pronouncements to prioritize the resolution of the
conflict in the eastern region of his country. We wish
him many successes in his Administration.
The Security Council and the international
community received the Minsk agreements as an
expression of the parties’ legitimate interest in achieving
a sustainable and lasting peace. However, more than
four years after the signing of the agreements, we
continue to witness ongoing violations of the ceasefire,
the worrisome need for humanitarian assistance for
civilians in the conflict zone, the alarmingly high
number of people — around 4 million — affected by
hunger and misery and the painful reality that more than
1.5 million internally displaced persons are still unable
to return to their homes. Added to that are the constant
unilateral measures that, in fact, do not contribute to
moving the peace process forward.
We once again call on the parties to relax their
positions and open the way to dialogue and to reaffirm
their commitment to peace, multilateralism and the
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

peaceful settlement of disputes. The Dominican
Republic urges the parties to ensure the collective
interest and respect for human rights, guarantees and
freedoms for all its inhabitants — for both those of
the majority and those of the minority, including the
rights and prerogatives relating to the language of the
latter populations.
In the context of today’s meeting, it is essential
to act on an impartial assessment of the situation of
minorities. To that end, we reiterate that it is necessary
to maintain a dialogue with all the relevant parties. It is
also necessary to move forward without delay towards
a sustainable solution. To achieve that, the parties are
called upon to refrain from any unilateral action that
might hinder the process of implementing the agreements
and complicate the efforts being made to build peace in
the Ukrainian people and their surroundings.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates
its recognition of the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. At the same time, we
take this opportunity to highlight the continued efforts
and customary support of the Organization and the
international community to overcome the adversities
suffered by the Ukrainian people in the midst of the
conflict that has affected them for years. Accordingly,
we call for the maintenance of conditions that allow for
the continuation of the dialogue between the parties
in the current Normandy format and the Trilateral
Contact Group and insist on the full implementation
of the Minsk agreements in order to put an end to the
conflicts and restore international peace and security
in Ukraine and the region.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I wish first of all to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and High Commissioner Lamberto Zannier for their
comprehensive briefings.

S/PV. 8575

manage the crisis responsibly and uphold international
law. We are of the view that it is crucial for all parties
concerned to fully implement resolution 2202 (2015).
Allow me to highlight the following points.
First, we fully respect Ukraine’s national competence
over the internal matters of the country, including the
establishment of the status of the Ukrainian language
as the country’s national language, as stipulated in its
law adopted on 15 May. As a country that comprises
more than 300 ethnic groups, and with over 700 living
languages spoken, Indonesia fully understands the
unifying power of language, which is precisely the
essence of language: to unite people instead of dividing
them. That has always been our credo, and we hope that
this spirit of inclusion, including respecting the rights
of minorities, is always kept in mind to ensure a united
society and lasting peace in Ukraine. We therefore take
note and welcome the intention of President Zelenskyi
to conduct a thorough analysis of the law to ensure that
the constitutional rights and interests of Ukrainian
citizens of all ethnicities, religions and backgrounds
are fully respected.
Secondly, we cannot overemphasize the importance
of implementing internationally agreed commitments.
It is the responsibility of all sides to make good on their
commitments as set out in the package of measures for
the implementation of the Minsk agreements contained
in resolution 2202 (2015). The full implementation of
those commitments is essential to the peaceful resolution
of the conflict and to avoiding further escalation
thereof. We therefore urge all parties to demonstrate
the necessary political will to ensure the end of the
conflict and bring about peace and stability in Ukraine.
All parties must cease resorting to actions that can be
construed as detrimental to the implementation of the
agreed commitments.

I would also like to congratulate the people of
Ukraine on the inauguration of President Volodymyr
Zelenskyi on 20 May. We wish the President and the
people of Ukraine every success in navigating all
the challenges faced by Ukraine on the road to peace
and prosperity.

Thirdly, we commend and support the efforts of
all parties, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Trilateral
Contact Group, in facilitating and monitoring the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. We urge all
parties to support and ensure the implementation of the
mandate of the OSCE and its effective engagement.

On many previous occasions, Indonesia has stated
its position with regard to respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well as
non-interference in its internal affairs. We have also
reiterated the need for all parties to exercise restraint,

Lastly, allow me to reiterate that a sustainable
solution to the crisis can be attained only through a
genuine dialogue among the parties, supported by the
United Nations and the international community. We
fully support all constructive efforts aimed at peacefully

19-218639/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

resolving the conflict in Ukraine, in accordance with
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and High
Commissioner Zannier for their briefings.
China has always held an objective and impartial
position on the issue of Ukraine. We respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Ukraine. China believes that all the parties
concerned should fully implement resolution 2202 (2015)
and the new Minsk agreements, remain committed to
the overall direction of political settlement and actively
seek a comprehensive, lasting and balanced solution to
the Ukrainian issue.
The situation in Ukraine involves both complex
historical and contemporary factors. China supports
the parties concerned in their efforts to resolve their
relevant differences quickly through dialogue and
negotiations on the basis of taking into account and
accommodating the legitimate concerns of all regions
and ethnic groups in Ukraine so as to reach a final
settlement that is acceptable to all parties.
The Security Council should play a constructive
role and create a favourable external environment for
the proper settlement of relevant issues, advancing
peace, stability and development in Ukraine, promoting
harmony among its various ethnic communities and
enhancing peaceful coexistence between Ukraine and
other countries in the region.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Zannier
for his briefing.
When the Security Council decided not to hold a
meeting on this issue on the day of President Zelenskyi’s
inauguration, the Russian Ambassador accused the
Council of censorship. Well, there is no censorship.
Here we are debating the issue. Back then, Russia was
offered any other date it wanted, but it insisted that we
had to meet on inauguration day. Which country around
this table would not think that unnecessary, provocative
and disrespectful if proposed in its region?
We are now at this meeting, as we said then that we
would be, discussing Ukraine, and there should be no
censorship. That is why I was surprised not to hear the
Russian Ambassador explain why Russia continues to
arm separatists in eastern Ukraine, why Russia refuses
to implement the Minsk agreements, why it continues
10/23

16/07/2019

to illegally detained 24 Ukrainian servicemen or why
it persecutes the Tatar community in illegally annexed
Crimea. Those are the issues that warrant continued
discussion around this table.
Let me address Ukraine’s policy on State
language. It is important that we do so in the
context of Russia’s continued attempts to undermine
Ukraine’s independence. We reject the tenuous link
Russia was drawn between the language law and the
Minsk agreements, and call on Russia to live up to
its responsibility to uphold international peace and
security by implementing its Minsk commitments.
As we have heard, the bill on ensuring the
functioning of Ukrainian as the State language, which
was adopted by the Ukrainian Parliament on 25 April,
is designed to reinforce the role of the Ukrainian
language in public life. We note that the law requires
the Ukrainian Parliament to pass further legislation on
the realization of the rights of indigenous peoples and
national minorities of Ukraine. We welcome the fact
that the law requires the Ukrainian Parliament to pass
further legislation to protect the rights of indigenous
peoples and national minorities. Of course, we expect
Ukraine to comply with its international obligations,
including with respect to the Council of Europe
Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages. I agree with Mr. Zannier that the
language law should unite, not divide, a diverse society.
Ukrainians continue to suffer as a result of the
Russian-fuelled conflict. Almost 13,000 people have
lost their lives. Russia denies providing weaponry
and personnel, but if it has nothing to hide, why does
Russia and the separatists it backs block access for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to the Ukraine-Russia
border outside Ukrainian Government control? And
why has Russia still failed to provide any explanation
for the shooting down of a long-range unmanned aerial
vehicle belonging to the Special Monitoring Mission
in October last year on the border outside Ukrainian
Government control? We call on Russia to play its part
in ensuring that the security and humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine is resolved.
Three months ago, the day after President
Zelenskyi’s overwhelming democratic election, Russia
decided to make it easier for Ukrainian citizens living
in eastern Ukraine to receive Russian citizenship. That
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

showed a clear disregard for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and runs counter to the spirit
and objectives of the Minsk agreements. The United
Kingdom supports the European Union’s readiness to
respond to that, including through the non-recognition
of Russian passports issued in contradiction to the
Minsk agreements. And I recall that it was on the
pretext of protecting Russian citizens that Russia
invaded Georgia. It is important that there be no such
plan for Ukraine.
The United Kingdom welcomes President
Zelenskyi’s efforts to address the Ukraine crisis and
stands ready to support his efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation and bring peace to Donbas. We
also continue to support the efforts of our partners with
the Minsk process and are prepared to assist further
as required. All parties have responsibilities under the
Minsk agreements, and we expect to see the withdrawal
of Russian personnel and weaponry supplied to
Russian-backed separatists and the safe access,
delivery and distribution of humanitarian assistance to
those in need. I welcome the information provided to us
by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo about some of the
recent improvements in that regard.
The situation in illegally annexed Crimea is
desperate. We deplore the continued persecution of the
Crimean Tatars, including the arbitrary arrest of 24
individuals in Simferopol in March. We call on Russia
to immediately release all political prisoners and
allow unrestricted access for human rights monitoring
organizations. We further call on Russia to immediately
release the 24 Ukrainian naval servicemen detained
since 25 November, in line with the ruling of 25 May of
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Tomorrow marks the fifth anniversary of the
shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
which resulting in the tragic deaths of the 298 people
on board. The family and friends of those who died
deserve justice. We welcome the indictment of four
individuals accused of perpetrating those attacks, and
we urge Russia to fully cooperate with the prosecution
in accordance with resolution 2166 (2014).
The day after President Zelenskyi was
overwhelmingly democratically elected, Russia
introduced its new passport law. On the day President
Zelenskyi was inaugurated, Russia tried and failed to
hold a Security Council meeting to distract attention.
Instead of that aggression, why does Russia not engage

S/PV. 8575

with President Zelenskyi and lower tensions rather
than stoke them in eastern Ukraine and withdraw from
Ukrainian territory?
We want to engage in constructive dialogue with
Russia on the issues that matter. But it is a matter of
deep regret that, through its actions, Russia continues
to violate the rules, norms and international law that we
around this table are tasked with upholding. I urge Russia
to choose an alternative path to the one it pursues today.
But until it does, the international community must
stand resolute in its opposition to Russia’s continued
attempts to destabilize and undermine Ukraine.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto Zannier
for their contributions to today’s briefing.
We strongly believe that the Russian aggression
against Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
is a direct threat to international peace and security.
At the same time, the Ukrainian legitimate authorities’
adoption of a law is not. We would like to use this
opportunity to underline a few facts about the current
crisis in and around Ukraine, which has been provoked
and deliberately fuelled by the Russian Federation
since 2014.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission regularly
reports about ceasefire violations, explosions and
incidents. The Monitoring Mission’s observers are
recording hundreds of ceasefire violations each day,
including the deployment of weapons prohibited under
the Minsk agreements. The overwhelming majority of
ceasefire violations, illegal deployments and movement
restrictions are committed by Russia-backed and
-controlled illegal military formations in the areas
of Donbas that are not controlled by the Ukrainian
Government. We regret that the Russia-controlled
armed formations continue to undermine the efficiency
of the Special Monitoring Mission by restricting its
freedom of movement, intimidating monitors and
attacking the Mission’s assets.
No one should ever doubt that Russia’s attack against
Ukraine in 2014 and its illegal annexation of Crimea
was an act of aggression and a flagrant violation of the
prohibition on the use of force. It was Russia that used
a sham referendum to take over a part of a sovereign
country, not Ukraine. Russian ships attacked vessels
and captured their crew in the Kerch Strait. Again, that

19-2186311/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

was not Ukraine. In that regard, Ukraine has the right
to promote its national language.
The list goes on and on: illegal elections in
non-Government controlled areas of Ukraine in 2018,
the introduction of the ruble zone and the official
recognition of documents used by the illegal military
bodies of certain parts of Donbas. How can one still
try to equate the actions of both sides and call on both
parties to show restraint and goodwill?
In May, the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea ruled that Russia must immediately release vessels
captured in the Kerch Strait and free the 24 servicemen.
It has been nearly two months since the ruling and
Russia continues to ignore the legally binding decision,
offering instead to have the servicemen transferred and
tried on Ukrainian soil according to Russian law, which
is obviously unacceptable.
Despite Russia’s failure to implement its security
commitments, the Ukrainian Government has met a
number of its political commitments — the President
has signed a law on special status for Donbas, the
Verkhovna Rada has passed an amnesty law and
Ukraine has repeatedly called for an exchange of
detainees. Lately, the Ukrainian side demonstrated its
commitment to a constructive approach to achieve the
conflict’s resolution by initiating a withdrawal of its
forces near Stanytsia Luhanska.
The response remains grim. Despite the progress
achieved on disengagement in Stanytsia Luhanska,
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission still observes a
Russian military presence in areas where there should be
none. Moreover, the Russian Federation did not support
the so-called harvest ceasefire suggested by Ukraine at
the Trilateral Contact Group meeting. Further political
steps — including local elections in Donbas, held under
Ukrainian law — are impossible while parts of eastern
Ukraine remain under Russia’s control.
Russia continues its policy of flagrant disregard
for the fundamental principles of international law
with respect to Ukraine. Russia’s actions continue to
undermine the peace process, particularly the Minsk
agreements of 2014 and 2015, which define the modalities
for a permanent ceasefire and provide for Ukraine’s
reintegration of temporarily occupied territories.
During the previous Council meeting on this crisis
in April (see S/PV.8516), Poland condemned Russia’s
decision to provide expedited Russian citizenship to
12/23

16/07/2019

Ukrainian citizens living in the Russian-controlled
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
It was the first and — most certainly — will not be
the last challenge the Russian authorities pose to
the new President of Ukraine. It is disappointing to
see that Russia is not able to respond positively and
constructively. Moscow can only continue its tactics of
throwing logs to trip up other people.
Russia’s continued fuelling of tensions in Donbas
remains a direct challenge to international security,
with grave implications for the international legal order
that protects the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
all States. The international community should neither
accept nor recognize such a cascade of disregard for
the fundamental principles of international law and
should respond accordingly to Russia’s unacceptable
and illegal behaviour.
Last, but not least, I would like to draw the
Council’s attention to the upcoming fifth anniversary of
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which
claimed the lives of 298 victims from 17 countries. We
pay tribute to those who lost their lives and reassure
the families of the victims that we will support the
efforts of investigators to establish truth, justice and
accountability for the downing of Flight MH-17. We
call on all States, including the Russian Federation, to
fully cooperate with efforts to establish accountability
for the downing of Flight MH-17, in line with resolution
2166 (2014).
In conclusion, I once again underline Poland’s
unwavering support for Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First,
let me thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Zannier for
their briefings.
The State of Kuwait believes that all States have
the right to adopt an official State language through
their Constitutions. That is one of the most important
elements supporting the existence and identity of the
State. In that regard, the use of languages in Ukraine is
provided for by its Constitution and regulated by law.
Furthermore, article 10 of the Constitution provides
that the official language of the State of Ukraine is
Ukrainian. The State guarantees the development and
use of the Ukrainian language in all aspects of social
life throughout Ukrainian territory. despite the fact
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

that many provisions of the law entered into force on
16 July 2019.
Since the law provides for a transitional period of
six months to 10 years for the implementation of some
of its provisions. Both the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
the High Commissioner on National Minorities of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
have provided advice to the Ukrainian authorities on
language issues to ensure a balanced legislation that
unite the diverse Ukrainian society. We hope that the
relevant parties will implement those provisions and
recommendation, which are likely to ease tensions.
On another level, we call on the two sides to show
restraint and undertake all the measures necessary to
de-escalate the situation, diffuse military tension in
the Sea of Azov and commit to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. We also urge them to
demonstrate the necessary political will to re-commit
to the full implementation of the Minsk agreements
in order to end the conflict and preserve peace and
security in the region. We renew the call for dialogue
as the best peaceful means to resolve disputes and
conflicts no matter how diverse they might be, based
on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Therefore, we also renew our appeal
to the parties to engage seriously and in good faith in
that dialogue to maintain the security and stability of
the region and pursue a comprehensive and balanced
solution to the issue through dialogue, as provided for
in Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that regard, we call for enhanced dialogue between
both parties and at all levels to lend greater momentum
to the settlement of the dispute.
Moreover, we observe with concern the ongoing
unstable situation in eastern Ukraine, now in its fifth
year. The situation has had grave humanitarian and
economic consequences for the daily lives of the people
and for the infrastructure. More than 3.5 million out of
a total of 5.2 million people need urgent humanitarian
assistance, in addition to the 1.5 million internally
displaced persons. We therefore urge both parties not
to take any escalatory measures or steps that would
fuel the conflict or obstruct the progress made in the
implementation of Minsk agreements, which represent
the only agreed framework for a settlement of the
dispute within its regional scope.

S/PV. 8575

In conclusion, we renew our commitment to
the unity and sovereignty of Ukraine, as well as its
territorial integrity inside its internationally recognized
borders. We call for non-intervention in its internal
affairs and express the hope that all the relevant parties
will work to implement resolution 2202 (2015) and the
Minsk peace agreements, including a full commitment
to its package of measures.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto Zannier for
their insightful briefings.
The population of Ukraine has just elected a
new President, Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyi, through a
democratic electoral process. The outgoing President,
Mr. Poroshenko, has ensured a constructive transition.
Those are two important achievements in a complex
political, economic and security environment. In
addition, Mr. Zelenskyi, has expressed openness
towards the entire Ukrainian population, including
zones not controlled by the Government. In recent
days, Mr. Zelenskyi has reached out to the Russian
Government to hold consultations. Belgium encourages
Russia to participate constructively with the new
President, and we call on the Russian authorities to
consider this political momentum in Ukraine as an
opportunity not to be missed.
The implementation of the Minsk agreements is the
only way to achieve a lasting political solution to the
conflict. Ukraine should, for example, take fully heed
the Venice Commission’s recommendations on the law
on education, in accordance with its commitment, and
the law on the use of languages should be in line with
the obligations of the Minsk agreements. We therefore
expect all parties to refrain from taking unilateral
measures that could exacerbate tensions, to implement
those agreements promptly and fully and to honour
their commitments.
All actors must respect the ceasefire and uphold
international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians and civilian structures. They
have a responsibility to improve humanitarian access
by ensuring the safety of humanitarian workers and
removing bureaucratic obstacles. The parties must
guarantee the freedom of movement of OSCE observers
throughout Ukraine, including along the UkrainianRussian border and in Crimea. We are particularly
concerned that the technical instruments of the

19-2186313/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

OSCE Mission are being targeted and blocked on an
ongoing basis.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. We reiterate our support for the
efforts of the Trilateral Contact Group, the ОSСЕ
and the Normandy format. We hope that the new
President will continue on the path of the political and
economic reforms that the country needs, particularly
in the context of the implementation of the European
Union Association Agreement. Belgium will continue
to offer its support to that process, as well as to the
Ukrainian people.
We reiterate our deepest concern over the escalation
in the Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov, as well as
over Russia’s violations of international law. In that
regard, we regret that Russia has yet to comply with the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea’s order,
dating back to May 25. We call on Russia to uphold that
legally binding decision and to release without delay
the 24 military personnel captured in November 2018,
as well as the three vessels.
We condemn any obstruction of navigation and
free passage in the Kerch Strait. The militarization
of Crimea and any illegal use of force could further
destabilize the region and escalate tensions. We urge
Russia to ensure free passage through the Sea of Azov
without hindrance, in accordance with international
maritime law.
As other colleagues have recalled, tomorrow will
mark five years since Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 was shot down over the southern part of Ukraine.
That tragic event claimed the lives of 298 people,
including several Belgians. The Joint Investigation
Team, of which Belgium is a member, recently made
public the names of four suspects allegedly involved.
Their identification does not end the investigation, and
Belgium continues to call on all countries to lend their
cooperation, in accordance with resolution 2166 (2014),
so that all those responsible can be prosecuted and
justice can be rendered in an independent, honest and
transparent manner to the victims and their families.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation commends Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Lamberto Zannier, High Commissioner
on National Minorities of the Organization for Security
14/23

16/07/2019

and Cooperation in Europe, for their informative
briefings on the entry into force on 15 July 2019 of the
law establishing Ukrainian as the sole national language.
Whenever the Security Council has been seized
of worrying developments in the situation in Ukraine
and the region, Côte d’Ivoire has remained consistent
in its call on all stakeholders in the crisis to exercise the
utmost restraint and prioritize dialogue as a means of
resolving their dispute. My country remains convinced
that the lack of progress in the implementation of
the Minsk agreements and the unilateral initiatives
that exacerbate tensions reduce the prospects for a
peaceful solution to the current crisis in Ukraine. In
that especially volatile context, fuelled by a climate of
mutual mistrust, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its conviction
that lasting peace and stability will be possible only
with ongoing dialogue that enables compromise among
all parties.
In that respect, it welcomes the telephone interview
on 11 July, which allowed Presidents Volodymyr
Zelenskyi and Vladimir Putin to discuss a number of
topics, including the situation in south-eastern Ukraine.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to express its hope that the
telephone exchange will pave the way for many more
consultations between the two Presidents with a view to
restoring the much-needed dialogue in the Normandy
format, including its possible expansion.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced
that, despite the complexity of the current crisis, the
restoration of peace and peaceful coexistence is possible
in Ukraine. It is up to the political actors to work, through
dialogue, towards achieving that noble aspiration in
order to protect the entire region from a confrontation
with disastrous humanitarian consequences.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We join other members in expressing our
thanks to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto
Zannier for the detailed briefings they have just
delivered and of which we have taken careful note.
My delegation pays close attention to the situation
in Ukraine, especially the complex crisis in the eastern
part of the country. We believe that the crisis must be
resolved politically in order to achieve the stabilization
of the country and to strengthen and improve relations
with the countries of the region. Given the complexity
and fragility of the security, stability and development
situation, which has yet to be resolved, we believe
that the parties involved must show greater resolve
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

and willingness to improve the situation in the east of
the country.
In that context, my delegation calls on the parties to
exercise restraint in order to prevent certain actions and
decisions from causing an escalation of the situation
between them, leading to long-term consequences.
We also encourage them to refrain from future actions
that could aggravate and destabilize the situation,
thereby undermining the efforts of the international
community, including those of the Security Council, to
seek a peaceful solution to the crisis. That is why we
call for their cooperation to reduce tensions.
As it has reiterated on other occasions, the
Government of Equatorial Guinea believes that the
implementation of the Minsk agreements in their
entirety remains essential to the restoration of peace
and the achievement of stability in the region. We
therefore regret the daily violations of the ceasefire, in
direct breach of the Minsk agreements, and urge the
parties to work towards a solution to the crisis in the
eastern part of the country, taking into account the
package of measures contained in that agreement.
We recall that the Minsk agreements, signed in
February 2015 and ratified in resolution 2202 (2015),
remain the foundation of the international community’s
commitment to the peaceful settlement of the conflict
in Ukraine. We therefore encourage the parties to
respect the full implementation of the agreements
and to focus their efforts on facilitating an inclusive
dialogue, in which the interests of all citizens prevail,
that helps to strengthen harmonious relations among
the various ethnic groups of Ukraine.
In conclusion, we once again commend the work of
humanitarian actors in delivering humanitarian aid in
the region in order to provide vital assistance. We also
express our support for and welcome the efforts of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission, in particular to facilitate
dialogue, as well as to maintain stability in the region.
We encourage the parties to prioritize dialogue and to
show greater political will in order to help to reduce
tensions and find a lasting solution to the crisis.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset, we
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
High Commissioner Zannier for their briefings today.
With regard to the matter brought to the attention
of this meeting, South Africa continues to encourage

S/PV. 8575

all the parties to strengthen all diplomatic efforts so as
to avoid an escalation of tensions and work towards an
inclusive, sustainable and peaceful solution based on
cooperation and genuine dialogue. It is also of critical
importance that all the parties refrain from actions that
could be viewed as provocative, which may further
impede a peaceful resolution of the situation.
Non-implementation of existing agreements leads
to unintended consequences. We wish to reiterate the
necessity for all the parties to fully implement all their
respective commitments under the Minsk agreements,
which provide the most promising road map for the
peaceful settlement of the current hostilities, including
in eastern Ukraine, and to advance the cause of peace
and stability in the wider region.
In conclusion, we encourage all parties to approach
dialogue in the spirit of compromise in order to move
the process forward.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me start on a
positive note, namely, that Russia and Mr. Nebenzia’s
intervention today insisted that we should not populate
the issue of the language law with other topics. That
is positive because, from our perspective, the adoption
or the discussion of a language law does not really
constitute a threat to peace and security and does not
need to be discussed in the Security Council. I see
a very positive shift in the position of Russia, which
until now has always insisted that questions that are not
directly related to peace and security or to human rights
issues be discussed in Geneva. So we welcome that.
Regarding the law itself, we agree with what
Mr. Zannier said, namely, that a language law should
unite, not divide, a people. We welcome the signals that
have been sent out by the new Ukrainian President.
As Russia highlighted human rights issues, Germany
would like to do the same. We would like to recall today
the treatment of minorities in occupied Crimea. The
Crimean media and organizations are banned. There
is a recent Human Rights Watch report that Crimean
Tatars are targeted, arrested and prosecuted without any
evidence. We would appeal to the Russian authorities
that they respect the fundamental rights, the freedoms
of opinion, expression and association and the religion
of minorities. The backdrop, of course — what is going
on in Crimea — is the blatant violation of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity through Russia’s
illegal occupation of Crimea.

19-2186315/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

Talking about human rights, and Russia mentioned
this, what is being done to compensate the families
of the victims of Flight MH-17 — 298 men, women
and children, who lost their lives after having been
shot down by Russian weapons. A gesture by Russia
tomorrow on the fifth anniversary of the shooting down
would be very welcome. As the Security Council, we
recently visited Colombia and we all witnessed the
so-called truth commission. Why not have a truth
commission and find out what happened there so that
the family members of the victims learn the truth about
the shooting down of Flight MH-17? What about the
victims of the ongoing violation of the ceasefire? When
Russia talks about the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, the first and most important paragraph of
the Minsk agreements was a ceasefire. There continues
to be a violation of the Minsk agreements. We see
that the heavy weapons have not been withdrawn. I
would also like to mention the unacceptable attack on
a Ukrainian medical vehicle on 1 July, in which there
were three casualties.
With regard to human rights, there are 24 detained
Ukrainian servicemen. Such detention violates
international law. For Germany, respect for international
law and international court rulings is fundamental in
an international rules-based order. I could add elements
but refer to what my French, Belgian, United Kingdom
and Polish colleagues said. There is a new President
in Ukraine. The President clearly said that he wanted
to overcome the stalemate. He has made gestures, one
of which the German delegation has raised at each and
every discussion in the Security Council, that is, with
regard to the bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska. Right away
the President unilaterally withdrew. He is ready to
rebuild the bridge. We need such a gesture from Russia
to echo Ukraine’s gestures and to alleviate the situation
for the citizens because it is the only connection
between the occupied area around Luhansk and the rest
of Ukraine.
Germany remains committed to the Normandy
format. There was a good meeting of the advisers. We
hope that the new spirit that has been brought about
by the new President in Ukraine prevails and that we
will now see progress on the implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
16/23

16/07/2019

We thank this morning’s briefers — Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto Zannier — for their
briefings. I will begin by welcoming the recent decision
of the Russian and Ukrainian Presidents to resume talks
under the Normandy format and to continue working at
the expert level, including with a view to a prisoner
exchange in the near future.
In line with the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, Peru recognizes and supports the efforts
of the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact
Group to facilitate a political solution to the situation
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. In that regard, we
believe that both countries should capitalize on those
opportunities and mechanisms to promote dialogue,
while refraining from actions that exacerbate tensions
and hinder the possibilities for dialogue between
the parties.
In that regard, we took note of the entry into force of
the law to strengthen the use of the Ukrainian language,
and we express our concern that the rights of linguistic
minorities in the country, such as those in Donbas, may
be affected. Similarly, we also express our concern
about the Russian executive order to expeditiously
grant Russian nationality to residents of those regions,
given that they are controlled by separatist groups.
Therefore, in line with the decision of the
Presidents of both countries, we call on all parties
and actors involved to work together with a view to
promoting trust and dialogue and to step up the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, starting with
the ceasefire commitment.
For Peru, the Minsk agreements remain the legal
basis for and the political solution to the situation
in eastern Ukraine, and we support the package of
measures and its full implementation endorsed by the
Council more than four years ago. In that regard, we
take this opportunity to welcome the decision by both
parties to withdraw their troops and artillery from the
Stanytsia Luhanska area, which also helps address
the serious humanitarian situation. We acknowledge
the important work and efforts of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in carrying out that task.
In conclusion, I reiterate our commitment to the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Ukraine within internationally recognized borders,
in line with the Charter of the United Nations and the
Minsk agreements.
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

I now I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I thank the
members of the Security Council, as well as the briefers,
for their remarks. We have taken good note of them.
Nearly two months ago, on 20 May, the Security
Council clearly stated its position on the Russian request
to discuss Ukraine’s language law by rejecting it (see
S/PV.8529). At that time, the Russian representative,
however, demonstrated outrageous disrespect for the
Council’s rules and its members by abusing its right to
speak in explanation of vote and delivering a lengthy
statement on substance.
Now Russia yet again wants to talk about Ukraine’s
law on the functioning of Ukrainian as the State
language, as if it might threaten international peace and
security and as if there were no more important issue on
the Council agenda. In fact, this matter has no relation
whatsoever to international peace and security and has
nothing to do with the implementation of resolution
2202 (2015).
On 22 May, I sent a letter to the Council with a
detailed argumentation of the issue, contained in
document S/2019/422, which I cite for the convenience
of Council members. I just want to stress the following.
A country that, for centuries, suppressed the
Ukrainian language and forcefully replaced it with
Russian in all spheres of public life is not in a position
to tell us now what language we should speak and
write. Let us compare. There are Ukrainian schools
in Australia, Argentina, Slovakia and many other
countries. Russia, where about 3 million Ukrainians
live — that is according only to the official count, but
unofficially many more live there — does not have a
single Ukrainian school. Moreover, there were seven
Ukrainian and 15 Crimean Tatar schools in Crimea
before the Russian occupation in 2014. The occupying
authorities closed all Ukrainian schools and half of
the Crimean Tatar schools. I can only repeat the words
from the Sermon on the Mount:
“Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine
own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out
the mote out of thy brother’s eye.” (The Holy Bible,
Matthew, 7:5)

S/PV. 8575

As far as our language law is concerned, let me
say once again that is our own issue subject to our own
work, and we will sort it out ourselves with the help
of our partners, including the High Commissioner on
National Minorities, the Venice Commission and other
relevant international institutions.
Every time the Russian delegation raises this
subject, it pursues a double goal — to put political
pressure on Ukraine and to distract attention from
other issues. In May, it tried to impose its own agenda
on the newly elected President of Ukraine, who was
inaugurated the very same day, and to distract attention
from the anniversary of the deportation of Crimean
Tatars by the Stalin regime.
Today, by raising this spurious issue four days
before the parliamentary elections in Ukraine, Moscow
is trying to provide political support to the pro-Russian
parties. At the same time, Moscow is trying to divert
attention from the anniversary of the downing by the
Russian military of flight MH-17 on 17 July 2014 and
from the implementation of the Minsk agreements, or,
to be more precise, their persistent non-implementation
by Russia. That is why my delegation requested that
the Security Council consider developments related to
the ongoing Russian-Ukrainian conflict, and we are
thankful for today’s discussion.
This is the first Council meeting on the RussianUkrainian conflict after the presidential elections
in Ukraine. I therefore would like to reiterate the
unwavering commitment of Ukraine’s new leadership
to the politico-diplomatic way of resolving the conflict.
The implementation of the Minsk agreements remains
among its top priorities.
Right after assuming his duties as Head of State,
President Zelenskyi took concrete steps towards
ensuring the potency of the Trilateral Contact Group,
the revitalization of the Normandy format and
achieving the disengagement of forces in Donbas.
Thus, the Ukrainian side has demonstrated in deed
its constructive approach in search of the conflict’s
resolution. What have we received in return?
Despite the agreement reached by the Trilateral
Contact Group on the ceasefire starting on 8 March,
the Russian occupation forces in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions have violated it almost 2,000 times.
Heavy weapons, prohibited by the Minsk agreements,
including tanks, heavy artillery and mortars, have
been used almost 800 times. Those provocations have

19-2186317/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

16/07/2019

resulted in the death of 36 Ukrainian servicemen.
Approximately 200 servicemen have been wounded. In
June alone, Ukraine lost nine military personnel owing
to unprovoked enemy fire.

and the Russian delegation still wants to discuss the use
of Ukrainian language in the public life of my country.
For those who have forgotten, I will cite paragraph 1 of
resolution 2286 (2016):

Since the new President took office, the Russian
forces and their proxies have almost doubled their
ceasefire violations. Is that what Russian peace
proposals look like? The Russian forces intentionally
target civilian infrastructure facilities throughout the
area. Is that an invitation to the direct talks that the
Russian Federation persistently calls for? Detailed
information on all such violations has been regularly
reported by the Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for five years, but the Russian delegation
prefers to talk here about the language law.

“[The Security Council] strongly condemns acts
of violence, attacks and threats against the wounded
and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties,
their means of transport and equipment”.

The situation on the ground appears very bleak, as
Russia shows no indication of readiness to abandon its
aggressive goals in Ukraine. The implementation of the
Minsk agreements by the Kremlin, first and foremost
in the security sphere, remains stalled. The illegal
“passportization” continues. The security situation in
Donbas continues to deteriorate. The de-occupation of
Crimea has not started. Ukrainian citizens continue
to be used as hostages by Moscow in its hybrid war
against my country. The Charter of the United Nations,
the norms of international law and the binding orders
of international courts and tribunals remain dead letter
for the Russian Federation, which keeps denying that it
is a party to the conflict that it masterminded, initiated
and continues to fuel.
Let us return to the Minsk agreements, namely, to
the package of measures of 12 February 2015, on which
Ambassador Nebenzia so enjoys lecturing the members
of the Council.
With regard to paragraph 1 on an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire (see resolution 2202 (2015),
annex), recently, the Russian forces intensified the
shelling of Ukrainian military positions and residential
areas, using 122-millimetre and 152-millimetre heavy
artillery. On 1 July, an ambulance, bearing every
indication of medical transport, was targeted by the
Russian occupation forces with an anti-tank rocket. As
a result, two Ukrainian medics evacuating a wounded
soldier near the village of Vodyane were killed, and one
died later in the hospital. Did the militants not know that
shelling a medical vehicle is a violation of the norms of
international humanitarian law? Of course they knew,
18/23

The Russian delegation persistently asserts that
Moscow has no obligations under the Minsk agreements
and that it is only an impartial observer and mediator.
Let us inject a dose of reality into those delirious claims.
The 1st and 2nd Army Corps that constitute the main
fighting force in the occupied territories of Donbas
are part and parcel of Russia’s 8th Army, which has its
headquarters in Novocherkask, in the Rostov region of
Russia. All weapons, arms, ammunition, equipment
and fuel are supplied to the occupied Donbas courtesy
of the 8th Army. All command posts of any significance
are occupied by Russian officers. Therefore, the
responsibility for upholding any ceasefire agreement
rests with the Russian military leadership and not some
fictitious local militias. The Russian military presence
and active participation in the war is an established fact,
no matter how strenuously Russia may try to deny it.
With regard to paragraph 2 of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, related to the withdrawal of all heavy
weapons with the aim of creating a security zone, the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission continues to report
weapons in violation of the respective withdrawal
lines and outside of designated storage sites in the
Russian-occupied territories of Donbas and a constant
replenishment of fuel, lubricants and ammunition.
Hundreds of pieces of Russian heavy weapons continue
to pose a direct and serious military threat to Ukraine
and its defenders. Much more remains hidden from the
Mission’s eyes.
With respect to paragraph 3 of the package of
measures, related to the effective monitoring and
verification by the OSCE of the ceasefire regime and
the pull-out of heavy weapons, as reported by the
Special Monitoring Mission, the Russian occupation
authorities restrict the activities of the monitors,
including by denying access of the Mission to border
crossing points in the occupied parts of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

Concerning paragraph 10 of the package of
measures, related to the withdrawal of all foreign
armed formations, military equipment and mercenaries
from the territory of Ukraine under the monitoring of
the OSCE, reports from Donbas confirm that there
has been no withdrawal whatsoever. Instead, we see
a systematic and incessant flow of Russian-made
weapons, including the newest types, and ammunition
through the uncontrolled segment of the UkrainianRussian State border.
Which of the security provisions of the Minsk
agreements can be considered to have been implemented
by Russia? None. Not a single one. Despite the progress
made on disengagement in Stanytsia Luhanska, the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission still observes a
Russian military presence in areas where there should
be none. The OSCE Mission has reported men in
military-style clothing, who were illegally wearing
blue armbands with “Joint Centre for Control and
Coordination” (JCCC) written on them. We consider
such actions by the Russian side to be yet another
provocation, since, as of the end of 2017, only the
Ukrainian part of the JCCC has continued to discharge
its duties on site. As has already been mentioned in the
Council at previous meetings, the Russian Federation
has unilaterally and groundlessly withdrawn its officers
from the bilateral structure. No one is authorized to
replace them.
Despite ample proof of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine in Donbas, it remains in denial. That is
Moscow’s usual tactic — to deny the obvious, despite
any evidence. It is the same way it denied the presence
of its troops in Crimea and its role in seizing the
peninsula. It is the same way it denied its role in the
downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17, which
killed almost 300 passengers. Tomorrow will mark five
years since that tragedy. I would again like to convey
Ukraine’s deepest condolences to the families of all
of the victims and reassure them that the perpetrators
must and will be held to account, in compliance with
resolution 2166 (2014).
Ukraine fully supports the efforts by the Joint
Investigation Team, which includes investigators and
prosecutors from the Netherlands, Australia, Belgium,
Malaysia and Ukraine. The start of criminal prosecution
is an important milestone in uncovering the full truth
and ensuring that justice will be done. We welcome the
decision of the Netherlands and Australia to hold the

S/PV. 8575

Russian Federation responsible under international law
for its role in the downing of flight MH-17.
Let me also remind the Council of an event that
took place on 25 November last year, when Russia
attacked and captured the Ukrainian navy ships
Berdyansk and Nikopol and the tugboat Yana Kapu,
as well as 24 Ukrainian servicemen. That was nothing
more than another act of aggression of the Russian
Federation against Ukraine. It was a blatant violation
of the core principle of customary international law
and international law of the sea — the immunity of
warships. Russian overtly neglects warship immunity
and creates a dangerous precedent that irreparably
harms the whole system of the freedom of navigation
on the high seas.
Russia has continued to deny that international
wrongful act, but today it has gone even further. It
denies the jurisdiction of the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) and ignores its binding
orders. On 25 May, ITLOS ruled in the Case concerning
the detention of three Ukrainian naval vessels (Ukraine
v. Russian Federation) by 19 votes to 1 that Russia
should immediately release the three vessels and ensure
their return to the custody of Ukraine, and release its
24 servicemen and allow them to return to Ukraine.
Russia has not implemented it.
We do not know the condition of those military
vessels. We do know the situation with the 24 servicemen
of those vessels. They are in a Russian prison — the
infamous Lefortovo. They are very rarely allowed to
be visited by the Ukrainian Consul and have not seen
their families for more than seven months. Tomorrow,
a Russian court will consider the continuation of the
detention of the 24 Ukrainian servicemen. We call
on the Russian Federation to comply, at last, with the
binding orders of ITLOS, release the Ukrainian sailors
and let them return to Ukraine.
Russia’s general disregard for international law
is obvious as the Russian occupation administration
intensifies its repression of residents of Crimea under
the pretext of fighting terrorism. That is how Russia
reacts to hearings, which now take place at the
International Court of Justice, on the application of
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism and of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, and the Arbitral Tribunal in the matter
of the Dispute Concerning Coastal State Rights in the

19-2186319/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

16/07/2019

Black Sea, Sea of Azov, and the Kerch Strait (Ukraine
v. the Russian Federation).

fortification structures there. Fifthly, it should agree on
the opening of additional crossing checkpoints.

The Russian occupation authorities continue to
deny proper medical assistance to Ukrainian citizens
in detention. They ignore the decision of the European
Court of Human Rights of 11 June and refuse to transfer
disabled Crimean Tatar Edem Bekirov to a hospital.
Russia must immediately and unconditionally release
all Ukrainian citizens illegally held by the Kremlin,
including in the Russian-occupied parts of Ukraine.
Until then, they must be given all necessary medical
assistance and legal protection.

Of course, this is a very short list and I could go
on and on naming relevant measures. But we must start
somewhere. Let us make a difference. As the famous
Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu said, centuries ago: “A
journey of thousand miles begins with a single step.”

Russia’s blatant disrespect of international
jurisdictional bodies should receive an appropriate
response. We call for the strengthening of political
and economic sanctions on the aggressor State until
Russia stops violating human rights in the temporarily
occupied Crimea, releases all illegally detained citizens
of Ukraine and de-occupies the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol.
I do not have a recipe for a political settlement to
the conflict. Various ideas and initiatives have been
introduced to provide additional impetus. None of
them has worked so far. People are still being killed,
ceasefires do not hold and the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. The best the Council can do
today is to express concern or call on the parties to do
something. That is very unfortunate, particularly as the
parties are present in the Chamber, even though one of
them pretends it is not a party.
Let us be practical. I would like to suggest very
specific, simple and doable measures that Russia can
implement, if Moscow really wishes to contribute to the
resolution of the conflict and make the lives of civilians
in the conflict zone at least a little bit easier.
First, it must ensure that the so-called harvest
ceasefire, which was agreed by the Normandy Four,
is sustained and withdraw heavy weaponry. Secondly,
it should unblock the process of prisoner exchange,
including in relation to the Ukrainian citizens detained
by the Russian occupation authorities; provide access
to them, including by the International Committee of
the Red Cross; and allow searches for missing persons.
Thirdly, it must unconditionally release the 24 Ukrainian
servicemen, as ordered by the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea. Fourthly, it must withdraw its
military from the disengagement area and dismantle its
20/23

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should indeed like to comment on the
remarks made by certain colleagues in their statements.
I will begin with my friend, Ambassador Heusgen.
I do not know who told him what I said, but the way
he interpreted my statement makes it clear that it was
restated in an inaccurate manner. I can repeat my
statement for him personally later, should he so wish.
However, I will not dignify my British colleague
with a response to his numerous questions. This is due
not to a lack of respect for my colleague, but to the simple
fact that he does not need these responses. He lives
within his own paradigm and those questions he has put
forward are, for him, rhetorical. They also contain the
responses that he wishes to hear and therefore he has no
need for other answers. Incidentally, I have proposed
that my British colleague visit Crimea personally and
take a look at the so-called suffering of Crimeans,
including Crimean Tatars, so that he can draw his own
conclusions, rather than read out the narrative that is
duly provided to him by the British Foreign Office.
Incidentally, in Crimea it would be possible to
familiarize oneself with the educational system in
three State languages: Russian, Ukrainian and Crimean
Tatar, which our American colleague was so concerned
about today. Not a word, however, was said about the
topic of today’s meeting and in no way did he even
comment on the words of the High Commissioner on
National Minorities, who indeed provided a great deal
of interesting information.
We assumed that a number of Council members
would do everything possible to avoid discussion of
the topic at hand today. They raised many issues, but
not what we proposed to be put forward for discussion.
This is truly no surprise to us. We have long attempted
to convey to the Council that the picture members
are painting in their imagination, which is duly being
19-21863

16/07/2019

Ukraine

delivered to them by the Ukrainian authorities about
freedom-loving, democratic Ukraine engaged in an
uneven struggle with a brutal aggressor, has nothing to
do with reality.
They do not see that the reality of the situation is, in
fact, straight out of their imagination or rather the myth
that they have created for themselves; more accurately,
perhaps they simply do not wish to see it. They do not
wish to understand that their indulgence towards Kyiv
prompts a feeling of lawlessness, all-permissiveness
and impunity. They do not wish to hear that what is
really happening in Ukraine is the enmity and hostility
being cultivated in society vis-à-vis Russia. I will offer
three brief examples to illustrate that.
The Ukrainian television channel News One
announced a television broadcast and a link with
Russia One. Ordinary citizens, not politicians, were
tracked to an unprecedented level by nationalists with
the connivance of the authorities. Information surfaced
yesterday that the general producer of the channel
was questioned by the Ukrainian security forces as
part of “a criminal affair on encroachment upon on
a state offence or treason” — all this for an attempt
to set up a television broadcast. The building of the
Ukrainian channel 112 Ukraine was fired on with
mortars in the centre of Kyiv for its plans to screen the
documentary Revealing Ukraine, by Oliver Stone, a
well-known United States director. This mortar attack
was denounced by the National Union of Journalists of
Ukraine, who claimed that a war was being waged in
Ukraine against journalists and mass media. Dmytro
Yarosh, the former head of the Right Sector party
and a deputy from the outgoing Rada, recommended
that workers of television channels quit and that all
those concerned about violations of human rights and
freedom of speech should shut their mouth.
Kyrill Vyshinsky, head of RIA Novosti Ukraine, has
been behind bars for a year now. He is accused of State
treason for some reports he delivered. These instances
and examples abound. I can list many, but members of
the Council — at least, many of them — simply do not
wish to hear it.
We regret the fact that some have been unable to
resist the temptation to use today’s meeting in order to
capitalize on the sensitive issue of the disaster of the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in Ukraine
in July 2014. On the eve of the fifth anniversary of
this tragedy, we once again extend our most sincere

S/PV. 8575

condolences to the families of the dead. We believe that
every family deserves to know the truth about what
really occurred on that unfortunate day. For that reason,
from the very beginning we have called for a thorough
and impartial international investigation in line with
resolution 2166 (2014) and have repeatedly stressed our
willingness to join and to deliver the necessary support.
Unfortunately, we cannot trust the actions of
the Joint Investigation Team, which is comprised of
Australia, Belgium, the Netherlands, Malaysia and
Ukraine itself, to be impartial. Questions regarding
the proceedings of the work surfaced right after
four out of five States, on 7 August 2014, signed a
confidential agreement that enabled the filtering of
any information. Malaysia had long been denied an
opportunity to fully participate in the investigation.
I do not know whether the Council has heard that the
Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir Mohamad, at a
meeting with journalists on 30 May, cast doubt on the
outcomes or the result of the work of the group. We
concur with his opinion that there is an impression that
the purpose of the investigation is not to shed light on
the circumstances of what took place but rather to pin
all blame on the Russian Federation.
Incidentally, I am surprised that the statement
delivered by my friend Ambassador Heusgen, who
referred to international law and demonstrated an
incredible level of legal nihilism, calling upon the
Russian Federation to pay compensation for the victims
when there have been no judicial proceedings and no
one has yet been identified as the culprit. I wish to
recall the fact that, in October 2016, we conveyed the
initial unredacted radar data and remain the only ones
to have done so.
Regarding flight MH-17, I would like to ask our
United States colleague about the whereabouts of the
satellite images from United States satellites over the
crash site that have long been spoken of and which the
United States has refused to provide. At a recent press
conference, on 19 June, the representatives of the Joint
Investigation Team were unable to answer the question
of why Russian data was not taken into account but the
data of other countries was not even provided, just as
they were unable to say why they had disregarded the
fact that the rocket that allegedly downed the Boeing
had come from the Ukrainian armed forces, when that
fact had been established by the Russian side after the
Joint Investigation Team itself displayed fragments of

19-2186321/23

S/PV.8575

Ukraine

that rocket. The politicization of this Group is to us
completely evident.
I will not speak in depth about the incident in
the Kerch Strait. I would simply say — I do not
know whether Council members are aware of this or
not — that Russia proposed releasing those sailors
to return to Ukraine provided that they consented to
participate in criminal proceedings to take place in
the Russian Federation. This idea was immediately
rejected by Ukraine’s Foreign Minister and, by the
way, subsequently questioned and called into doubt by
President Zelenskyi.
I will not talk about that, but I will read out a single
quotation about how the day before the inauguration
of the President, the former Deputy Head of the
Presidential Administration, Andriy Portnov, filed
a complaint with the State Bureau of Investigation in
relation to actions by former President Poroshenko in
connection with that incident:
“The aforementioned instances were the result of
planned illegal actions by an individual who at
the time occupied the post of President of Ukraine
and was the senior military commander of the
country’s armed forces. In other words, as part
of an organized group of individuals having full
information about the tensions in the Kerch Strait,
aware of the likelihood the Russian Federation’s
armed forces would undertake aggressive action,
and fully understanding the risks to the life, health
and freedom of Ukrainian servicemen as well as
potential damages and loss of military equipment
and weapons stemming from his actions, President
Poroshenko deliberately instructed or consented to
the instruction ordering a group of naval vessels
belonging to the Ukrainian armed forces to be
transferred from the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov
through the Kerch Strait, which was fully under the
control of the Russian naval forces.”
In conclusion, I wish to tell my Ukrainian colleague
the following. My Ukrainian colleague used the wellknown tactic of twisting notions that the Ukrainian
side has long favoured. It is as if he were not at the
meeting commemorating the Minsk agreements when
the question concerning the presence of Russian
troops in Donbas was answered, not by us but by the
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. We remember very well what
they said in this regard.
22/23

16/07/2019

Nevertheless, the Ukrainian side is obstinately
using the term “Russian militants”. They can of course
be Russian — there are many Russians in Ukraine — but
they are in fact representatives of the Donbas region and
not of the Russian Federation. Incidentally, he forgot to
mention how many civilians in Donbas, Luhansk and
Donetsk died as a result of the shelling by the valiant
and knightly Ukrainian forces. I wish to stress that
these were civilians. I would like to reiterate for the
Council’s understanding that it was not Donbas that
marched on Kyiv, but Kyiv that came to Donbas.
I will not continue to describe the way Ukraine
has been sabotaging the Minsk agreements. Earlier,
the representative of Ukraine proposed measures that
need to be adopted to begin to resolve the conflict, but
he spoke to the Russian side, again resorting to the
tactic of twisting notions. We have said, we are saying
and we will continue to say that until the Ukrainian
side engages in direct dialogue with representatives of
Donetsk and Luhansk — not with Russia — there will
be no progress in this conflict.
I have asked this many times in this Chamber:
Why is it that when we discuss other conflicts that have
unfortunately engulfed the world — the Syrian, Yemeni
or Libyan conflicts, or indeed any other conflict — we
call on the parties to the conflict to sit down at the
negotiating table and we do not allege that external
players supplant those parties to the conflict. It is only
in the case of Ukraine that many Council members are
obstinately attempting to make Russia speak to Ukraine
rather than to those individuals in Donbas, Donetsk and
Luhansk who are the direct parties to this confrontation.
Lastly, the representative of Ukraine mentioned
that we are instructing the Ukrainians on what
language needs to be spoken in Ukraine. We are not
giving any such instructions. This is Ukraine’s law,
which instructs its citizens as to what languages they
are allowed to speak and what languages they are not
allowed to speak.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Ukraine has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): To
show respect to my Russian colleague, Mr. Vassily
Nebenzia, I have chosen to speak in Russian, especially
since it would seem to be appropriate in the light of his
fabricated topic for today’s meeting. I will be very brief.
19-21863

16/07/2019

S/PV. 8575

Ukraine

The second statement delivered by Mr. Nebenzia
bore out my gravest concerns, namely, that once again
he has confused a Security Council meeting with a
talk show — a very popular talk show in the Russian

Federation called 60 Minutes, with Olga Skabeeva. But
today’s meeting is not a talk show.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m..

19-2186323/23
