S/PRST/2003/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 July 2003
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4793rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 July 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates the need for Ivorian political forces to
implement fully and without delay all the provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, as well as those of the agreement signed in Accra on 8 March 2003
(“Accra II”), with a view to open, free and transparent elections being held in
2005. The Council takes note with satisfaction of the formation of a
government of national reconciliation and the progress made, particularly the
identification of cantonment areas and the delegation of powers to the Prime
Minister, and is looking forward to new progress in accordance with the LinasMarcoussis Agreement. The Council also welcomes the “joint declaration by
Côte d’Ivoire defense and security forces and the armed forces of the Forces
Nouvelles” of 4 July 2003 (S/2003/704).
“The Security Council emphasizes, however, that much remains to be
done to achieve the full implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
In this regard, the Council endorses the recommendations of its mission to
West Africa (S/2003/668). The Council calls on Ivorian political forces to
redouble their efforts in the following areas: voting for the amnesty bill
submitted to the National Assembly by the Government, the complete
implementation of a “disarmament, demobilization and reintegration”
programme, the extension of public services and the authority of the State to
areas still under control of the Forces Nouvelles, the appointment of ministers
for defence and interior security, the guarantee of equal security for all
ministers, the dismantling of militias throughout the country and the
termination of the activities of mercenaries and of the purchase of weapons.
“The Security Council renews its support and encouragement to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire. It asks him
to keep the Council closely informed of developments towards the full
implementation of the above objectives. It is pleased that the United Nations
Mission in Côte d’Ivoire (MINUCI) is now operational and hopes it will soon
be fully staffed, including in such crucial areas as the political and human
rights components.

03-44182 (E)

250703

*
0
3
4
4
1
8
2
*

S/PRST/2003/11

“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and France in
contributing to a peaceful solution to the crisis. It welcomes in particular the
satisfactory deployment of their peacekeeping forces in the western part of the
country to support the implementation of the ceasefire reached on 3 May. The
Council calls on Member States to continue to respond to the appeal made at
the donors’ conference in Paris on 18 July, attended by the Executive Secretary
of ECOWAS and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and to
provide logistic and financial support to ECOMICI so that it can continue to
fulfil its important mandate.
“The Security Council invites donor countries to contribute to the
reconstruction of Côte d’Ivoire in compliance with the commitments
undertaken at Kleber.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the continued existence of
regional factors of instability, particularly the use of mercenaries and child
soldiers, and the spread of small arms and light weapons which prevent a
lasting solution to the crisis in the region. The Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit recommendations to the Council as soon as possible on
ways to combat such subregional and cross-border problems, focusing in
particular on better coordination of United Nations efforts.
“The Security Council is convinced that a lasting solution to the
problems of the subregion also requires genuine cooperation among all States
concerned, together with confidence-building measures and the personal
commitment of heads of State in the subregion.”

2
