S/PV.9374

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9374th meeting

Wednesday, 12 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward/Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Kuymizakis
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2023/477)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20469 (E)
*2320469*

Accessible document

Please recycle

Colombia

S/PV.9374

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2023/477)

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia; and Ms. Diana María Salcedo
López, Spokesperson for the Special Women’s Instance
for the follow-up of the implementation of the peace
agreement in Colombia and Director of the International
League of Women for Peace and Freedom.
begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/477, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in Spanish): I welcome
this new opportunity to present the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia (S/2023/477) and to update the Council on
developments related to the implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace and other peacebuilding efforts.
2/18

It is a pleasure, as always, to be with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán,
to whom I reiterate my gratitude for the continued
collaboration of the Government of President Petro
Urrego with the Mission and with the United Nations,
as a whole. I am also honoured to be in the presence of
Ms. Diana María Salcedo López, an outstanding leader
who has worked tirelessly on the implementation of the
gender provisions of the Agreement and on the national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.
(spoke in English)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

12/07/2023

When the Council met in July last year (see
S/PV.9094), a new Administration had just been elected
in Colombia amid great optimism about the prospects
for peacebuilding to advance. At that time, I highlighted
the enormous opportunity and responsibility that
the Government of President Gustavo Petro Urrego
would have in accelerating the implementation of
the Agreement.
I believe that the advances registered in the
Secretary-General’s latest report are an indication
that implementation is gaining traction across several
sections of the Agreement, including those that have
been lagging behind despite having the greatest
potential to address the root causes of the conflict.
Especially noteworthy are the numerous peace-related
provisions of the National Development Plan, the
increased attention given to comprehensive rural
reform and the allocation of much-needed funds for the
implementation of the peace agreement.
The establishment of the Ministry of Equality,
led by Vice-President Francia Márquez, as well as
progress by her Office in crafting ways to further the
implementation of the Agreement’s ethnic chapter,
are important steps for improving the situation of
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities and
other vulnerable groups.
Sound planning and coordination will be important
if we are to maximize the potential of those initiatives
to bring tangible peace dividends. To that end, I
take this opportunity to reiterate the importance of
following through on the decision to appoint a top
official within the presidency dedicated to overseeing
the implementation of the Final Agreement.
Congress also has a key role to play in the
implementation of the Agreement. I welcome the
23-20469

12/07/2023

Colombia

approval of legislation pertaining to the comprehensive
rural reform and trust that all political actors
will continue to find ways to build consensus to
consolidate peace.
(spoke in Spanish)
The centrality of victims is a promise of the
Agreement and a fundamental principle of its
implementation. As the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
continues to move forward in its various macro-cases,
including through new indictments, the voices of
victims demanding truth, justice, reparation and
non-repetition have resounded loudly in recent hearings
of the Jurisdiction, with participants from the various
parties to the conflict.
One such hearing took place in Dabeiba, Antioquia,
despite death threats from those seeking to obstruct
truth and justice. Public security force witnesses
gave impactful testimonies acknowledging their
responsibility in extrajudicial executions — crimes that
illustrate the degradation of the conflict. The presence
of several Government Ministers and officials at these
proceedings is a significant gesture and an important
step towards the imperative goal of non-repetition.
I am confident that the SJP will continue to move
decisively towards the issuance of the first sanctions
of its own, which will undoubtedly mark another
milestone in the Colombian peace process. In addition,
victims and civil society organizations have persisted
in seeking justice for crimes related to sexual violence
in the conflict and continue to await a final decision
by the SJP with respect to the opening of Case 11 on
this issue. Finally, with respect to the SJP, I would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate my solidarity in
the face of the new threats denounced yesterday by the
President of the SJP, Justice Roberto Vidal.
(spoke in English)
With regard to the reintegration process, I echo the
Secretary-General in commending the Government’s
new approach, stressing sustainability, communitybased reintegration with an emphasis on reconciliation,
access to land, and gender and women’s empowerment.
The approval by the parties of a sustainability strategy
to support collective productive projects and the
allocation of funding for this purpose are important
actions. The approval of new collective projects,
additional support for individual initiatives and for
access to employment would significantly boost

S/PV.9374

thousands of former combatants’ livelihoods and help
anchor their transition into civilian life.
Regrettably, violence continues to hinder the
realization of the full potential of the Agreement. I trust
that recent actions with regard to security guarantees
such as the adoption of a new security and defence
policy will soon yield results and help improve the
situation in conflict-affected regions. One such region
is Catatumbo, where I recently had the opportunity to
attend a humanitarian round table convened by local
leaders and grass-roots organizations. Their pleas for
an increased presence of State institutions and services,
legal alternatives to illicit crops, and perseverance in
resolving armed conflict through dialogue, are the
same ones heard in many parts of the countryside.
As the implementation of rural reform advances, we
see an increase in violence against peasant leaders and
land claimants and in obstacles posed to Government
officials working on land reform. Also concerning is
the persistent violence against former combatants, five
of whom have been killed since the publication of the
report of the Secretary-General. Just last week, another
reintegration area was relocated due to insecurity, as
dozens of former combatants and their families moved
from Vista Hermosa, Meta, to the nearby municipality
of Granada. I trust that support from the Government
will soon result in lasting solutions for both former
combatants and host communities. Much more must be
done to protect those who exercise leadership and stand
up for the rights of entire communities, as well as those
who have laid down their arms in good faith under the
peace agreement.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to take this opportunity to condemn
once again the recent armed attack against members of
the Catholic Church in Caldono, Cauca, and to reiterate
our solidarity with the Church, which is an invaluable
ally in peacebuilding and reconciliation. Likewise, in
view of the territorial elections in October, I call on
illegal armed actors to respect the right of citizens
and candidates of all political parties to participate
in campaigns free of threats. I reiterate my call to the
authorities to take the measures needed to ensure that
the elections take place in a safe and participatory
environment, with full guarantees for the participation
of women in politics.
The Government’s push for the implementation
of key aspects of the peace agreement has been

23-204693/18

S/PV.9374

Colombia

12/07/2023

paralleled by efforts at dialogue with armed groups of
various kinds. These two strands are complementary
and mutually reinforcing. The results achieved in
Cuba in the third round of negotiations between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
are very encouraging. Last week, the cessation of
hostilities between the parties went into effect, a step
towards the full effectiveness of the bilateral, national
and temporary ceasefire on 3 August. Likewise, in a
few days, the National Commission on Participation,
which will promote the broad involvement of society
in the peace process, will be set up. I trust that the will
of the parties will be maintained and that it will lead to
further progress.

The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.

Moreover, and despite the challenges, the
rapprochement with the group that identifies itself
as the Estado Mayor Central Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo is
also noteworthy. The joint announcement made by the
Government and this group on 8 July with regard to
setting up a round of peace talks is positive news. I hope
that the building of trust between the parties continues
and that we will soon have developments with respect
to the formal start of negotiations and a renewed
national ceasefire. This and other dialogue initiatives
are an opportunity to achieve concrete commitments
to reducing the suffering of civilian victims of the
conflict and in particular to reducing violence against
ex-combatants and social leaders.

In the seventh year of implementation of the
Agreement, we recognize the commitments made by the
Government to bring the implementation to a balance
point, guaranteeing the inclusion of the Agreement
in the National Development Plan and in different
processes such as the formulation of the Colombia’s
national action plan pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000),
its feminist foreign policy and the “total peace” policy.
The Government must progress from the 12 per cent of
the gender provisions of the Final Agreement that have
been implemented so far to achieve material, tangible
and urgent results.

The dialogues also offer opportunities for the United
Nations to redouble its support for peace. Colombia is
going through a critical moment in which the determined
will of the parties, with the support of the international
community, could build on incipient peace processes.
In this context, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s belief
that the Mission can make an important contribution
through the monitoring and verification of ceasefires.
Undoubtedly, the progress made during this period
shows that, with the cooperation of various actors, the
efforts to build peace are yielding important results.
In order for Colombia to finally see the fulfilment
of its desire for non-repetition, it is essential to preserve
and build on what has been achieved, decisively face the
security challenges and not to falter in the search for a
solution to the violence that gives priority to dialogue.
We have before us a window of opportunity in which
the support of the Security Council is decisive.
4/18

I now give the floor to Ms. Salcedo López.
Ms. Salcedo López (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful
for the opportunity given to the Women’s Special
Instance for the Gender Approach to Peace to bring its
main reflections, analysis and recommendations on the
implementation of the Final Agreement and the gender
measures to the Security Council Chamber.
Before I begin, I would like to acknowledge and
remember all the women peacebuilders, signatories of
the Agreement and LGBTQI+ people, whose lives and
dignity have been taken away by the war.

First, with regard to comprehensive rural reform,
Colombia has been addressing the major challenges
resulting from years of a lack of structure and of
corruption and dispossession by taking encouraging
action at the State level, for example by significantly
increasing the budget of the National Land Agency and
formalizing land tenure for women. However, what is
particularly challenging is ensuring the role of women
and LGBTIQ+ persons in decision-making, as well
as the systematic inclusion of a gender approach and
specific measures in programmes with a territorial
approach and in the national plans for comprehensive
rural reform.
Secondly, with regard to political participation,
the Women’s Special Instance for a Gender Approach
in Peace acknowledges the work of congresswomen
in advancing the adoption of a bill criminalizing
acts of violence against women in politics. We hope
to see it implemented quickly in order to respond
to such violence, especially in the context of the
upcoming elections, and we also want to see measures
implemented to prevent violence against women, as well
23-20469

12/07/2023

Colombia

as racism and sexism, during the electoral campaigns
and the election process. We are advocating for more
meaningful and effective participation of women in the
civil monitoring and verification activities established
by the Agreement in order to ensure transparency in
public management and the proper use of resources.
We remain concerned about the lack of an LGBTIQ+
perspective among community members in political
leadership roles. With regard to security, given the lack
of guarantees ensuring that women can work in the
territories, we acknowledge the Government’s efforts
to develop seven policies under the auspices of the
Ministry of the Interior, in particular the Action Plan
of the Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards for
Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, which
is in the process of formulating inclusive activities.
Thirdly, with regard to ending the conflict, we
welcome the progress made in the areas of the “total
peace” policy, the progress made within the framework
of the National Commission on Security Guarantees in
including a gender approach, the new defence policy
and the support of the international community for
the policy of reintegrating the signatories to the Final
Agreement. In that regard, the Instance would like to
highlight the following points.
With regard to reintegration, we would like to
remind the Council that it is women who continue to
sustain the process of economic reintegration and
who have yet to fill decision-making positions, while
shouldering the burden of caring for their families
and communities — sometimes even unpaid — which
diverts their time, energy and expertise from the process
of political, community and economic reintegration.
Similarly, we note with deep concern the increase in
violence against women and girls in the territorial
training areas and surrounding areas, especially
violence within families, exploitation and sexual
violence. We especially call for ensuring that the
reintegration policy can implement and promote
measures to prevent violence against women and girls
and create safe environments where they can exercise
their rights. We underscore the significant history of
the peace signatories’ willingness to work with the
communities living close to the territorial training
areas. The projects and processes undertaken by the
signatories have often provided the municipalities with
better access to education, health and work.
We urge the Government to work quickly to improve
the security situation for former combatants and address

S/PV.9374

the series of murders that have left at least 12 women
dead since the signing of the Final Agreement, as well
as the other forms of violence against those who have
decided to continue to honour the Agreement. Peace
cannot come at the cost of the signatories’ lives. In
terms of security guarantees, the Instance emphasizes
the importance of consolidating a defence and security
policy under the current Government that in terms of
human security addresses the obligation to sustain and
safeguard lives. However, we are concerned about the
central role of militarization, the use of arms in security
policies and the increase in the defence budget for 2023,
which continues to exceed that of the social services.
Fourthly, with regard to resolving the problem of
illicit drugs, the Instance has demonstrated that thanks
to measures adopted by the Government, more efforts
have been made to counter trafficking networks. We
nonetheless call for a speedy review and implementation
of the activities of the National Comprehensive
Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops,
stepping up families and children’s participation in
them, overcoming structural obstacles such as the lack
of visibility of LGBTIQ+ persons, and acknowledging
the high levels of violence, such as feminicide,
exploitation, forced prostitution, sexual violence and
other crimes that are hallmarks of illegal economies.
Lastly, with regard to the victims of the armed
conflict, the Instance acknowledges the activities of the
committee established to follow up on and monitor the
recommendations of the Truth Commission’s report,
which are supporting the transition agenda in Colombia.
We encourage its implementation at the local level. We
welcome the modest 14 per cent budget increase for the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the announcement
of its opening of Case 11 on sexual and gender-based
violence. We underscore the need to ensure the provision
of sufficient numbers of suitable personnel to optimally
carry out investigations on an equal footing with other
cases and urge that the hearing processes acknowledge
the impact on LGBTIQ+ persons and come up with ways
to guarantee reparations and reintegration for them.
With regard to the Unit for the Search for Persons
Deemed as Missing, the Instance would like to draw
attention to the removal of the gender group from its
composition, which will be detrimental to constructive
and mainstreaming efforts to guarantee its mission
within the framework of the peace agreement. We
welcome the call of the Office of the Ombudsman to
advance the development of collective reparation plans

23-204695/18

S/PV.9374

Colombia

with a gender focus, in conjunction with the input of
women in the territories. We recommend improving
the quality of the psychosocial care system to enable
physical and emotional recovery for victims, particularly
those affected by sexual violence. Mental health must
be one of the main priorities of the Agreement where
surviving victims are concerned.
Finally, we acknowledge the Government’s work in
creating a “total peace” policy that integrates dialogue,
negotiations and consultations with the members of
illegal armed groups. We underscore the progress
made in strengthening the dialogue with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional. The national commission on the
participation of communities must guarantee the equal
participation of women and prioritize their agenda and
the immediate implementation of measures related to the
ceasefire, including on sexual violence in the conflict.
Concerning discussions with other armed groups, the
Instance urges for progress to be made in dismantling
and negotiating with those groups and in analysing the
structures that have been core drivers in the surge of
the conflict in relation to the establishment of illegal
economies and the strengthening of militant models.
The implementation of the peace agreement,
especially gender-related measures, can make the
difference in driving “total peace” forward and setting
an example for the resolution of other conflicts around
the world. Guaranteeing the lives of women and
LGBTIQ+ persons and people’s dignity is the path
to peace today. We call on the Security Council to
continue its timely, sustained and determined efforts so
that we can work towards making Colombia a country
where the people can live in dignity.
The President: I thank Ms. Salcedo López for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu
and Ms. Salcedo López for their briefings. I also
welcome Foreign Minister Leyva Durán to this meeting.
The United Kingdom welcomes the efforts made
by the Colombian Government to implement the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. We welcome the adoption
of the National Development Plan, which includes an
investment plan for peace. Ensuring funding to deliver
6/18

12/07/2023

reforms and strengthen the State presence across
Colombia will be essential to delivering progress in
the coming years. As Ms. Salcedo López has outlined,
the gender chapter is an essential element of the peace
agreement. We are concerned about the fact that
women leaders and female ex-combatants continue to
face conflict-related sexual violence, and we encourage
the Government of Colombia to continue to prioritize
the full implementation of the gender provisions of
the peace agreement. Political participation is also
critical to the implementation of the Agreement. As
we approach the regional elections in October, we
encourage the Government to take the necessary steps
to ensure the safety of peace signatories seeking to
participate in the democratic process.
We strongly condemn the violence against former
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants, human
rights defenders and social leaders. Since the signing
of the Agreement, more than 375 former FARC-EP
combatants have been killed. We urge the Government
to strengthen prevention and protection measures and
reiterate the importance of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees. The United Kingdom welcomes
the announcement in June of a ceasefire between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN) and hopes that communities will see genuine
improvements in their security. We expect the ELN
to approach its undertakings in good faith, and we are
following closely the efforts of the Government to reach
a ceasefire agreement with the Estado Mayor Central
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo.
Finally, we thank the Secretary-General for
providing the Security Council with options for an
expanded United Nations role in verifying ceasefire
agreements. We will share a draft resolution in the
coming days for discussion with Council members.
Let me assure Minister for Foreign Affairs Álvaro
Leyva Durán, Special Representative Ruiz Massieu and
the members of the Council that Colombia can count on
the United Kingdom to continue its support along their
path to peace and security for all Colombian people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement.
23-20469

12/07/2023

Colombia

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and welcome Minister
for Foreign Affairs Álvaro Leyva Durán of Colombia
to today’s meeting. I also listened attentively to the
statement by the civil society representative.
Thanks to the tireless efforts of the Government
and the people of Colombia, the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace has been implemented and the total peace policy
is being advanced. We welcome that, and we look
forward to all the parties in Colombia consolidating
the gains made and continuing to move towards
the goal of achieving a comprehensive, lasting and
sustainable peace.
The full implementation of the peace agreement
is at the centre of the peace process in Colombia. The
country’s recently adopted National Development Plan
has provided policy support and resource guarantees for
the implementation of important elements of the peace
agreement, such as rural reform, land distribution,
the substitution of illicit crops and the reintegration
of former combatants into society. We would like to
express our appreciation for that. Development is the
basis for sustainable peace. Effectively addressing
the root causes of conflicts requires reducing hunger
and poverty, narrowing the gap between urban and
rural areas, effectively improving people’s livelihoods
and increasing investment in development. We hope
that the agencies of the United Nations system and
international partners will provide active support
and assistance to Colombia in its efforts to promote
sustainable development, consolidate the achievements
of peace process and achieve lasting peace and security
in the country.
Curbing the violence of the conflict is crucial
for maintaining the population’s confidence in the
peace process. China appreciates the Colombian
Government’s commitment to eliminating conflictrelated violence through dialogue and negotiation. We
welcome the six-month ceasefire agreement reached
between the Colombian Government and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional during the third round of peace
talks and hope that the agreement will be effectively
respected and fully implemented. We support the
Colombian Government’s efforts to continue dialogue
and negotiations with other armed groups, to combat
illegal armed groups and violent organizations and
to curb the expansion of their power and scope of

S/PV.9374

activities, which is another integral part of realizing
a comprehensive peace in Colombia. We also support
the Colombian Government’s efforts to increase the
deployment of security forces in former conflict zones
that lack effective control and to strengthen security
protection for ex-combatants, women, children and
ethnic minorities.
China appreciates the important role played by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in
support of the peace process and supports the Security
Council in earnestly studying and actively considering
the expansion of the Mission’s mandate to participate
in the monitoring and verification of the ceasefires. We
believe that that would help to consolidate the positive
momentum of the current dialogue and the peace talks.
China is ready to work with the international community
to continue to support the Colombian-led and -owned
peace process and to help the Colombian people to
achieve greater success on the road to comprehensive
peace, stability and development.
Mr. Kuymizakis (Malta): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Representative Ruiz Massieu and
Ms. Salcedo López for their insightful briefings today,
and I welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
Colombia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Álvaro
Leyva Durán.
Malta remains encouraged by the efforts and
determination of the Government of Colombia to
bring about lasting and sustainable peace. Since our
last meeting in April (see S/PV.9303), we have seen
significant progress in the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, complemented by the
Government’s policy of total peace. We were pleased
to see the approval by Congress of the Government’s
National Development Plan, which includes key
elements of the peace agreement. We further welcome
the approval of key bills relating to comprehensive
rural reform and the Government’s recent purchase and
formalization of land in that regard. The culmination,
in Cuba, of the third round of peace talks between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
and the Agreement on a six-month national bilateral
ceasefire are also positive developments. Furthermore,
we welcome the announcement by the Government of
upcoming talks with several illegal armed actors, and
we call on them to seize this opportunity and engage in
good faith.

23-204697/18

S/PV.9374

Colombia

We acknowledge the request made by the
Government on 14 February for a further expansion
of the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and we look forward to
working closely with Security Council colleagues on
supporting the Government’s efforts for sustainable
and permanent ceasefires.
Malta is deeply concerned about the high levels
of violence perpetrated by illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations, which continue to undermine
peacebuilding efforts across Colombia. We condemn
in the strongest terms any violence and threats made
against judges and politicians, human rights defenders,
social leaders and LGBTIQ+ persons. We are deeply
concerned about reports of the forcible displacement of
thousands of people in recent months, and those forcibly
confined, as well as reports of the forced recruitment of
children, disproportionately affecting indigenous and
Afro-Colombians. We condemn the murder, violence
and threats against former combatants in several
regions of Colombia, particularly in areas under the
social and territorial control of illegal armed groups.
Government authorities must do all they can to stem
violence against civilians, including by increasing the
efforts to extend State presence in rural areas to protect
vulnerable communities.
As was highlighted again today, we are concerned
about the fact that the gender provisions of the
Agreement continue to face implementation challenges.
The recently approved bills to address violence against
women in politics and to establish a 50 per cent quota for
women’s membership in public entities are important
for ensuring that women can fully, meaningfully and
safely participate in the political process. Ongoing and
future peace initiatives must include specific measures
to prevent attacks, threats, killings and conflict-related
sexual violence against all women leaders and former
combatants. Malta supports the progress made by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace within Colombia’s
transitional justice system. We reiterate our support
for women and LGBTI organizations’ call to open
Case 11 on sexual and gender-based violence, and for
the full implementation of the Truth Commission’s
recommendations on reparations for victims of
sexual violence.
We are encouraged by the efforts to advance the
implementation of the ethnic chapter across the peace
agreement and urge the Government ensure adequate
funding to address historic inequalities. We also call
8/18

12/07/2023

for sustained attention and resources in the search for
those forcibly missing and disappeared.
Colombia continues to make progress towards
lasting and sustainable peace. Malta reaffirms its
commitment to supporting the peace process and
commends the determination and resilience of the
Colombia people.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ruiz
Massieu, for his briefing on the progress in the peace
process in Colombia. I also thank Ms. Salcedo López
for her insights related to the gender chapter of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. I extend a warm welcome
to Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán.
Colombia has again demonstrated its great potential
to become a model of peacebuilding through its best
practices. The approval of the Government’s National
Development Plan by Congress is another good
example of that. The Plan includes commitments to the
ethnic chapter of the Final Agreement and a plan for
rural reform, which are imperative for peacebuilding
in Colombia. Japan looks forward to the effective
implementation of the National Development Plan,
which will enable urban-rural gaps to be addressed
and promote comprehensive development. If sustaining
peace is to be achieved under the Plan, we reiterate
the importance of building resilient and transparent
institutions and systems, as well as providing capacitybuilding for every citizen, with human security at its
core. Furthermore, no peacebuilding effort can be
effective unless it is led by a Government that has the
trust of the people. In that regard, Japan underscores
the importance of the peaceful and non-violent conduct
of the department and municipal elections scheduled
for October.
Japan commends Colombia’s continued effort to
achieve “total peace” through dialogue, in addition to
the steady implementation of the 2016 Final Agreement.
We welcome the recent agreements between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional on
a six-month national bilateral ceasefire and an inclusive
mechanism for involving Colombian society in the
peace process. Japan also encourages other armed
groups to engage constructively in dialogue with the
Government to reach a ceasefire, and to refrain from
resorting to violent means.
23-20469

12/07/2023

Colombia

Japan appreciates the work by the United Nations
Verification Mission in supporting Colombia’s efforts.
In that regard, we note the request by the Government
for an expansion of the Mission’s mandate in order to
support its efforts to hold a dialogue with armed groups,
particularly in the verification of ceasefires. Taking
into account the Secretary-General’s recommendations,
Japan remains engaged in identifying how the Mission
can most effectively carry out its mandate and serve the
purpose of sustaining peace and stability in Colombia.
Japan condemns the continuing violence, most notably
in rural areas, including against former combatants,
social leaders and conflict-affected communities.
Creating an environment conducive to reintegration will
be key to addressing insecurity in the long term, as we
have seen from the example of the draft of the Strategic
Plan for Security and Protection for former combatants.
Long-term stability can be achieved only when
the peace process is shaped by its stakeholders, with
their own vision and full ownership. Reintegration
should be led by community-based initiatives with an
emphasis on reconciliation and the active participation
of all stakeholders, including women and young
people. To promote such initiatives, Council members
should encourage Colombia to continue utilizing the
Peacebuilding Commission.
In conclusion, Japan reaffirms its unwavering
commitment to supporting the peace process and
peacebuilding efforts in Colombia.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I thank Special Representative Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his valuable briefing and continued work in
Colombia. We listened carefully to Ms. Diana Salcedo
López, and I welcome the participation of Foreign
Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán in today’s meeting. I
would like to focus on three main points today.
First, the United Arab Emirates welcomes the
Government of Colombia’s continued dedication and the
steps it has taken to implement the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. That includes the recently approved National
Development Plan, which embeds the peace agreement
in its foundations. We are also encouraged by efforts to
implement the ethnic chapter and rural reform, while
also stressing the need to prioritize the implementation
of the gender provisions of the Agreement. Expanding
women’s political participation is an important step,
but it must be coupled with measures that address the

S/PV.9374

increased security risks and violence against women
and girls, particularly conflict-related sexual violence.
That includes using existing mechanisms, such as the
various components of the Comprehensive System
for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, to
advance the protection and promotion of women and
girls across Colombian society.
Secondly, we commend the approach of the National
Reintegration Council to ensuring a sustainable
strategy for the reintegration of former combatants.
Those men and women honoured their commitment
to the Final Agreement and facilitating their effective
and safe reintegration into Colombian society should
remain a priority. That includes implementing the
security guarantees, which are crucial to the success of
the Agreement.
That leads me to my third point. We remain
concerned about the persistent violence against
civilians, including former combatants and community
leaders, which threatens efforts for peacebuilding
and reconciliation. We recognize that the ongoing
peace talks, including the recent six-month ceasefire
agreement with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional,
are another tool for tackling violence in Colombia.
The Council can count on the United Arab Emirates’
constructive engagement in Council discussions
regarding the requested expansion of the mandate of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
to support the Government in its efforts towards peace,
and we reaffirm our full support for the Verification
Mission under the leadership of Special Representative
Ruiz Massieu.
In conclusion, the growing and continued
engagement between Colombia and the Council
continues to be an important process for safeguarding
the peace dividends achieved so far. It is also a clear
representation of the international community’s
commitment to peace in Colombia. That continued
engagement and cooperation will provide the necessary
support for Colombia to ensure long-term and
sustainable security, stability and prosperity.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative and Ms. Salcedo López for
their briefings. I also welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia to today’s meeting.
The quest for peace must involve dialogue. That
is why we welcomed the conclusion on 9 June of an
agreement on a six-month national ceasefire between the

23-204699/18

S/PV.9374

Colombia

Colombian Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional. We hope that first step will lead to a lasting
ceasefire. France welcomes the efforts made by the
Colombian authorities to broker further ceasefires with
several armed groups, particularly the Estado Mayor
Central Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia.
We support Colombia’s request for an extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia so that it can monitor and support the
implementation of the various commitments. That
is essential to reducing violence, the risk of which
remains particularly worrisome ahead of local elections
in October. Despite the progress that has been made,
security guarantees for former combatants, human
rights defenders and representatives of civil society are
still lacking.
The approval by Congress of the National
Development Plan is a positive step. France welcomes
the Government’s commitment and recent initiatives
on rural reform and access to land, in particular the
creation of a new agrarian jurisdiction. We also welcome
the priority given to the implementation of the ethnic
chapter of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We encourage
the Government to continue on that path with a view
to offering new, viable socioeconomic opportunities to
the people who have suffered because of the conflict
and continue to be subjected to violence by armed and
criminal groups. France welcomes the steady progress
made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and firmly
condemns the threats made against Colombian judges.
The first restorative sentences will open a new chapter
on the road to reconciliation.
In conclusion, the peace agreement is a historic
achievement, and Colombia’s willingness to build peace
through dialogue is an example for the international
community. We support the Colombian authorities in
their efforts to fully implement the peace agreement
and in the discussions that have started as part of the
“total peace” policy. There is admittedly still some way
to go, but Colombia is on the right track and France
stands ready to provide its full support.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and
my own country, Mozambique (A3).
We would like to express our profound
appreciation for the hard work carried out by the
10/18

12/07/2023

Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and his team in their efforts
to consolidate peace and stability in Colombia. We
extend our greetings and thanks to Ms. Diana María
Salcedo López, for the perspective shared. We welcome,
in this Chamber, the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Colombia.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
overall situation in Colombia during the reporting
period (S/2023/477) reflects the selfless efforts and
firm commitment of the Government and the people
of Colombia to consolidate an integrated framework
conducive to finding a lasting and sustainable
peace. That occurs despite the varied and complex
challenges faced by the Government and people of
Colombia. The approval of the Government’s National
Development Plan by Congress is one clear example
of the important steps taken in dealing with various
peace-related matters.
In that relentless quest for peace, the A3 warmly
congratulates His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Petro
Urrego, President of the Republic of Colombia, and the
leadership of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional for
the successful conclusion of the third round of peace
negotiations in Cuba. That remarkable achievement
has culminated in a temporary six-month ceasefire
that will take effect from 3 August 2023 and in the
establishment of a national commission entrusted with
defining the broad participation of Colombian society
in the peace process. Additionally, the formation of a
national commission tasked with defining the extensive
participation of Colombian society in the peace process
demonstrates a commitment to inclusivity and ensuring
that the voices of all Colombians are heard and taken
into account.
The A3 commends the Colombian Government’s
strategic approach to restoring peace through inclusive
and constructive dialogue with armed groups,
regardless of their classification. That demonstrates
the Government’s commitment to resolving conflicts
while upholding the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. By promoting mutual
understanding and reconciliation, the Government
fosters sustainable peace and security in the country.
The A3 welcomes the Colombian Government’s
efforts to improve security in conflict-affected
areas through the adoption of policies and strategic
23-20469

12/07/2023

Colombia

plans aimed at gradually strengthening the presence
of military and police forces in conflict-affected
areas. We encourage the Government to expedite the
implementation of those plans, using innovative and
tailored approaches to dismantle criminal structures
and protect vulnerable communities.
We note with satisfaction the positive developments
resulting from the Government’s institutional reforms
and the allocation of funds for comprehensive rural
reforms. In the same vein, we commend the establishment
of mechanisms to expedite land acquisition for landless
people. We urge swift identification and allocation
to beneficiaries. To that end, we appeal to the
international community to support that process with
the needed resources.
The granting of property titles to former Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) fighters on land previously
obtained by the National Land Agency is, in our view,
a positive step. We deem it vital to offer them essential
technical support and financial assistance to facilitate
their transition to civilian life and enable them to attain
self-reliance.
To attain peace in Colombia and address the
historical inequalities that are the root causes of conflicts,
it is crucial to implement fair and inclusive policies for
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. In that
regard, the A3 welcomes the Colombian Government’s
consideration of indigenous and Afro-Colombians in
the land distribution process.
We welcome the initiative to create a support group
for the implementation of the ethnic chapter by various
embassies and United Nations entities. Likewise, we
welcome the announcement of the allocation of 30 per
cent of the resources of the territory renewal agency
for the implementation of more than 8,000 initiatives
under the development programmes with a territorial
focus in ethnic territories that are facing significant
development challenges.
We take note of the upcoming regional elections
scheduled for 29 October 2023. We emphasize the
importance of ensuring representative participation,
in terms of both male and female candidates, while
also guaranteeing the security of women and former
combatants who wish to engage in the electoral
process. Doing so will foster inclusive, peaceful and
fair elections.

S/PV.9374

Despite the positive developments in many fields
during the reporting period, the security situation
in the country deserves our attention. There are
reports of clashes between armed groups and ongoing
violence affecting various vulnerable groups. There is
concern over the increased recruitment of children by
illegal armed groups, as well as forced displacement,
confinement and massacres in multiple regions. We
strongly condemn those incidents, as well as the recent
murder of three children forcibly recruited by the
Estado Mayor Central FARC-EP in the border area of
Caquetá and Putumayo.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace is crucial in
building peace in Colombia by investigating and
holding former FARC-EP guerrillas and State agents
accountable for war crimes. It provides justice,
reparation and dignity to the victims. The independent
and inclusive approach of the body is commended,
while the threats against magistrates, lawyers and
victims by armed groups are condemned.
Financial resources are vital for a successful
peacebuilding process. The allocation of $3 million
by the Peacebuilding Fund to support negotiations and
peacebuilding initiatives at national and local levels
is welcomed. Continued financial support from the
United Nations, partners and donors is encouraged for
the effective implementation of the Final Agreement.
The A3 stresses the importance of ongoing
dialogue and constructive collaboration among the
parties involved in the conflict. We urge them to adopt
an innovative mindset. The broad participation of all
relevant actors, including civil society, indigenous and
Afro-Colombian communities, women, youth and other
entities, is essential for achieving a lasting peace in
the country.
The A3 reiterates its support for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia in monitoring the
implementation of the Final Agreement in Colombia.
The A3 expresses appreciation for the Government
of Colombia’s efforts in bringing an end to the conflict
and building a stable nation where the Colombians can
live in harmony, embracing their diversity and fostering
an effective, long-lasting and sustainable peace.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the briefers for their statements, and I warmly
welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs Álvaro Leyva
Durán to the Council.

23-2046911/18

S/PV.9374

Colombia

Colombia continues to demonstrate its unwavering
commitment to the Final Agreement and to the expansion
and consolidation of peace throughout its territory.
We are delighted to recognize that the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace is one
of the central thrusts of the strategy of the Government
of President Petro Urrego. We are seeing concrete and
significant progress. As we have already emphasized, in
order to build peace, the State must extend its presence
to all corners of the country, in particular in areas
affected by the conflict and which have historically
been marginalized.
In that regard, the approval of the National
Development Plan by Congress represents a significant
achievement. That strategic plan increases budgetary
resources allocated to and includes decisive measures
for the implementation of the peace agreement and for
rural reform.
Moreover, Congress has adopted two laws vital for
the rural reform envisioned in the peace agreement:
one establishes an agrarian jurisdiction to resolve rural
conflicts and the other recognizes the rights of peasants
in the Constitution. In addition, we have seen significant
progress in land acquisition and registration.
Brazil supports the strategy of the Government
of President Petro Urrego to achieve total peace. We
recognize the importance of and need for the additional
dialogues under way to expand the peace dividends
throughout the country. Peacebuilding requires the
full implementation of the Final Agreement and the
curbing of the violence still being perpetrated by
other armed groups. Those expressions of violence
have a disproportionate impact on Afro-Colombians,
indigenous peoples, women and children and the most
vulnerable populations. In that regard, Brazil reiterates
its firm commitment as a guarantor country to the
panel for peace between the Colombian Government
and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN). We
commend the achievements of the third round of
negotiations, which took place in Havana, especially the
announcement of the agreements on social participation
and a ceasefire, as well as the commitments made to
humanitarian relief. Brazil hopes that the registration
process and the immediate results of the agreements
will renew hope in the territories for the benefit of the
most affected communities and reflect, in fact, a new
moment in the negotiation and peacebuilding process.
12/18

12/07/2023

Brazil believes that there are encouraging signs.
While we are holding this important debate in the
Security Council, the Colombian Government’s panel
for peace with the ELN is meeting in Havana, working
on documents to assess the progress made since the
signing of the agreements reached in Cuba on 9 June.
Brazil is pleased to support the work of the panel for
peace and will continue to be involved in the follow-up
of that process, encouraging the implementation of the
agreements and the furtherance of the agenda.
Brazil believes that, in this process, the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia can and
should play an important role, especially to ensure the
success of the crucial steps planned for the coming
weeks, including the establishment of the national
commission on participation and the entry into force, on
3 August, of the temporary national bilateral ceasefire,
which, as agreed by the parties, can be continued.
In the context of such significant developments,
Brazil is ready to carefully examine and discuss the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on the role that
the Verification Mission could play in support of the
various ceasefire agreements reached with different
armed groups in Colombia. In addition to the degree
of progress achieved with regard to each dialogue and
ceasefire agreement, it will be critical to assess impact
on the ground arising from the Mission’s involvement,
bearing in mind that some armed groups are fighting
among themselves for control of the same territories.
Due to the existing territorial disputes among
the armed groups, we believe it would be beneficial
to promote simultaneous progress in the different
negotiations. Any setback with one particular group
could have a negative impact on other processes and
exacerbate conflicts. For that reason, we believe it
is essential that the Council carefully assess how
to optimize its contribution to jointly advance all
those processes.
We welcome the reports of a notable decrease in
clashes between illegal armed groups and public security
forces as a result of the Colombian Government’s efforts
to seek ceasefire agreements with different armed
groups. However, challenges remain. The violence that
continues to be perpetrated by illegal armed groups
and criminal organizations continues to disrupt the
lives of civilians and undermine peacebuilding. That
situation highlights the importance of the international
community’s support for the Colombian Government’s
23-20469

12/07/2023

Colombia

efforts to advance peace initiatives and consolidate State
presence, especially in rural areas, where vulnerable
communities need stronger protection.
Brazil staunchly supports Colombian society and
the Government of President Petro Urrego in its political
determination to address the challenges of overcoming
violence and building peace. We also recall, as we have
done on several occasions, that the work of the Security
Council in Colombia is based on the expectations and
requests formulated by the Colombian Government
itself on behalf of that brotherly people.
Brazil reaffirms its commitment to work closely
with Colombia so that peace, the fruit of the tireless
efforts of its people, may take root and spread its
transformative effects throughout its territory.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation of Álvaro Leyva
Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, in
today’s meeting. We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia and Head of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for
his assessments. We also listened to the civil society
briefer, Diana Salcedo López.
Russia welcomes the agreement reached in Cuba
on a six-month ceasefire between the Government
of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN), which is an extremely important step towards
comprehensive peace in Colombia. Our country has
consistently promoted dialogue with the group, even
when the former Colombian Administration completely
ignored such calls and countries guaranteeing the
peace process were subjected to unprecedented
pressure. We note the important role that Havana has
played in discharging its duties as guarantor in good
faith and establishing contact between the parties. It is
very telling that its principled and consistent mediation
efforts were precisely the reason that the United States
added Cuba to its list of State sponsors of terrorism. As
the saying goes, no further comment is necessary.
We believe that we can accommodate the request
from the heads of the delegations of the Government
and the ELN that the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia be expanded so that
it can verify and monitor the parties’ implementation
of the bilateral ceasefire agreement. We are willing to
consider the possibility that the Mission could verify
agreements with other groups once such agreements
are reached. In that context, we welcome the efforts

S/PV.9374

of the Colombian authorities to engage in dialogue
with the Estado Mayor Central Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia. We note that the parties
issued a joint statement saying that they are ready to
come to the negotiation table.
The shift in focus to new negotiation formats
should not detract from the key objective that it is
the job of the Security Council to monitor, that is, the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We
believe that the comprehensive implementation of the
Agreement’s provisions is the only way to build trust
among the new participants in the peace process. We
acknowledge Bogotá’s conscientious efforts on that
front, especially the progress made on agrarian reform.
However, it is clear that more needs to be done to
ensure the physical safety of former combatants, social
leaders and the most vulnerable sectors of society, as
well as to implement crop substitution programmes
and strengthen State authority on the ground. We are
looking forward to the execution of the decisions of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and representatives
of the United Nations Mission will be following that
as well.
We are concerned about the ongoing high levels
of violence against ex-combatants. Just a few days ago
we saw a number of high-profile cases of killings and
attacks on former members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia, including owing to their
political activities. Without security guarantees for excombatants, it will be impossible to reintegrate them
into society and the economy. We hope the situation
will improve markedly in the run-up to regional and
local elections in October.
Russia, for its part, as a permanent member of
the Security Council, will continue to take an active
part in international efforts to support the Colombian
peace process, including by extending support to the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, with
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu at the helm.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, His Excellency Mr. Álvaro
Leyva Durán, in this meeting, and I thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his
briefing. My thanks also go to Ms. Salcedo López.
Switzerland has a long-standing commitment to
Colombia and continues to support the country’s peace

23-2046913/18

S/PV.9374

Colombia

process, particularly regarding coming to terms with
the past. I would like to emphasize examples of major
progress achieved recently. First, Switzerland welcomes
the allocation of specific resources and the commitments
stipulated in the National Development Plan aimed at
accelerating the implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. The recent progress on enacting
peace legislation is commendable, and all the parties
concerned should prioritize its full implementation. We
welcome the progress of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and the measures taken by the Government to
implement restorative sentences. The inter-institutional
coordination mechanism established for the search for
missing persons has also already yielded tangible initial
results. Lastly, at Colombia’s request, the Swiss Federal
Council approved an agreement to retain a digital copy
in Switzerland of the archives of the Colombian Truth
Commission, and we were very pleased to see our
President visit Colombia and announce that agreement.
I want to emphasize three more points. First,
Switzerland remains concerned about the fact that
conflict-related violence continues to affect the
civilian population, and we urge all parties to respect
international humanitarian law. Clashes between
armed groups continue to spread throughout the
country, particularly in areas that are a priority for
the implementation of the Final Agreement. Security
guarantees for members of political parties, social
leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants
should remain a priority for the Government. We call
on the Colombian authorities to implement adequate
preventive measures for ensuring the holding of free,
secure and participatory elections, especially in the
run-up to the departmental and municipal elections
in October.
Secondly, in its cooperation programme in
Colombia, Switzerland is committed to making the
impact of armed conflict on children visible, and to
mitigating that impact. Given the increase in child
recruitment, we encourage the Colombian Government
to redouble its efforts to prevent and end grave
violations of children’s rights and pave the way for their
effective reintegration. In that regard, I would like to
quote the recommendation of young Ms. Violeta, who
courageously addressed the Council last week during
the recent open debate on children and armed conflict
(see S/PV.9366) and urged that
14/18

12/07/2023

(spoke in Spanish)
“children and young people belonging to those
[armed] groups must be recognized both as
victims of conflict and as agents of change and
peacebuilding” (S/PV.9366, p.8).
(spoke in French)
Lastly, we welcome the holistic approach taken by
the Colombian Government to prioritizing continued
dialogue with all key actors and armed groups. The
recent signing of a temporary bilateral ceasefire
agreement with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional,
due to enter into force on 3 August, attests to the success
of that approach. We also welcome the announcement
of a resumption of peace negotiations with the Estado
Mayor Central Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia as a first step towards the implementation
of a ceasefire. In order to ensure full compliance by
all parties with the stipulated protocols, Switzerland
reiterates its full support for extending the mandate of
the Verification Mission to include the monitoring and
verification of ceasefires. The Council must continue
to respond promptly to Colombia’s calls for verifying
and eventually consolidating the ceasefire agreements,
which have the potential to be mutually reinforcing.
Switzerland stands ready to support those efforts.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Salcedo López for their
briefings. We also welcome the participation of Foreign
Minister Leyva Durán in today’s meeting.
With the signing of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, Colombia has embarked on a transformative
process for reaching “total peace” by reducing social
inequalities and pursuing dialogue with armed groups.
It is a process that requires vision and courage, and we
commend President Petro Urrego and the Colombian
Government for their resolve to press ahead with
concrete measures to make total peace a reality. We
applaud the approval by Congress of the Government’s
National Development Plan, with a specific focus on
women and peace and security, and we welcome the
landmark legislative deals that Congress has enacted
to implement the Final Agreement. Peace cannot be
separated from social justice, so we fully appreciate
and support the Colombians for pursuing peace through
social justice.
23-20469

12/07/2023

Colombia

National dialogue and the meaningful inclusion
of civil society are crucial to achieving national
reconciliation. We are encouraged by the ongoing
negotiations between the Government and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional and urge them to continue in
good faith. We are anticipating with optimism the start
on 3 August of the full implementation of the bilateral,
national and temporary ceasefire. In the context of
the ongoing reintegration of former members of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, we
welcome the adoption of the Strategic Plan for Security
and Protection and commend the progress that has been
made in implementing the ethnic chapter. Those are
crucial steps for deepening peace, but much more needs
to be done, such as ensuring a resumption of talks
between the Government and the Estado Mayor Central
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia. Also,
transitional justice is a critical step for lasting positive
peace. We commend the enormous effort made to
advance this, especially with regard to upholding
victims’ rights as the foundation for justice, peace
and reconciliation.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong
support for the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, including by expanding its mandate to
encompass ceasefire verification.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and
his presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/477). We appreciate the vital role that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia continues to
play in supporting peace in Colombia. I would also like
to thank Ms. Diana María Salcedo López for sharing
her perspective — not only as a representative of civil
society, but more importantly, for amplifying the crosscutting role that women’s rights must continue to have
in the implementation of the 2016 Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. That perspective is necessary and
invaluable. I also welcome the participation today of
Colombian Foreign Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán in
today’s briefing.
The United States is committed to supporting
Colombia as it seeks to deepen the implementation
of the 2016 peace accord. The United States remains
the top international donor to the 2016 peace accord,
dedicating over $1.5 billion towards its implementation
since 2017. As the first international accompanier to

S/PV.9374

the ethnic chapter of the 2016 peace accord, the United
States demonstrated its desire to help Colombia address
inequality and political and socioeconomic exclusion,
issues that have disproportionately affected indigenous
and Afro-Colombian communities. Making tangible
progress on those issues is essential for a durable peace.
The United States joins the Secretary-General in
urging the Government to redouble efforts to address
historic exclusion and inequality. Making full use of
the High-Level Forum of Ethnic Peoples is essential to
ensuring that implementation is shaped by the views
and priorities of indigenous and Afro-Colombian
communities. As the latest report from the SecretaryGeneral’s notes, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
(SJP) is making clear, through its decisions, that a
commitment to upholding victims’ rights is the only
way forward. The United States welcomes further
cooperation between the SJP and the Government and
looks forward to the first restorative sentences that will
bring justice to the victims.
The United States continues to closely monitor the
Colombian Government’s efforts to expand its total
peace plan through negotiations with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN) and the dissident groups
of the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). We
are encouraged that the ELN agreed to a six-month
ceasefire, although steps must be taken to outline
the protocols to ensure that the ceasefire takes place
in August, as intended. We make special mention
that the ELN must halt all acts of violence, extortion,
kidnapping and forced recruitment for that ceasefire
to result in a genuine improvement to citizen security
in Colombia. We note that the Colombian Government
suspended the ceasefire with the Central General Staff
of the FARC-EP in four departments in May, following
the killing of four indigenous miners.
For the Security Council to consider expanding the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, negotiations must progress; ceasefires
must be respected; protocols must be fully developed,
financed and adhered to; and these groups must halt
all criminal and terrorist activities, in particular
those impacting civilian populations. Very careful
consideration must be taken. The United States remain
supportive of efforts to help Colombia achieve a real
and lasting peace and a demonstrable reduction in
violence from illegal armed groups.

23-2046915/18

S/PV.9374

Colombia

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Colombia, Mr. Álvaro Leyva
Durán. I welcome the informative briefing of Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. We listened carefully to the
presentation by Ms. Diana María Salcedo López.
My delegation takes note of the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia (S/2023/477). Ecuador welcomes
the progress achieved in the implementation of critical
aspects of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia.
In that connection, I highlight the approval by the
Colombian Congress of the National Development
Plan, the text of which includes obligations related to
the implementation of the Final Agreement, with key
elements for transitional justice, comprehensive rural
reform, the reintegration of ex-combatants and the
substitution of illicit crops. We hope for continued
progress in those areas.
The approval of a bilateral, national and temporary
ceasefire between the Colombian Government and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional, as well as the recent
agreement reached with the Central General Staff of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo, aimed at the approval of a bilateral
ceasefire, enable progress towards the desired lasting
peace. Ecuador hopes that the parties will continue to
demonstrate their commitment and good faith in the
implementation of the agreements already reached, as
well as in the crystallization of those under discussion.
We call for a halt to conflict-related violence,
especially against women, human rights defenders,
social leaders and ex-combatants, mostly of AfroColombian and indigenous origin. Those acts must be
investigated and their perpetrators brought to justice.
Also of concern is the use by illegal armed groups
and criminal organizations of improvised explosive
devices, which continue to claim lives.
We call on the parties to promote inclusive dialogue
and to make every effort to bring an end to hostilities
and to reach a ceasefire. We hope that efforts will
continue to extend the presence of the State in rural
areas and to identify the location of landmines in order
to avoid future tragedies.
16/18

12/07/2023

The Special Jurisdiction for Peace continues to
work, with a genuine commitment to the defence of
victims’ rights. In that regard, we hope that the close
relationship and technical cooperation established
between the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the
International Criminal Court can contribute to
advancing the Jurisdiction’s work.
Undoubtedly, the experience and logistical
capacity of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia can make an important contribution to the
implementation of the ceasefire agreements. To that
end, my delegation will contribute constructively to the
process of analysing the Secretary-General’s proposals
on the Mission’s mandate, which will enable the
observation, monitoring and verification of the current
and future agreements.
I wish to conclude by reiterating Ecuador’s support
for the full implementation of the peace agreement
in Colombia, as well as for any effort that promotes
dialogue, with a view to establishing a lasting peace for
the benefit of all Colombians.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Mr. Leyva Durán (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Every three months we meet in this Chamber to hear
the briefing on the quarterly report on the progress and
challenges identified by the Security Council-mandated
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia on
the implementation of the Havana peace agreement
signed between the Colombian State and Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) in 2016. I attend these meetings
with the greatest pleasure as a sign of our Government’s
commitment to the full implementation of what was
agreed and to the building of a total peace, and out of
the deep conviction of the importance of the role played
the international community and the verifiers. It would
therefore not be coherent to discuss or question any
of the findings in the most recent report (S/2023/477),
when the Mission’s task is to carry out a thorough and
impartial verification. Those findings in the report
that are less than positive should always be received
as opportunities for improvement, early warnings and
calls to action for the purpose of protecting what has
been agreed with the FARC-EP.
Today I would like to this opportunity to refer
to three fundamental issues of peace in Colombia,
which now, under the leadership of President Gustavo
23-20469

12/07/2023

Colombia

Petro Urrego, it is proposed, will extend beyond our
borders through good relations with our neighbouring
countries. These are issues to which we want to draw
the attention of the international community. First, we
wish to highlight that the dialogue between the parties
to the 2016 peace agreement is an essential element
in its implementation and that it will continue to be
the backbone of our national “total peace” policy. My
Government recognizes the bilateral nature of what
was agreed and calls for maintaining it as a point of
departure in peacebuilding. Secondly, we wish to call
attention to the importance that the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, while developing its mandate, which today
is an example and point of reference for the justice
commitments of the Colombian State, fully embraces
in operation what was agreed by the high contracting
parties, which gave rise to its origin. Thirdly, we wish to
highlight the relationship between the implementation
of the 2016 Agreement and the other dialogue initiatives
that we have proposed in the framework of the total
peace policy.
We will not tire of repeating that the implementation
of the 2016 Agreement is a commitment of this
Government. Today we recognize that this commitment
must take shape in actions that affect the lives of the
signatory population and the populations historically
affected by the conflict. As highlighted in the
Verification Mission’s report, we have worked on a
series of institutional and legislative initiatives that
will allow us to make progress to this end. Examples
include the National Development Plan and the new
security and defence policy, which emphasizes human
security, the strengthening of territorial control and
the dismantling of criminal organizations. But what
is interesting about these national initiatives is that
they have sought to maintain dialogue between the
different actors, involve civil society and, in some
cases, consider the requests of the signatories of the
Agreement, pursuant to what was agreed. We are aware
of the challenge before us to link this dialogue in an
increasingly more structured manner.
With regard to political participation, I would like
to highlight the dialogue with the peace representatives
in parliament, promoted by the Government, to identify
and promote joint legislative initiatives related to the
implementation of the Agreement. The Government of
Change and the representatives of the special transitory
circumscriptions of peace achieved synergies in
promoting specific provisions on the implementation of

S/PV.9374

the 2016 Final Agreement in the National Development
Plan that had been left behind in previous legislative
sessions. Likewise, the Agency for Territorial Renewal
has developed permanent dialogue processes with
the representatives of the transitory circumscriptions
on the implementation of the development plans with
a territorial focus, at the national level and in each
subregion in particular, turning the representatives into
guarantor actors of these processes.
With regard to ethnic issues, it is worth highlighting
the dialogue processes in which the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization proposed that
signatories with ethnic affiliation participate in prior
ongoing consultation processes, in order to guarantee
effective reintegration within their communities.
In terms of gender, I would also like to refer to our
conviction that peace must include women in all their
diversity and the LGTBQI+ population, recognizing
the challenges imposed by intersectionality. This vision
allows us to identify and generate actions to combat the
multiple forms of discrimination that are deepened by
armed conflict.
I should highlight that, for the first time, the
National Development Plan includes the adoption of a
foreign policy with a gender approach, which is a result
of our dialogue with civil society, and which will be
required to promote implementation of the relevant
provisions of the 2016 peace agreement.
With regard to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, I
would like to draw attention to the need for it to always
comply with what was agreed in the 2016 Agreement.
It is fundamentally restorative justice, which, like
all justice, must exalt the principle of nulla poena
sine lege. In what was agreed for this purpose by the
negotiating parties of the Final Agreement, sentences
were announced. It is therefore not possible to decide
sentences that are different from those published and
referred to in today’s Security Council document
and which the State made a unilateral declaration. In
this regard, it is worth highlighting something that is
obvious but interesting: the peace process as such has
not ended, which is why we meet quarterly to establish
the progress of the implementation of what has been
agreed. It means that the negotiating parties are still
alive and alert. The high contracting parties — the
Colombian State on the one hand and the former Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo on the other — subscribed to what was agreed.

23-2046917/18

S/PV.9374

Colombia

This indicates no more and no less than that such
parties could still resort to instruments enshrined in
international humanitarian law to assert principles
and improve upon texts that guarantee the soughtafter peace, while accelerating procedures for its full
and more prompt implementation. That is the case, for
example, in the effort to remove unjustified obstacles
to the paramilitaries gaining access to the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, in the opening of the major
case on State responsibility as an actor in the armed
conflict, either by commission or omission, and the
possibility of improving the mechanism for selecting
new magistrates to avoid the appearance of co-optation.
The high contracting parties to the Havana peace
agreement may resort to the special agreements
provided for under Article 3 common to the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949. Incidentally, such initiative is not
only provided for in that article, but it was also expressly
included in the original peace text in the agreement
dated 7 November 2016, III, with scope of sentences
cited therein, as noted by the International Committee
of the Red Cross in its commentary No. 850.
Finally, I would like to raise a point that the
Verification Mission has come to understand very well
thanks to its experience on the ground, which is the
relationship between the implementation of the 2016
Final Agreement and the other dialogue initiatives that
we have proposed within the framework of the “total
peace” policy. Colombia must continue to make progress
in encouraging and enabling all actors in the conflict
to shoulder the responsibility of achieving truth and
justice for the sake of society and the victims alongside
sustainable, effective and dignified reintegration
processes. We want to win the peace.
The primary concern of the Council, as well as
of the two signatory parties to the peace agreement,
has been ensuring the security guarantees for former
combatants. We can continue working to strengthen the
security arrangements for the signatories by updating
our institutional guidelines in the area. The Unit for the
Implementation of the Final Agreement has spearheaded
an inclusive process aimed at reconfiguring, updating
and developing the Strategic Plan for Security and

18/18

12/07/2023

Protection, which is expected to be adopted in August.
However, if we are to have significant results, we need
to reduce the number of violent incidents in the country
and de-escalate the violent dynamics in the territories.
Engaging in dialogue with the groups and actors that
drive violence in the country is key to lessening that
violence and guaranteeing the security of the signatories
and of the civilian population as a whole. In the
meantime, discussions with the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional are moving in the right direction and have
yielded concrete results in that regard. We are waiting for
the negotiating groups to propose the protocols for the
ceasefire agreed on 9 June. Similarly, expectations are
high with regard to the initial outcomes of discussions
with the group that calls itself Estado Mayor Central
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, as the
Secretary-General points out in his letter dated 13 June
to the Security Council (S/2023/438) concerning the
expansion of the mandate requested by Colombia.
Everything now depends on those new dialogues,
especially as we move forward in terms of making
concrete commitments, and the role of the international
community as guarantor and overseer of what has been
agreed has become vital to the success of the processes.
For that reason, we have requested the Security
Council’s support for the verification process of the
ceasefires proposed by the parties in the transition to
total peace, which we are committed to realizing.
I would like to conclude by affirming that the
international community and the Security Council are
more than ever our key allies and guarantors in achieving
our firm goal of achieving historic peace in Colombia.
Colombia wants its society to move forward, no longer
towards one hundred years of solitude — a phrase that
has continued to haunt our national memory — but
towards one hundred years of coexistence and peace.
That would be a true victory.
I thank Carlos Ruiz Massieu and express my
heartfelt gratitude to all in this Chamber. And, of
course, I reiterate my pleasure at being with everyone
here today.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

23-20469
