76

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 84 transmitting the study of the Group of Experts to Prepare a Study
on Israeli Nuclear Armament,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report on Israeli nuclear armament;
2. Expresses its deep alarm at the fact that the report
has established that Israel has the technical capability to
manufacture nuclear weapons and possesses the means of
delivery of such weapons;
3. Also expresses its deep concern that Israel has undermined the credibility of the International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards, in particular by the bombing of the Iraqi
nuclear facilities which were under Agency safeguards;
4. Reaffirms that Israel's attack on the Iraqi nuclear
facilities and Israel's capability constitute a serious destabilizing factor in an already tense situation in the Middle
East, and a grave danger to international peace and security;
5. Requests the Security Council to prohibit all forms
of co-operation with Israel in the nuclear field;
6. Calls upon all States and other parties and institutions to terminate forthwith all nuclear collaboration with
Israel;
7. Requests the Security Council to institute effective
enforcement action against Israel so as to prevent it from
endangering international peace and security by its nuclearweapon capability;
8. Demands that Israel should renounce, without delay,
any possession of nuclear weapons and place all its nuclear
activities under international safeguards;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the report on Israeli nuclear armament and to
distribute it to Member States. the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental organizations, so that the international community
and public opinion may be fully aware of the danger inherent
in Israel's nuclear capability;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
Israeli military nuclear activity and to report thereon as
appropriate;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the report on Israeli nuclear armament to the General Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear
armament''.
91st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/99.

Conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the
stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space

The General Assembly,
Guided by the goals of strengthening peace and international security,
Expressing the common interest of all mankind in the
further exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes for the good of all States and in the interest of developing friendly relations and mutual understanding between
them,
Conscious of the danger which would threaten mankind
if outer space became an arena for the arms race,
84
A/36/431. The study was subsequently issued with the title Studv
on Israeli Nuclear Armament (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.82.IX.2).

Desiring not to allow outer space to become an arena for
the arms race and a source of strained relations between
States,
Taking into account the draft treaty on the prohibition of
the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space, 85
submitted to the General Assembly by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, and the views and comments expressed
during the consideration of this item at its thirty-sixth
session,
I. Considers it necessary to take effective steps, by
concluding an appropriate international treaty, to prevent
the spread of the arms race to outer space;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to embark
on negotiations with a view to achieving agreement on the
text of such a treaty;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled •'Conclusion of a
treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any
kind in outer space''
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 198 I

36/100.

Declaration on the Prevention of Nuclear
Catastrophe

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the foremost task of the United
Nations, born in the flames of the Second World War, has
been, is and will be to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recognizing that all the horrors of past wars and all other
calamities that have befallen people would pale in comparison with what is inherent in the use of nuclear weapons
capable of destroying civilization on earth,
Reaffirming that the universally accepted objective is to
eliminate completely the possibility of the use of nuclear
weapons through the cessation of their production, followed
by the destruction of their stockpiles, and that, to this end,
priority in disarmament negotiations should be given to nuclear disarmament,
Convinced that, as the first step in this direction, the use
of nuclear weapons and the waging of nuclear war should
be outlawed,
Solemnly proclaims, on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations:
I . States and statesmen that resort first to the use of
nuclear weapons will be committing the gravest crime
against humanity.
2. There will never be any justification or pardon for
statesmen who take the decision to be the first to use
nuclear weapons.
3. Any doctrines allowing the first use of nuclear
weapons and any actions pushing the world towards a
catastrophe are incompatible with human moral standards
and the lofty ideals of the United Nations.
4. It is the supreme duty and direct obligation of the
leaders of nuclear-weapon States to act in such a way as
to eliminate the risk of the outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
The nuclear-arms race must be stopped and reversed by
joint efforts, through negotiations conducted in good faith
and on the basis of equality, having as their ultimate goal
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.

" Official Records of th,· General Assembly, Thirtv-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 128, document A/36/192, annex.
