A/69/162–S/2014/542*

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
24 July 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Item 63 of the provisional agenda**
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General

Summary
The present report is submitted in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 68/278, which was adopted following consideration by the Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session of my report (A/68/220-S/2013/475) reviewing the
implementation of the recommendations contained in the 1998 report on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(A/52/871-S/1998/318).
The report highlights major developments with regard to peace, security and
development in Africa over the last 12 months. It also examines the implementation
by the United Nations system of key priority areas identified in the review report,
namely, on strengthening institutional cooperation with the African Union and its
regional economic communities, conflict prevention, peacekeeping and conflict
management, post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery, sustainable economic growth
and sustainable development, human rights and humanitarian affairs, rule of law and
administration of justice, and support for security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 1 May 2015.
** A/69/150.

14-58436* (E)

040515

*1458436*

A/69/162
S/2014/542

Pursuant to the mandate outlined in General Assembly resolution 68/278 to
develop policy proposals on persistent and emerging challenges and on the approach
and support of the United Nations system, the report provides an in -depth analysis of
the transformative agenda of the African Union to achieve a conflict-free Africa, as
outlined in the Organization of African Unity/African Union Fiftieth Anniversary
Solemn Declaration and Agenda 2063, the forthcoming ambitious 50 -year plan of the
African Union. This agenda reflects a political commitment to progr essively and
concretely address persistent and emerging challenges to peace and security in
Africa, while simultaneously ensuring stable and enduring conditions for inclusive
growth and sustainable development. Concerted action by African countries, region al
institutions, the private sector, civil society, and sustained and strategic partnerships
with the international community, including the United Nations, will be critical in
realizing this agenda.

2/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

I. Introduction
1.
In response to a request from the Security Council in 1998, the SecretaryGeneral undertook a comprehensive analysis of the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. The report
proposed specific measures aimed at reducing conflict, b uilding durable peace and
promoting sustainable development in Africa ( A/52/871-S/1998/318).
2.
Subsequent to that report, in 2009, in its resolution 63/304, the General
Assembly requested me to submit a report reviewing the status of implementation of
the recommendations contained in the 1998 report.
3.
A comprehensive review was undertaken, including broad -based consultations
with Member States, the African Union and African regional economic
communities, civil society organizations and the United Nations system through the
interdepartmental task force on African affairs convened by the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa. The report on the review ( A/65/152-S/2010/526) outlined
progress made, persistent obstacles and new and emerging challenges facing Africa.
It also set out concrete recommendations and proposals for renewed United Nations
engagement with Africa.
4.
Pursuant to the requests of the General Assembly, outlined in its successive
resolutions on the subject, I continue to submit, on an annual basis, a report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa, focusing, among other things, on pressing issues and innovative solutions
in the continent. The present report focuses on the transformative agenda of the
African Union to achieve a conflict-free Africa, as set forth by the African Union
Heads of State and Government in their Fiftieth Anniversary Solemn Declaration.
The agenda is intended to be an integral part of Agenda 2063, the forthcoming
50-year transformative development agenda of the African Union. In the interim, it
is also aligned with the overall vision of both the African Union Commission and
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) Strategic Plans for the
period 2014-2017.

II. The year in review
5.
Since my last report, and as highlighted in my report on NEPAD ( A/69/161),
Africa has further expounded on its vision of an African renaissance and of a
continent on the rise. African countries have made tangible progress in reforming
their economies, boosting economic growth, improving governa nce and respect for
the rule of law, and managing and resolving conflicts. In Madagascar, GuineaBissau and Egypt, transition processes were concluded with the successful conduct
of elections, the restoration of constitutional order and the reinstatement of these
countries into the activities of the African Union. Progress was also made to end the
rebellion by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to implement the regional cooperation initiative for the elimination of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
6.
While these positive trends have created a favourable climate for investment
and a new spirit of optimism about Africa’s prospects, there have also been some
reversals. In the Central African Republic, Libya, Mali, Nigeria, Somalia and South
Sudan, renewed hostilities and threats from growing acts of terrorism, violent

14-58436

3/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

extremism and transnational organized crime have resulted in challenges to both
peace and development. The United Nations continued to work closely with th e
African Union and its regional economic communities to support their regional
mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and resolution in addressing these
problems.
7.
The Security Council, after consultations with the transitional authorities in the
Central African Republic, led by interim President Catherine Samba-Panza, the
African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
adopted resolution 2149 (2014), establishing the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). The
resolution further mandates the transfer of authority from the African -led
International Support Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA) to
MINUSCA on 15 September 2014.
8.
The United Nations, through MINUSCA, will support the transitional
authorities to implement the transitional process, including through efforts to extend
State authority and preserve territorial integrity. MINUSCA is also mandated to
protect civilians, promote and protect human rights, provide humanitarian
assistance, support national and international justice, the rule of law and
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation. Coordination of efforts
with the African Union, ECCAS, the European Union mission to the Central African
Republic, the French forces and the International Contact Group on the Central
African Republic, will be critical for the success of the mission.
9.
Since the outbreak of violence in South Sudan in December 2013, the political,
security, humanitarian and human rights situation has deteriorated, in spite of
multiple signed agreements on the resolution of the crisis. The United Nations, the
African Union and Heads of State and Government of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) have been involved in the mediation process and
continue to facilitate political dialogue aimed at finding lasting solutions to the
crisis. In March 2014, IGAD decided to deploy a regional for ce to South Sudan. In
accordance with Security Council resolution 2155 (2014), the United Nations,
through the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), will continue to
assist the IGAD ceasefire monitoring operations in South Sudan.
10. South Sudan and the Sudan made progress in implementing the road map that
was adopted by the African Union Peace and Security Council in April 2012 and
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 2046 (2012), outlining the steps to
defuse the tension between the two countries. However, the African Union team of
experts, mandated to provide a non-binding opinion on the status of the five
disputed border areas and the work of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, made
little progress. My Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan will continue to
work closely with the two countries, the African Union High -level Implementation
Panel and the United Nations missions in the region towards the full implementation
of the cooperation agreements.
11. The recurring cycle of inter-communal violence in Darfur has resulted in
deaths and further displacement of the civilian population. The African
Union/United Nations Joint Special Representative and Chief Mediator for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) continues to
work closely on the peace process with facilitators of the Darfur-based Internal
Dialogue and Consultations, notably the African Union, UNAMID, the State of

4/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

Qatar and the Implementation Follow-up Commission of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur.
12. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the rebellion by M23 officially
ended with the signing of the Nairobi Declaration with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in December 2013. The United Nations
continues to work closely with the African Union, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
to implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region.
13. Pursuant to the framework agreement and the conclusions of the Kampala
dialogue, the Congolese Government passed the amnesty law covering acts of war
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is an important step that will
advance the peace consolidation process. In addition, the Governments of the
region, the African Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the team of Special Envoys in the region launched the Great Lakes Women’s
Platform, the forum on private investment to support the implementation of the
framework agreement, and the forum of hope for youths of the countries of the
region. These efforts strengthen implementation of the cooperation framework and
solidify the nexus between development, peace and security.
14. In Libya, the political and security situation continues to deteriorate. The
United Nations, through the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
remains engaged in providing support to the authorities, including for the holding of
parliamentary elections on 25 June and to facilitate a Libyan -led political dialogue
aimed at forging an agreement by political actors and armed groups on the fu ture of
the transition. However, deep political polarization alongside increasingly violent
clashes between the main armed groups continues to undermine the fledgling
political transition process.
15. Developments in Somalia demonstrate the value of the strategic partnership
between the Government, the African Union and the United Nations. Despite
challenges, the country continues to make progress towards reconciliation and peace
consolidation. The Federal Government of Somalia convened a “Vision 201 6”
Conference in September 2013, and has started legislative work to appoint the
commissions that will lead the constitutional review, the delineation of boundaries
and the preparation for elections in 2016. However, Al-Shabaab continues to pose
significant threats to the peace, security and development of Somalia and the region.
I have strongly condemned their activities, including the 8 July 2014 att acks on the
presidential palace, and stated that continued international support is required to
combat terrorism in the country and region.
16. In addition, the Federal Government of Somalia needs financial and capacitybuilding support to enable it to deliver security and social services, build capable
public institutions and boost the economy. The international co mmunity had in 2013
pledged $2.4 billion as part of the New Deal Compact to promote peace and Statebuilding efforts. However, despite commitments, financial support to Somalia has
been especially low. Some donors have further announced a decrease in their
contributions, and the trend is likely to continue into 2015. It is important that the
international community remains fully committed to supporting the peace
consolidation efforts of Somalia.

14-58436

5/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

17. In West Africa, growing acts of terrorism and transnational organized crime in
northern Mali and north-east Nigeria continue to exacerbate insecurity, gross
violations of human rights and disregard for international humanitarian law. With
the support of the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the international community, including the United Nations, the
Government of Mali continues to implement the ceasefire agreement of 23 May
2014, stabilize the country, strengthen democratic processes and institutions, and
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.
18. At the regional level, neighbouring countries have also enhanced cooperation
to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime. Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and Niger created the Group of Five Sahel Nouakchott framework to
intensify their security cooperation and operationalize the African Peace and
Security Architecture in the Sahel-Sahara region. In support of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) launched its strategy for the Sahel for the period 2013-2017, which seeks
to foster cooperation with neighbouring countries in North and West Africa on
criminal justice, in order to combat illicit trafficking, organized crime, terrorism and
corruption.
19. Following the deteriorating security situation in Nigeria, arising from the
frequent and lethal attacks by Boko Haram, the United Nations strengthened its
support to the Government of Nigeria, providing an integrated support package that
includes immediate support for affected families and communities, as well as for the
abducted Chibok girls, upon their rescue, release or escape. The package includes
psychosocial counselling and reintegration support for the girls and emergency
needs and early recovery support, to help in tackling some of the long -term national
structural challenges.
20. In May 2014, the Security Council Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee decided to
include Boko Haram on its sanctions list. In my report on children and armed
conflict (A/68/878-S/2014/339) of May 2014, I also included Boko Haram as a new
party on the list of parties that recruit or use children, kill or maim children, commit
rape and other forms of sexual violence against children, or engage in attacks on
schools and/or hospitals in situations of armed conflict not on the agenda of the
Security Council, or in other situations. Going forward, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005), my Special Representative on Children and Armed
Conflict will work with relevant stakeholders to establish the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on violations undertaken by Boko Haram. In general, as the
country prepares for elections in 2015, concerted political action is required to deal
with growing security concerns. My High-level Representative to Nigeria will
continue to lead the efforts of the United Nations in supporting the country ’s own
efforts to restore security, promote human rights and address the humanitarian
situation in the north-east.
21. Other important developments relate to the successful conduct of elections in
Algeria, Malawi, Mauritania, Somalia’s Puntland and South Africa. An additional
8 African countries are scheduled to hold elections before the end of 2014 and 11
more in 2015. Given the proclivity of elections to act as triggers of conflict, and
building on the recommendations in my previous report to the General Assembly on
election-triggered conflict (A/68/220-S/2013/475), I encourage all actors,
particularly at national levels, to create conducive conditions for inclusive, free,

6/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

credible and peaceful elections. The United Nations will continue to work clo sely
with the African Union and the regional economic communities to provide support
to countries undergoing elections, before, during and after the polls.
22. The African Peer Review Mechanism can provide useful lessons learned and
best practices on how to successfully manage elections. On this note, I welcome the
accession of Equatorial Guinea to the Mechanism. I also congratulate South Africa
and Mozambique for their respective progress reports on the implementation of their
national programmes of action. Meanwhile, the Mechanism still requires substantial
financial and capacity-building support to advance its activities. The international
community should continue to support this important voluntary mechanism.
23. Given the strong links between natural resources, conflict and fragility in
Africa, concerted efforts were made by the African Union, in collaboration with the
United Nations, to advance Africa’s transformative agenda for sustainable natural
resource management. The agenda aims to promote economic transformation
through commodity-based industrialization and to address poverty, inequality and
youth unemployment.

III. Enhanced focus on the nexus between peace, security
and development
24. In my review report (A/65/152-S/2010/526), I underscored the importance of
linking economic growth and socioeconomic development with peace, security,
stability, governance, rule of law and human rights. Rapid socioeconomic
transformation, the current priority of the African Union, can be achieved faster
under a peaceful, secure and stable environment. Likewise, durable peace and
security are enabled by inclusive and sustained socioeconomic development.
25. In demonstrating my commitment to operationalizing this nexus, I undertook
two joint visits, with the President of the World Bank, to the Great Lakes and Sahel
regions in Africa in May and November 2013, respectively. Our message was that
peace and development must go hand-in-hand. The Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, the President of the African Development Bank, my Special
Envoy for the Sahel and the Commissioner for Development of the European Union
joined us in our visit to the Sahel region. The visits catalysed the mobilization of
resources for peace, stability and development initiatives in both regions.
26. In the Great Lakes region, the World Bank committed $1 billion to provide
better health and education services, generate more cross-border trade and fund
hydroelectricity projects in support of the framework agreement for peace, security
and cooperation. In the Sahel region, a contribution of $8.25 billion was made
towards boosting economic growth and eradicating poverty, through projects that
would support peace and security efforts.

IV. Implementation of the recommendations in the review report
27. The present section provides an overview of the implementation by the United
Nations system of key priority areas for Africa’s peace and security agenda
identified in my review report.

14-58436

7/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

A.

Institutional cooperation
28. Within the framework of the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the
African Union and the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa, the United
Nations and the African Union continued to enhance their institutional co operation
on 10 thematic clusters, including peace and security and governance. In 2013, both
organizations undertook the second triennial review of the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the African Union and presented its report to the fifteenth
session of the Mechanism, which was held in Abuja in March 2014.
29. The outcome document of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa
meeting called for greater engagements with the regional economic communities,
especially in formulating a comprehensive long-term United Nations programme of
support to the African Union as a successor to the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union upon its expiration in 2016. It also called for
greater coherence and coordination of United Nations sys tem support to Africa and
underlined the role of the interdepartmental task force on African affairs in enabling
the organization to deliver as one.
30. In addition, a joint review of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa
was undertaken to better align it with both the African Union Commission and
NEPAD Strategic Plans for 2014-2017 and the African Union Agenda 2063. A key
decision was taken to hold the Mechanism meetings on the margins of the joint
annual meeting of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) Conference of
African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the African
Union Conference of Ministers of Economy and Finan ce, so as to enable high-level
engagements of senior officials.
31. On peace and security, both organizations continued to enhance their
cooperation on different components of the African Peace and Security Architecture,
including on early warning, preventive diplomacy, mediation, elector al assistance,
peacekeeping and post-conflict recovery and reconstruction. Consistent with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations on the role of regional
arrangements, the United Nations Security Council and Peace and Security Council
of the African Union continued to strengthen their partnership in conflict
prevention, resolution, management and peacekeeping. In June 2014, they held their
eighth joint consultative meeting at the United Nations Headquarters in New York
and, among other things, observed the tenth anniversary of the African Union Peace
and Security Council, while agreeing to further elaborate ways of strengthening
their relations.

B.

Conflict prevention, peacekeeping and conflict management
32. On conflict prevention, the United Nations maintained a determined and
cohesive international engagement with the African Union, SADC, donors and local
stakeholders like the Independent National Electoral Commission by deploying its
high-level good offices in Madagascar to prevent conflict and ensure the conduct of
peaceful elections. As part of their conflict prevention strategies, the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, the African Union and ECOWAS organized the
fifth Africa regional platform and third ministerial meeting on disaster risk

8/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

reduction in May 2014 in Nigeria. The meeting called for integrated approaches to
disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation as means to prevent conflict.
33. In peacekeeping, there was growing cooperation between the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army. Their joint military
operations resulted in the recovery of more towns from Al -Shabaab control. Support
to the Somali security forces increased, including through a United Nations trust
fund, assisted delivery of a non-lethal package to the Somali National Army forces
fighting alongside AMISOM. This was authorized by the Security Council in
resolution 2124 (2013), which also extended the mandate of AMISOM for an
additional year and increased the troop level to 22,126.
34. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Forces armées de la Republique
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
including its intervention brigade, continue to intensify their joint operations to oust
destabilizing armed groups such as the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and LRA.
35. Recent global considerations and decisions on United Nations peacekeeping
were also pertinent for Africa. Drawing on the experiences with the MONUSCO
intervention brigade in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Security Council
convened an open debate in June 2014 on new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping that deliberated on the boundaries of traditional peacekeeping through
peace enforcement. The General Assembly, in June 2014, adopted resolution 68/281
on rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries, manifesting the
recognition by Member States of the importance of peacekeeping in addressing
conflicts. These are welcome developments for Africa, where more than two thirds
of all United Nations military, police and civilian personnel operate. As the
continent is increasingly contributing to United Nations peacekeeping and seeks to
further strengthen its peacekeeping capacity, including through the
operationalization of both its African Standby Force and its rapid deployment
capability, these global debates and decisions are particularly relevant for Africa.

C.

Post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery
36. United Nations Peacebuilding Fund support to 15 African countries during the
review period amounted to about $50 million. As stated in its May 2014 review
report, 1 roughly 60 per cent of its annual allocations were made in support of the six
countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission: Burundi, Central African
Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The remaining funds
supported important peacebuilding initiatives in Côte d ’Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and Niger.
37. In the Central African Republic, the Peacebuilding Fund facilitated rapid
response to the crisis by providing financial assistance to enable the rehabilitation of
police and gendarmerie facilities in Bangui, facilitating the urgent deployment of
human rights monitors in support of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), and reinforcing the transitional

__________________
1 The report is available at www.unpbf.org/wp-content/uploads/Final-Report-May-UN-PBF.pdf.

14-58436

9/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

authorities by paying salaries of the police and gendarmerie for a limited period of
four months in 2014.
38. In the light of significant advances in consolidating peace in Sierra Leone, the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) drew
down in March 2014 and transferred its residual activities to the Government and
the United Nations country team. UNIPSIL successes underscore the importance of
national ownership and leadership, inclusive political dialogue, coordination and
sustained resources for efforts to bring about peace, stability and development. In
July 2014, the Peacebuilding Fund approved additional funding for peace
consolidation in post-transition Sierra Leone. This included $525,000 for
consolidated human rights support activities in partnership with the Human Rights
Commission of Sierra Leone and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and $1,525,000 to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) for developing national mechanisms and
capacities for peace consolidation and conflict prevention in Sierra Leone.
39. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) also continued to support countries in
fragile situations with an approach that emphasized the need for proper assessment
of the political and institutional environment and the design of economic strategies
that are gradual, flexible and tailored to the country’s capacity constraints. IMF
provides assistance both financially and through policy advice and technical
assistance, including through the Rapid Credit Facility that provides immediate
financing support. The Central African Republic, Madagascar and Mali received
support through the Rapid Credit Facility. IMF also supported capacity-building in
Ethiopia, Mozambique and Uganda in natural resource revenue management, tax
administration, public financial management, banking and monetary issues and
macroeconomic statistics.

D.

Human rights and humanitarian affairs
40. In line with the “Rights up front” initiative, which I launched in December
2013, United Nations system entities continued to take concrete actions to integrate
human rights into their strategies and operational activities. With the support of
UNDP, in May 2014, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
adopted the Guidelines on the Use and Conditions of Police Custody and Pre -trial
Detention in Africa, which set the continental agenda for acceptable pretrial justice
practice. The Commission also adopted a four-year strategic plan (2014-2017),
which will be aligned with the forthcoming African Union Agenda 2063.
41. OHCHR continued to provide secretariat support to the International
Commission of Inquiry for the Central African Republic and technical assistance to
the African Union Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan. In line with the
Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement, OHCHR will engage the Malian authorities
on modalities for establishing an international commission of inquiry to investigate
the incidents in Kidal, if the authorities decide to go forward with this. On 27 June
2014, the Human Rights Council adopted a resolution establishing an international
commission of inquiry, for a period of one year, to investigate all alleged violations
of human rights in Eritrea.

10/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

42. A recent UNMISS report, “Conflict in South Sudan: A Human Rights
Report”, 2 revealed that there are reasonable grounds to believe that all parties to the
conflict have committed war crimes and crimes against humanity. The interim report
of the African Union Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan, submitted to the
African Union Assembly in June 2014, further highlighted allegations of sexual and
gender-based violence. In response, UNMISS has intensified its work on human
rights monitoring and reporting and the protection of civilians. Similarly, in
response to developments on the ground, UNAMID increased efforts to protect
civilians and promote human rights in Darfur. UNDP strengthened national
capacities to investigate and prosecute international crimes in th e Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including crimes related to sexual and other forms of
gender-based violence.
43. On the humanitarian front, food security in South Sudan deteriorated at an
alarming rate and resulted in the Food and Agriculture Organiza tion of the United
Nations (FAO) expanding its humanitarian action to support 3.3 million conflict affected people with emergency livelihood support. In Somalia, humanitarian needs
remained acute as financial support has been especially low, with only 19 p er cent
of the humanitarian appeal funded. In addition, there are re -emerging signs of
drought. Consequently in June 2014, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs issued an appeal for $60 million to address urgent food,
nutrition and health-care needs for the next three months.
44. In the Sahel region, the number of food insecure people is expected to increase
from 20 million to 24 million by the end of July 2014, owing to a combination of
both acute and chronic factors such as climate change, conflict and population
growth. An increase in the caseload of food insecure people is expected to take
place in northern Cameroon, Mali, Senegal and Northern Nigeria for the first time.
The regional strategic response plan for the Sahel of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs that was launched in February 2014 is responding to this
situation through life-saving activities.

E.

Rule of law and the administration of justice
45. During the review period, the United Nations continued to shape global
debates on the rule of law. In February 2014, the Security Council held an open
debate on the rule of law to deliberate on my report on measuring the effectiveness
of the support provided by the United Nations system for the promotion of t he rule
of law in conflict and post-conflict situations (S/2013/341). Among other things, the
report outlined that the United Nations, through the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), has provided
wide-ranging assistance to Governments, from constitution-making to strengthening
police, justice and corrections institutions, including in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Mali. In June 2014, the General Assembly held a high-level event on
the contributions of human rights and the rule of law in the post -2015 development
agenda.

__________________
2 The report is available at http://unmiss.unmissions.org/Default.aspx?tabid=5805&language=

en-us.

14-58436

11/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

46. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations provided support
for the restoration of State authority through projects aimed at strengthening the
judiciary, the security sector and penitentiary institutions, and improving access to
justice for victims of sexual violence in South Kivu, North Kivu and Ituri. The
United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) supported the M inistry of Justice in
developing a strategic plan to fight corruption in the justice sector and improve
equal access to justice.
47. Under its regional programme for Arab States, 2011 -2015, UNODC continued
to support countries in North Africa, notably Egyp t, Libya and Tunisia, to improve
their criminal justice systems in order to strengthen the rule of law. Similar support
is being provided to Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia under the auspices of the regional
programme for eastern Africa, 2009-2015.
48. The United Nations Democracy Fund continued to support civil society
engagement for good governance and the rule of law. Recent projects of the Fund
have included collaborative efforts by judges and community workers to promote
access to justice in Malawi, support local peace structures to prevent communitybased conflicts in Sierra Leone, support for local governance in mining zones of
Guinea and support for civil society participation in local governance in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

F.

Economic growth and sustainable development
49. In the last 12 months, the African Union developed its Common African
Position on the Post-2015 Development Agenda and framed its priorities for the
sustainable development goals. These processes were extensively supp orted by
various United Nations system entities, in close collaboration with the African
Union Commission, the NEPAD Planning and Coordination Agency and the
regional economic communities. For instance, ECA, the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa and UNDP supported the efforts of the African Union
Commission to influence acceleration of Millennium Development Goals
implementation as the foundation of the post-2015 development agenda and the
sustainable development goals. ECA, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa
and other partners also organized the African ministerial consultative meeting on the
sustainable development goals, providing a platform for African countries to
identify, articulate and reach consensus on regional development priorities . In line
with General Assembly resolution 67/294, the United Nations will continue to give
due attention to Africa’s priorities, including the NEPAD priorities, in the last phase
of our formulation of the post-2015 development agenda.
50. The Office of the Special Adviser on Africa and the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs organized the first Economic and Social Council integration
segment on sustainable urbanization, including a panel event on the th eme
“Sustainable urbanization in Africa”, in May 2014, to raise awareness about and
advocate for Africa’s sustainable development priorities. On the Africa
Industrialization Day in November 2013, the African Union, the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa and the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization organized a joint event that deliberated on job creation and
entrepreneurship development as a means to accelerate industrialization in Africa.

12/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

51. At the seventh joint annual meetings of the ECA Conference of African
Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the African Union
Conference of Ministers of Economy and Finance, held in Abuja in March 2014,
African ministers discussed industrialization for inclusive and transformati ve
development in Africa. The meeting underscored that Africa’s growth has not been
sufficiently inclusive and broad-based, because of its continued reliance on the
exploitation of raw materials with limited value addition. This does not maximize
returns to Africans from the wealth created from the continent’s vast natural
resources. Therefore, a new approach is required that will ensure Africa’s
industrialization and structural transformation are inclusive. The meeting
underscored the need for coherent long-term development planning frameworks
with inclusive development goals and adopted a ministerial statement underscoring
a set of actions to advance industrialization for structural transformation that boost
African economies, empower citizens and advance African integration.

G.

Support for security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration
52. In April 2014, the Security Council adopted resolution 2151 reaffirming the
importance of security sector reform in post-conflict situations. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO facilitated the development of a national
security and justice strategy, provided capacity-building support to the Congolese
National Police, including in community policing in Bunia, and supported the
Government in the development of its national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.
53. The United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) assisted the national
authorities in the implementation of the national security sector reform strategy and
is building the capacity of the secretariat of the National Security Council. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) is helping the Government enhance
oversight, accountability and management of its security sector, and strengthen the
financial sustainability of reform efforts.
54. In Mali, MINUSMA is fostering a nationally owned security sector reform
programme and coordinating the overall support of the international community in
security sector reform. In Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) is supporting the Federal Government’s efforts to establish a
National Security Council secretariat. In Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations
provided support to the permanent secretariat of the national security sector re form
steering committee in drafting a concept note on the way forward in implementing
up-to-date national security sector reform plans.

V. Persistent and emerging challenges and opportunities: a
transformative agenda to achieve a conflict-free Africa
55. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/278, this section provides an
overview of persistent and emerging challenges to the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. It also examines existing and emerging
opportunities, notably the African Union’s agenda for a conflict -free Africa, and the
United Nations approach and support for this agenda.

14-58436

13/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

A.

Overview
56. The African Union Assembly, at its fifth ordinary session in Sirte, L ibya, in
July 2005, adopted a declaration on the review of the Millennium Development
Goals (Assembly/AU/Decl.1(V)), in which it pledged to address conflict and
political instability on the continent with the aim of achieving a conflict -free Africa
by 2010. The international community, including the United Nations, rallied to
support this five-year target.
57. While Africa did make significant progress in addressing and resolving its
conflicts, the goal of a conflict-free Africa by 2010 was not realized, owing to
persistent and new challenges, some of which I have addressed in preceding reports
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. These include the poor management of diversity, elections triggered conflict, natural resource-based conflicts and youth unemployment.
58. Relentless in its determination to achieve this goal, the African Union
Assembly, at its twenty-first ordinary session in May 2013, commemorating
50 years of the Organization of African Unity/African Union, adopted a declaration
in which it again pledged to end all wars by 2020 and achieve a conflict -free Africa.
The current conflict situations on the continent diminish optimism that Africa will
indeed end all wars and be conflict-free in the next six-and-half years. Nevertheless,
it is in the collective interest of the international community to work with African
Governments, institutions and people, at all levels, in achieving this goal. The role
of the United Nations will be extremely important in this regard.

B.

Persistent and emerging challenges
59. Africa currently faces a new wave of complex challenges to peace, security,
governance and sustainable development, including terrorism and violent
extremism, transnational organized crime, illicit financial flows, poor natural
resource management and climate change.
60. As my first biennial report on the review of the implementation of the
commitments made towards Africa’s development ( A/69/163) extensively addresses
climate change issues, and having previously addressed conflict and natural
resources in my 2011 report on the implementation of recommendations ( A/66/214S/2011/476), I will limit this section to discussing terrorism and violent extremism,
transnational organized crimes and illicit financial flows.

1.

Terrorism and violent extremism
61. During the review period, Africa experienced increased terrorist activities, in
particular in the Maghreb and Sahel regions. This resulted in deaths, human
casualties, the destruction of property, abduction, sexual slavery, displacements, the
loss of livelihoods, insecurity and the polarization of communities along political,
ethnic and religious lines.
62. Terrorism and violent extremism in Africa are enabled by a number of factors.
As the cases of Mali, Nigeria and Somalia demonstrate, widespread poverty, poor
governance, weak public institutions, economic inequalities and high rates of
unemployment create conditions for radicalization and violent extremism. Terrorist

14/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

groups exploit these situations to recruit new members and win the hearts and minds
of communities. Tackling corruption, creating decent employment, providing basic
social services to especially deprived communities and building strong and
accountable public institutions are critical for countering radicalization, extremism
and delegitimizing popular support for terrorist groups. Public -private partnerships
and the engagement of civil society groups, including religious and community
leaders, are also important in this process.
63. Countering terrorism also entails a focus on the source of terrorist financing,
including
kidnapping
and
hostage-taking.
African
Union
Decision
(Assembly/AU/Dec.256(XIII)) of July 2009 strongly condemns the payment of
ransom to terrorist groups. The United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council, at their eighth annual joint consultative meeting,
further called on all Member States to prevent terrorists from benefitting directly or
indirectly from ransom payments or from political concessions and to secure the
safe release of hostages. They also considered sanctions as an important tool in
countering terrorism and welcomed the inclusion of Boko Haram on the Al-Qaida
Sanctions List.
2.

Transnational organized crime
64. Transnational organized crime continues to pose serious challenges to peace,
security and development in Africa. Besides traditional crimes like trafficking in
drugs, persons and arms, there is a proliferation of new forms of transnational
criminal activities in Africa. These include cybercrime, identity theft, trafficking of
cultural property, environmental crimes and counterfeit medicine.
65. Most African countries currently lack the requisite infrastructure to address
cybercrimes, including energy, Internet and communications technology.
Investments in infrastructure, science and technology, and scientific cooperation
within the public and private sectors, are therefore crucial and urgent. In my report
on NEPAD (A/69/161) I outlined Africa’s efforts in infrastructure development, and
science, technology and innovation. I also emphasized the need to leverage privat e
sector participation in infrastructure through innovative public -private partnerships,
as underscored by the Dakar Agenda for Action of June 2014.
66. Furthermore, most militia or armed groups are either linked to transnational
criminal groups or directly engaged in environmental crimes as a means of
financing their operations. Militia groups in Central Africa are estimated to earn
between $4 million and $12.2 million each year from elephant ivory. The
Environmental Crime Crisis assessment report, 3 released during the first United
Nations Environment Assembly, states that one terrorist group in East Africa is
estimated to make between $38 million and $56 million per year from illegal trade
in charcoal. In total, militia and terrorist groups in and around African nations with
ongoing conflicts may earn between $111 million to $289 million annually from
their involvement in, and taxing of, the illegal or unregulated charcoal trade.
67. Transnational organized crimes deprive African economies of billions of
dollars, threaten livelihoods and undermine good governance. Hence, the role of
Governments, parliaments, security and law enforcement agencies and regional

__________________
3 The report is available at www.unep.org/newscentre/default.aspx?DocumentID=2791

&ArticleID=10906&l=en.

14-58436

15/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

institutions is critical for strengthening and enforcing legislation to combat these
crimes.
3.

Illicit financial flows
68. Illicit financial flows are a major development and governance challenge. The
loss of national revenue and assets intended for delivering social services and long term development impairs Governments, communities and businesses from making
the investments necessary to create resilient pathways for economic growth and
prosperity.
69. In recognition of the enormous cost of illicit financial flows to the
development of the continent, the fourth joint African Union/ECA Conference o f
African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, held in March
2011, adopted a resolution that established the High-level Panel on Illicit Financial
Flows from Africa. According to the progress report of the Panel, that was presented
to the Conference of Ministers in Abuja, in March 2014, illicit flows from Africa
amount to approximately $50 billion annually. This is approximately the official
development assistance that Africa receives every year and, indeed, this estimate
may well be short of reality. Noting that this is an African problem with a global
solution, the report called for international cooperation and capacity development
assistance to Africa in tackling illicit financial flows.

C.

Making peace a reality: a renewed plan for a conflict-free Africa
70. In May 2013, the African Union Assembly reaffirmed its determination to
build an integrated, prosperous and peaceful Africa that is driven and managed by
its own citizens. In that regard, African leaders adopted the Fiftieth Anniversary
Solemn Declaration, which outlined eight priority agendas for action towards
realizing this continental vision: African identity and renaissance, the struggle
against colonialism and the right to self-determination, integration, social and
economic development, peace and security, democratic governance, Africa’s destiny,
and Africa’s place in the world.
71. The agenda on peace and security categorically stated a shared determination
to “end all wars in Africa by 2020” and “achieve the goal of a conflict-free Africa”.
Following this, the African Union Peace and Security Council in April 2014
discussed the theme “Silencing guns: prerequisite for realizing a conflict -free Africa
by 2020”, with the aim of defining a framework of actions required to achieve the
goal of a conflict-free Africa by 2020. The African Union Commission also
organized a retreat in South Africa in April 2014 on the same theme, with the
participation of senior officials of the United Nations, to establish a precise agenda
and workplan for achieving the goal in line with Agenda 2063. The African Union
Assembly, in its decision (Assembly/AU/Dec.536(XXIII)) of June 2014, further
called for renewed efforts by the African Union member States, the African Union
Commission, the regional economic communities and regional mechanisms towards
achieving this objective.
72. The logic of the agenda is unequivocal and sequenced. In the short to medium
term, the plan is to silence the guns and end all wars by 2020, as a required
precursor for attaining a conflict-free Africa, which is a longer-term goal. Concrete
actions to achieve this milestone within the next six-and-half-year period will thus

16/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

have to be undertaken in tandem with the longer-term plan being outlined in Agenda
2063. After 2020, efforts to consolidate the gains made during this period and tackle
remaining challenges will naturally progress within the framework of Agenda 2063.
73. Substantively, the agenda envisions an inclusive society that is stable, safe and
just for all Africans. The African person is at its core, regardless of sex, age,
religion, nationality, ethnicity or race, ancestry, class or disability. Consequently, the
agenda focuses on overcoming exclusion and promoting inclusive institutions and
participatory processes for political, economic, sociocultural and environmental
development. Its ideals and guiding principles are Pan-Africanism, respect for
human rights, non-discrimination, tolerance, respect for diversity, equality of
opportunity, solidarity, security, justice and participation of all, including
disadvantaged, marginalized and vulnerable groups and persons. Its approach
encourages collaboration and partnerships among Governments at all levels, civil
society, including the media, the private sector, the Afr ican diaspora and
international partners in harnessing Africa’s resources for the development and
shared prosperity of its people.
74. In order to achieve this, and as outlined in the Fiftieth Anniversary Solemn
Declaration, the African Union has set out to eradicate recurring and emerging
threats, including terrorism, piracy, extremism, armed rebellion and transnational
organized crimes like trafficking in narcotics and humans and cybercrimes. The
African Union will continue to devise measures to ensure the effective
implementation of agreements on landmines and the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons, weapons of mass destruction and small arms and light weapons. Special
attention will be given to the plight of internally displaced persons and refugees,
including by eliminating the root causes of all conflicts through sustained
investments in conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy and post -conflict
reconstruction and development. Alongside this, Africa’s peacekeeping and
enforcement capacities through the African Standby Force should be
operationalized.
75. The African Union undertakes to end impunity and ensure accountability by
strengthening national and continental justice institutions. The rule of law,
democratic institutions and processes and service delivery capacities will equally be
strengthened, alongside efforts to combat corruption and oppression. Underlying
this is a commitment to develop human capital, protect rights, particularly those of
women, children and the youth, and eradicate disease s. This is closely aligned with
my “Rights up front” initiative, and I encourage the African Union to further benefit
from the support of the United Nations in this area.
76. The aim of silencing the guns and ending all wars in Africa in a little over six
years may appear ambitious, considering the current situations in the Central
African Republic, eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya, Nigeria,
Somalia and South Sudan. These conflicts need to be addressed and resolved as a
matter of urgency, if the guns are to be silenced by 2020. This will require the
sustained political will, commitment, leadership and responsibility of African
Governments and peoples, as well as strategic and sustained partnerships with the
international community.
77. As highlighted in preceding sections of the present report, the United Nations
is already supporting regional, subregional and national efforts aimed at resolving
these conflicts. However, more needs to be done to support the African Union in

14-58436

17/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

achieving the current goal. The General Assembly may wish to consider defining a
concrete five-year actionable plan in support of the goal of achieving a conflict -free
Africa by 2020. Such a plan should seek to accelerate ongoing efforts to resolve the
crises in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan, among others, while also focusing on quick impact initiatives to be
undertaken in close collaboration with the African Union and the regional economic
communities.

D.

Strengthening United Nations engagement and support for a
conflict-free Africa
78. Since June 2011, the General Assembly has repeatedly called for intensified
efforts and a coordinated approach among Governments, the African Union, the
regional economic communities, the United Nations system and relevant partners in
addressing challenges, with a view to achieving progress towards the goal of a
conflict-free Africa. The General Assembly reiterated this call in its resolution
68/278.
79. While the support of the international community is important, it should be
stressed that the primary responsibility for achieving a conflict -free Africa lies with
African Member States and institutions at all levels. As such, the roles a nd
contributions of the United Nations should mainly be in support of Africa’s own
efforts and agendas, as currently articulated in the Fiftieth Anniversary Solemn
Declaration, the African Union Commission and the NEPAD strategic plan 2014 2017, the forthcoming Agenda 2063 and the broad array of African Union
instruments on peace, security and development. In other words, United Nations
support should be better aligned to the strategic priorities of the African Union.
80. Given varied mandates, resource constraints and competing priorities, United
Nations support should be coherent and coordinated. The Regional Coordination
Mechanism for Africa and the interdepartmental task force on African affairs remain
veritable platforms for strengthening coordination and coherence to better deliver as
one United Nations. United Nations system entities should strengthen their
collaboration within the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa and the
interdepartmental task force on African affairs, in particular in the areas of conflict
prevention, management and resolution, human rights, governance and the rule of
law, and post-conflict reconstruction and development.
81. In this regard, the commitments made by Member States, in providing
additional financial and human resources, to strengthen the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa to undertake its increasing responsibilities, including as the
convener of the interdepartmental task force on African affairs, are welcome. This
will reflect positively in the implementation of its mandate on peace, security and
development.
82. The Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union has also
been instrumental in improving coherence and alignment of United Nations system
support with the strategic priorities of the African Union, including in conflict
prevention, mediation and good offices, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As this
important programme will expire in 2016, the United Nations and the African Union
took a joint decision during the fifteenth session of t he Regional Coordination
Mechanism for Africa in Abuja, in March 2014, to establish a working group to start

18/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

formulating a successor programme that will also reflect the support of the United
Nations to Agenda 2063.

VI. Conclusions and recommendations
83. While African countries, the African Union and the regional economic
communities continue to make progress in consolidating the African Peace and
Security Architecture and accelerating efforts to implement the commitments
contained in the Fiftieth Anniversary Solemn Declaration, in particular on silencing
the guns, ending all wars by 2020 and achieving a conflict -free Africa, the United
Nations should intensify its support and cooperation with African countries, the
African Union and the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms towards the timely realization of this goal. In particular, the
United Nations should consider putting in place a five-year plan to support the
efforts of the African Union and the regional economic communities towards
achieving a conflict-free Africa. This plan should include measures for
accelerating ongoing efforts to address the situation in current epicentres of
conflict, as these pose significant threats to the realization of a conflict-free
Africa by the set timeline. As sustained and strategic partnerships will be
crucial for achieving a conflict-free Africa, this plan should also include
measures to systematically engage the private sector and civil society, especially
women and youths, in these processes.
84. The transformative agenda of the African Union underscores the interlinkages
between peace, security, development, human rights and governance. As the United
Nations has a comparative advantage in operationalizing this nexus, the United
Nations system should strengthen capacity development for the African Union
and regional economic communities in this area through the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union and the Regional
Coordination Mechanism for Africa.
85. As this nexus is further reflected in the Common African Position on the
Post-2015 Development Agenda, the international community and the United
Nations should continue to give due attention to Africa’s priorities in ongoing
negotiations on the sustainable development goals and in the last phase of
formulation of the post-2015 development agenda.
86. The African Union, at the tenth anniversary of its Peace and Security Council,
in May 2014, underscored the need for more resources to support and strengthen the
Continental Early Warning System, the good offices role of Special Envoys and
Representatives and post-conflict reconstruction and development efforts, including
through the African Solidarity Initiative. The Council also emphasized the need for
greater engagement with the African Union Panel of the Wise and similar structures
at the level of the regional economic communities. Within the framework of the
African Peace and Security Architecture, the United Nations should continue to
support African countries, the African Union and the regional economic
communities in further strengthening capacities for early warning, conflict
analysis, dialogue and mediation. The growing collaboration between United
Nations and the African Union in the area of good offices and between United
Nations and African Union Envoys should also be enhanced.

14-58436

19/21

A/69/162
S/2014/542

87. Bearing in mind the importance of good governance and inclusive, effective
and accountable public institutions for ensuring durable peace and sustainable
development, the international community, including the United Nations system,
should, upon request, support African countries in their ongoing efforts to
promote democratic governance, the rule of law and accountability in public
institutions. Continued support for inclusive, free, credible and peaceful
elections will be important in this regard.
88. With Africa increasingly appearing to be the new epicentre of terrorism, a
coherent security agenda is needed to tackle the growing problem of terrorism and
violent extremism. Given that terrorism in Africa is largely a social phenomenon, it
is also important to strengthen the engagement of civilians in counter-terrorism
efforts. As such, the United Nations should work closely with the African Union
and the regional economic communities in supporting the development and
implementation of regional counter-terrorism action plans that are peoplecentred. As these efforts should ideally include support to victims of terrorism,
I also encourage African Governments, the African Union, the regional
economic communities and African civil society organizations to utilize the
United Nations Victims of Terrorism Support Portal. 4
89. To prevent radicalization and violent extremism, African countries need to take
concrete measures to bolster State security forces’ and law enforcement agencies’
respect for human rights and the rule of law, promote civil -military relations and
devise development programmes, particularly for youths. In this regard, the
United Nations should continue to support African countries, the African Union
and the regional economic communities in implementing the African Union
security sector reform policy framework, which was adopted by the African
Union Heads of State and Government in 2013. The effective implementation of
the framework will also be vital for strengthening institutional capacities and
regional cooperation among security and law enforcement agencies in
addressing transnational organized crime, including trafficking in arms, cyber
and environmental crimes.
90. Given the links between natural resource management and conflict, it is
imperative to integrate natural resource management and environmental
considerations into frameworks for conflict prevention, management and resolution.
I call on United Nations system entities to mainstream this perspective within
their various mandates and expertise in conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and
development.
91. Given the impact of illicit financial flows on Africa’s governance and
structural transformation agendas, African countries, the African Union and
the regional economic communities, in cooperation with the international
community, should further strengthen efforts to confront the scourge of illicit
financial flows, including through combating corruption in both public and
corporate sectors and preventing tax evasion.
92. As Africa’s transformation agenda is still evolving and includes a number of
different components, it is important to closely monitor its de velopment to ensure
that the support of the United Nations system is constantly aligned with Africa’s
__________________
4 www.un.org/victimsofterrorism/en.

20/21

14-58436

A/69/162
S/2014/542

priorities. In this regard, United Nations system entities should strengthen
coherence and coordination within the interdepartmental task force on African
affairs to monitor and report on these developments. In addition, as the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union expires in 2016,
the United Nations and the African Union should accelerate the work of the
joint working group established by the fifteenth Regional Coordination
Mechanism for Africa to propose to Member States a successor programme to
the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union that will be
closely aligned to the Agenda 2063 of the African Union.

14-58436

21/21
