S/PV.8869

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8869th meeting

Wednesday, 29 September 2021, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Byrne Nason. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Gotru
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Khoroshev
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-26845 (E)
*2126845*

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 7 July, Israeli authorities demolished some
30 structures, of which 17 were provided as
humanitarian assistance, in the Bedouin community of
Humsa Al-Baqai’a, in the Jordan Valley.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process; Ms. Mai Farsakh, Planning
Manager, Jerusalem Legal Aid and Human Rights;
and Ms. Meredith Rothbart, co-Founder and Chief
Executive Officer of Amal-Tikva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: On behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, I will devote this briefing to presenting his 19th
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
covering the period from 12 June to 27 September.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on Israel to
“immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem” and to “fully respect all of its legal
obligations in this regard”.
During the reporting period, there were no
new settlement housing plans advanced, approved
or tendered.
On 2 July, some 50 Israeli settler families left
the settlement outpost of Evyatar, illegal also under
Israeli law, following an agreement with the Israeli
Government that the Israeli military would re-establish
a presence at the site and that a land survey would be
conducted to determine land status.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures continued across the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Citing the absence of Israeliissued building permits, which are almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain, 302 structures were demolished
or seized by Israeli authorities or demolished by their
owners to avoid heavy Israeli demolition fees. These
actions displaced 433 people, including 251 children
and 102 women.
2/21

29/09/2021

On 14 July, Israeli authorities confiscated at least
49 structures in the Bedouin community of Ras Al-Tin,
in Ramallah governorate. As a result, 84 people,
including 53 children and 14 women, were displaced.
On 11 August, the Jerusalem Local Affairs Court
froze the demolition of several dozen structures in
the Al-Bustan section of the Silwan neighbourhood
until
10
February
2022,
pending
ongoing
planning discussions.
On 2 August, Israel’s Supreme Court held a hearing
to consider an appeal request by four Palestinian
families facing forced eviction in the Sheikh Jarrah
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem. The judges made
a proposal, which was not accepted, and the hearing
was adjourned with no date to reconvene. There are
currently some 970 Palestinians facing eviction in
East Jerusalem.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for
“immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including all acts of terror, as
well as all acts of provocation and destruction”.
Unfortunately, daily violence continued. Overall,
24 Palestinians, including two women and five
children, were killed by Israeli security forces during
demonstrations, clashes, security operations and other
incidents. Some 4,814 Palestinians, including 10 women
and 530 children, were injured. Of these, 3,369 injuries
were due to tear gas inhalation. Some 205 people were
injured by live ammunition. One Israeli soldier was
killed by Palestinians and 41 Israelis, including seven
women and one child, were injured by Palestinians in
clashes, rock and Molotov cocktail throwing, attacks
and other incidents.
Beita village, in the occupied West Bank, remained
a flashpoint, where demonstrations against the nearby
Israeli settlement outpost of Evyatar often escalated
into clashes between Palestinians and the Israeli
security forces. Since June, four Palestinians, including
one child, have been shot and killed and 3,530 others
injured by Israeli forces during these clashes.
On 16 June during protests in Beita, Israeli security
forces shot a 16-year-old boy, who later died from his
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

injuries. During a demonstration on 24 September, a
Palestinian man was killed in an exchange of fire with
Israeli security forces.
On 24 June, Palestinian political activist Nizar
Banat died following an arrest operation by Palestinian
security forces in Hebron, during which he was
reportedly beaten severely. Banat’s death sparked
several demonstrations since late June, leading to
dozens of arrests; all were subsequently released. On
27 September, a Palestinian military court held its first
hearing for the 14 officers from the Palestinian security
forces charged with the death of Nizar Banat.
On 18 July, three Israelis, including a one-year-old
child, were injured by stones thrown by Palestinians
near Damascus Gate in Jerusalem’s Old City.
On 23 July, Israeli security forces shot killed a
17-year-old Palestinian during clashes in Nabi Saleh.
Israeli security forces stated that the boy was throwing
stones.
On 28 July, an 11-year-old Palestinian boy was
killed in Beit Ummar after Israeli security forces
fired at the car he was travelling in with his father and
siblings. The next day, Israeli security forces shot and
killed a Palestinian man amid clashes during the boy’s
funeral.
On 16 August, four Palestinians were killed and
another injured in an exchange of fire with Israeli
security forces during an Israeli search operation in the
Jenin refugee camp.
On 24 August, Israeli forces shot and killed a
15-year-old Palestinian boy in the Balata refugee camp,
east of Nablus. According to Israeli officials, the boy had
been preparing to throw a large rock at Israeli security
forces personnel from a rooftop. However, witnesses
disputed the account of Israeli security forces.
On 31 August, Israeli security forces shot and
killed a 39-year-old Palestinian man in Beit Ur, west of
Ramallah, under unclear circumstances. Israeli security
forces announced that it would open an investigation
into the killing.
On 10 September, following a call from Fatah and
Hamas, demonstrations linked to six escaped prisoners
were held across the occupied West Bank and Gaza,
with several escalating into clashes with Israeli security
forces, resulting in 183 Palestinians injured.

S/PV. 8869

On 26 September, Israeli forces conducted a searchand-arrest operation targeting what Israel said were
Hamas operatives in several locations in the West Bank.
Five Palestinians were killed, including a 16-year-old
boy, and seven others were injured during exchanges of
fire between Israeli forces and Palestinians. Two Israeli
security personnel were also injured.
In Gaza, Palestinian militants launched five rockets
and numerous incendiary balloons into Israel, injuring
four civilians, including one child, all while running to
shelter, and causing dozens of fires. In response. Israeli
forces carried out 55 air strikes on what they said were
military targets in the Strip, resulting in damage but
no injuries.
On 21 August in Gaza, thousands of people
participated in a demonstration at the perimeter fence.
Hundreds hurled stones and, reportedly, improvised
explosive devices at Israeli security forces, who
responded with live ammunition and tear gas. Some 41
Palestinians were injured, including 24 children. Two
Palestinians, including a boy, subsequently died of their
injuries. One Israeli soldier was critically injured and
later died of his wounds. On 23 August, Israeli forces
carried out eight air strikes against what Israel said
were Hamas military targets.
Across the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, settler-related violence continued, including
reports of armed settlers carrying out attacks against
Palestinians, in proximity to Israel security forces. On
17 August, a 15-year-old Palestinian boy was attacked
in the northern part of the occupied West Bank, during
which a group of Israeli settlers kidnapped the boy and
brutally assaulted him.
A total of 102 attacks occurred, in which Israeli
settlers or other civilians injured 36 Palestinians or
reportedly damaged property. Palestinians perpetrated
some 193 attacks against Israeli settlers and other
civilians in the occupied West Bank, including
throwing stones, Molotov cocktails and pipe bombs at
civilian vehicles, resulting in 23 injuries and damage
to property.
On 21 August, Palestinian security forces arrested
23 people in Ramallah for their participation in a planned
demonstration. On numerous occasions, Palestinian
security forces restricted the freedom of expression and
assembly on demonstrators and used force, including
beating them with batons and indiscriminately firing
tear gas and stun grenades. Women present at the

21-268453/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

demonstrations reported sexual harassment and genderbased threats on social media afterwards.
During the reporting period, Israeli security forces
arrested two prominent human rights defenders, one in
Ramallah and another in Bethlehem. Israeli security
forces also raided and searched three Palestinian
civil society organizations located in Area A of the
occupied West Bank and closed one for six months for
undisclosed security reasons.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for the parties to
refrain from acts of provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric. Some Palestinian and Israeli
officials continued to use such rhetoric during the
reporting period. On 27 June, an Israeli member of
the Knesset challenged the status quo on the Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, stating
“our demand is full sovereignty, raising the Israeli
flag and expelling all Waqf elements seeking to
harm us”.
On 20 June, a senior Hamas official said that
“neither words nor messages” were needed to resolve
the status of Jerusalem, and that the movement would
arrive in Jerusalem with the help of barrages of
hundreds of rockets fired at Tel Aviv.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse negative trends on the ground
that imperil the two-State solution. On 13 September,
the United Nations launched a cash assistance
programme to aid nearly 100,000 needy families in
Gaza. The effort is supported by the State of Qatar, with
$40 million provided over four months. In addition,
some $45 million of the requested $95 million has
been raised for the United Nations humanitarian flash
appeal, and nearly $55 million has been mobilized in
support of the humanitarian response more broadly.
In Gaza, Israel eased access restrictions imposed
during the May escalation. In addition to key
humanitarian assistance, access was progressively
facilitated for commercial goods and materials for
international projects, including allowing some
3,000 tons of rebar outside the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism, with nearly 20,000 trucks entering
Gaza through the Kerem Shalom crossing during the
reporting period. The entry of materials and trade has
since returned to pre-escalation levels. Moreover, on
1 September, Israel announced it would increase entry
4/21

29/09/2021

permits for traders and businesspeople from 2,000
to 7,000, expand the Gaza fishing zone from 12 to
15 nautical miles, allow the entry of more goods and
equipment and increase the supply of fresh water to
Gaza by 5 million cubic metres a year.
Israel continued to deduct an amount of the
clearance revenues from Israel to the Palestinian
Authority (PA) equivalent to what Israel calculates is
paid by the PA to Palestinian security prisoners and
the families of those killed in the context of attacks.
The PA continues to face a growing fiscal crisis that
has a severe impact on its ability to cover minimum
expenditures, including Government salaries and
payments to needy households.
Following a meeting between President Abbas
and Defence Minister Gantz on 30 August, the first
such meeting between both sides in years, Israel said
it would provide a $150 million loan to the PA, to be
repaid through commensurate deductions from the
clearance revenues. Israel also announced plans to issue
identification cards for thousands of undocumented
foreign nationals in the occupied West Bank and grant
an additional 15,000 permits for Palestinian workers
to enter Israel, along with an additional 1,000 building
permits for Palestinians in Area C of the West Bank.
On 6 September, the Palestinian Authority
announced that it would hold local elections on
11 December for all villages and municipalities in
category C, the smallest 388 of the approximately 450
councils overall. On 27 September, the PA announced
that the remaining local elections would be held on
23 March 2022, including for 11 local councils in Gaza,
pending an agreement for them to take place in that
second phase.
On 16 August, schools managed by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) opened for more than
300,000 girls and boys across the occupied Palestinian
territory. However, UNRWA is once again struggling to
obtain funding to operate in the last months of the year.
A disruption in UNRWA services will deny hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians, namely young people,
across the region the essential rights to a dignified life,
education, health, food and housing.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security
Council called upon all States to distinguish, in their
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State
of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. No
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

such steps were taken during the reporting period.
Resolution 2334 (2016) also called upon all parties to
continue, inter alia, to exert collective efforts to launch
credible negotiations.
On 15 July, the Envoys of the Middle East Quartet
met virtually to discuss the most recent developments
on the ground and agreed to remain engaged on the
matter and chart a way forward.
On 2 September, the Presidents of Egypt, Jordan
and Palestine met in Cairo. All three leaders pledged
to work together to resume peace negotiations, in
accordance with international legitimacy, under the
auspices of the Quartet.
In conjunction with International Day of Peace
on 21 September, Palestinian and Israeli peace
organizations hosted several events to promote the
establishment of a long-term solution to the conflict
and warn about the costs of maintaining the status quo.
In conclusion, allow me to share the SecretaryGeneral’s observations concerning the implementation
of the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) during the
reporting period.

S/PV. 8869

I am deeply concerned by the continued settlerrelated violence in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. Israel, as the occupying Power, has
an obligation to ensure the safety and security of the
Palestinian population and to investigate such attacks.
I underscore that all perpetrators of violence must be
held accountable and swiftly brought to justice.
The launching of indiscriminate rockets and
incendiary devices towards Israeli civilian population
centres violates international law and must stop.
I would like to reiterate that the fate of two Israeli
civilians and that of the bodies of two Israel Defense
Forces soldiers held by Hamas in Gaza remain an
important humanitarian concern. I call upon Hamas
to provide information on their status, as required by
international humanitarian law. I also remain deeply
concerned by the continued Israeli practice of holding
the bodies of Palestinians. I call upon Israel to return
withheld bodies to their families, in line with its
obligations under international humanitarian law.

I reiterate that all settlements are illegal under
international law and that they undermine the prospects
for achieving a viable two-State solution, in line with
United Nations resolutions, international law and
prior agreements. The pause in new advancements and
tenders of plans for housing units in settlements observed
during this reporting period must become permanent.

The death of Nizar Banat while in the custody of
Palestinian Security forces is unacceptable. I call on
the Palestinian Authority to ensure that his death and
all allegations of use of disproportionate force against
protesters by Palestinian security forces be investigated
and those responsible held accountable. All arrests of
human rights defenders, journalists and activists on
charges that interfere with their exercise of fundamental
freedoms of expression must cease.

I remain deeply concerned by the continued
demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures, which have included internationally
funded humanitarian projects. I urge Israel to cease
demolitions and evictions, in line with its obligations
under international humanitarian law, and to approve
plans that would enable these communities to build
legally and address their development needs.

I welcome Qatar’s generous contribution to support
vulnerable families and improve the dire socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The
United Nations will continue to work closely with the
Palestinian Authority and partners, including Egypt,
to solidify the ceasefire, allow the entry of urgent
humanitarian assistance and stabilize the situation
in Gaza.

I am deeply troubled by the continued loss of
life and serious injuries in the occupied Palestinian
territory. I am appalled that children continue to be
victims of violence. I reiterate that security forces
must exercise maximum restraint and use lethal force
only when it is strictly unavoidable in order to protect
life. Pertinent authorities must carry out thorough,
independent, impartial and prompt investigations into
all instances of possible excessive use of force and hold
perpetrators accountable.

While materials for humanitarian assistance
have entered Gaza more regularly, predictable access
for materials necessary for stability and economic
recovery remains a key challenge. All materials
required to implement the 2021 humanitarian response
plan and the May 2021 flash appeal should be allowed
into Gaza. All parties must facilitate unimpeded access
for humanitarian relief. Humanitarian staff from the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations must also be able to enter and exit Gaza

21-268455/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on a regular basis. Hamas must cease practices that
hinder the delivery of crucial humanitarian assistance.
A recent assessment by UN-Women of the impact
of the May hostilities has highlighted the importance
of addressing the protection needs of women and
children in Gaza. I encourage support for United
Nations partners to continue to offer gender-basedviolence-related services.
The Palestinian Authority’s finances continue
to be of serious concern. In addition to the severe
impact of the occupation on the economy, Israelis and
Palestinians should urgently resolve the impasse over
prisoner payments and the other fiscal files. The scope
of private-banking-sector lending to the Palestinian
Authority is now at its limit. I encourage donors to
provide urgent support to the Palestinian Authority.
I welcome recent high-level contacts between
Israeli and Palestinian officials and the steps taken by
the Israeli Government to ease the economic pressure on
the Palestinian Authority, and I encourage their further
expansion. I encourage both Parties to take urgent steps
that are necessary to stabilize the Palestinian economy
and strengthen Palestinian institutions. I also urge the
implementation of existing agreements by both sides.
The next meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee can
examine how outstanding issues can be addressed by
the parties, with the support of donor community and
the United Nations.
I reiterate the gratitude of the United Nations to
all donors who continue to support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). I urge Member States to sustain
the funding levels of UNRWA’s programme budget
in the past years and advance disbursements of funds
as much as possible to avoid a disruption of essential
services and humanitarian aid across the occupied
Palestinian territory. We must provide the Agency with
adequate resources to fulfil the mandate it was given by
the General Assembly. Investing in UNRWA remains
an indispensable investment in regional stability and
support for the goal of Middle East peace.
Crucially, Gaza requires political solutions
that will see a focus on working towards advancing
intra-Palestinian unity, lifting the debilitating closures
in Gaza, in line with Security Council resolution 1860
(2009), and, ultimately, returning to a peace process
that will end the occupation and create a viable twoState solution. Palestinian unity is crucial to advancing
6/21

29/09/2021

a two-State solution. It is therefore critical that the
Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts
continue. The United Nations stands firm in its support
of these efforts. The holding of elections in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza would
be a crucial step towards Palestinian unity, giving
renewed legitimacy to national institutions, including
a democratically elected Parliament and Government
in Palestine. I encourage the Palestinian Authority to
resume the election process as soon as possible.
I am encouraged that many Israelis and Palestinians
remain committed to achieving a two-State solution
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace despite
the significant challenges. We in the international
community must support the civil society organizations
that continue to work tirelessly to build trust and
advance the prospects for peace.
In closing, while I am encouraged by the recent
engagement of senior Israeli and Palestinian officials,
we must continue our efforts to address the worrying
situation on the ground, including reversing negative
trends across the occupied Palestinian territory and
stabilizing the fragile situation in Gaza. We must now
re-energize efforts aimed at establishing a legitimate
political horizon that will end the occupation in line
with relevant United Nations resolutions, international
law and bilateral agreements in pursuit of achieving
the vision of two States — Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous, viable and sovereign
Palestinian State — living side by side in peace and
security within secure and recognized borders, on the
basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital
of both States.
I once again urge Israelis, Palestinians, States of the
region and the broader international community to take
practical steps that will enable the parties to re-engage
on the path to peace. I will continue to actively engage
in advancing those efforts with my counterparts in the
Middle East Quartet, key regional partners and Israeli
and Palestinian leaders.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Farsakh.
Ms. Farsakh: We would like to attest before the
Security Council to the blatant disregard of the State of
Israel for international law in its continued settlement
expansion into Palestinian territory, at the expense of
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinians’ individual right to housing and collective
right to self-determination, among other rights, such as
the enjoyment of natural resources, private property,
freedom of movement and, with the emergence of
settler violence, personal security.
The settler population now stands at nearly 670,000
persons across 132 settlements and 140 outposts in
Area C and 13 settlement blocs in East Jerusalem,
controlling nearly 43 per cent of the territory of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem — an enterprise
amounting to the transfer of a State’s population into
occupied territory. Since the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016), approximately 60,000 additional settlers
have taken occupancy of the occupied Palestinian
territory through the addition of 43 new outposts and
the expansion of existing settlements, as reflected in
the published tenders for 15,900 new housing units, as
per data published by Peace Now.
More plans have since been announced in 2021,
involving 9,000 housing units in the Atarot settlement,
south of Ramallah, and 3,412 housing units in E-1,
in the Jerusalem periphery, among others. More
threatening still are the plans being advanced to
retroactively authorize illegal outposts situated on
Palestinian private land by declaring the lands as State
land after the fact, as is being attempted in the case of
the Evyatar outpost, constructed in May in the Nablus
governorate. Earlier in 2021, authorization plans were
also furthered for another two outposts: Havat Yair
in the Salfit governorate and Nofei Nehemia in the
Nablus governorate.
Settler violence, actively or tacitly supported by the
Israeli army, has been among the key measures employed
by settlers in constructing and maintaining settlements
and outposts on Palestinian lands. Such violence takes
the form of verbal assault and intimidation, physical
attack up to murder, the destruction of property and
fencing off land, among other measures. According
to data collected by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 441 settler
attacks were documented against Palestinians and
Palestinian property in the occupied Palestinian
territory in the first five months of 2021, which is nearly
a threefold increase when compared to the monthly
average of settler violence incidents the year prior.
Facilitating the process of settlement expansion are
Israel’s restrictive zoning and planning policies, which
effectively preclude Palestinians from obtaining and/or

S/PV. 8869

affording building permits and leaves the great majority
of residents vulnerable to the threat of demolition, as
reflected in 241 villages being completely designated
as Area C, nearly all Bedouin communities receiving
blanket demolition orders and at least a third of the
Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem lacking Israeliissued building permits. Since the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016), Israel has only intensified demolition and
displacement efforts in clearing the way for settlement
expansion. Between January 2016 and August 2021,
3,255 Palestinian structures were demolished,
displacing 5,622 women, men, girls and boys.
The
financial,
social
and
psychological
ramifications of living in anticipation, or in the
aftermath, of a demolition or violent act by an
Israeli involve far-reaching impacts on the lives of
Palestinians, from the loss of property or an inability
to access livelihood resource and the associated
financial impacts to the loss of social cohesion and
freedom of movement, trauma and the resulting effects
on mental health — for example, depression/anxiety,
higher rates of delusional, obsessive, compulsive and
psychotic thoughts and domestic violence and, in the
case of children, withdrawal, attention difficulties,
delinquency and violent behaviour. According to a
study by Save the Children, having to cope with trauma
emanating from house demolition in an environment of
family trauma serves to marginalize the individual’s
own need for care. That is especially problematic for
children, whose needs are magnified when their parents
are contending with their own, and for women, as they
are tasked with caretaking.
When demolition involves makeshift schools
constructed to service more remote and marginalized
areas, such as Bedouin communities or communities
isolated within the seam zone, the ability of girls in
particular to continue their education is often threatened.
The alternative, that of crossing in and out of heavily
militarized checkpoints or walking along arduous
footpaths or settler roads to reach schools beyond their
community, often prompts families to discontinue their
education out of fear for their safety. Similar concerns
have served to hamper women’s participation in higher
education and employment opportunities.
The continuously evolving facts on the ground I
referred to and their human impact serve to attest to
Israel’s intentional undermining of a viable two-State
solution and the prospect of peace in the region.

21-268457/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I thank Ms. Farsakh for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rothbart.
Ms. Rothbart: I thank you, Madam President, for
your kind and uncommon invitation to speak here in
front of the Security Council. I also thank the members
of the Council and the Special Coordinator for their
attention and consideration of new ideas and hope for
the future.
I am Meredith Rothbart, and I am a Jewish Israeli,
a religious Zionist, speaking to the Security Council
from Jerusalem. I am the co-Founder and Chief
Executive Officer of Amal-Tikva, where my Palestinian
co-founder, Basheer Abu-Baker, and our teamwork
with leaders of non-governmental organizations,
philanthropists and field experts to build capacity
for strategic, sustainable and scalable peacebuilding
efforts. I am here to share with the Council my view
from the ground.
We heard today and over the past few weeks of
the continued violence between our two peoples. It is
clear to all who are observing our political reality that
negotiations at the highest diplomatic levels would not
result in substantive peace right now.
If we recall, the Oslo Accords failed because the
agreement came from a secret process between elite
leaders, with no women, no religious leaders and no
representative of those wishing to disrupt the process
with violence. Neither society was prepared or ready to
make compromises. It is therefore no wonder that the
Oslo Accords failed and that the disappointment by the
public led to the most violent era in the history of our
conflict. Let us not do that again.
Around the same time as the Oslo Accords, when
violent attacks were a daily occurrence in Northern
Ireland, the United States spearheaded the establishment
of the International Fund for Ireland. Both Prime
Ministers Bertie Ahern and Tony Blair share the view
that the Fund built the social and economic foundations
upon which peace was eventually secured about a
decade later.
Today the Special Coordinator asked for affirmative
steps to improve the situation on the ground. We know
that civil society peacebuilding is not only an affirmative
step; it works, and it is a required precondition for a
negotiated peace agreement, especially in an intractable
conflict. We know because of so many initiatives that
have been proved to succeed.
8/21

29/09/2021

We know that it works because a Palestinian police
officer saved a lost Israel Defense Forces soldier’s
life, not because he had to but out of appreciation for
the Israeli volunteer from the organization Road to
Recovery, who had driven his brother to the hospital
just the week before.
We know that it works because Rabbi Michael
Melchior and Sheikh Raed Badir from the Religious
Peace Initiative were the religious leaders who
prevented a third intifada amid violence on the Temple
Mount. And it was they who conducted the negotiations
that led to our unity Government, which has a religious
Zionist Prime Minister and Palestinian members of
Parliament from the local Islamic Movement.
Those are the real peace negotiators. My close friend
and mentor, the Reverend Gary Mason, who helped
bring about peace in Northern Ireland, always says:
“If you want peace today, you should have started
building it 20 years ago. And if you do not feel like
working for building peace today, then you better
not complain to me in 20 years that the conflict is
ongoing and affecting your children.”
The United Nations has adopted resolution after
resolution, which, as a global institution, is a part of
the Security Council’s agenda. I understand that but, in
order to build peace between Israelis and Palestinians, I
ask the Council to consider investing in a social peace.
It is no coincidence that it is the Irish who invited
me here today, because the Irish know the power of
civil society peacebuilding firsthand. I must also
acknowledge the United States Government for passing
the Nita Lowey Middle East Partnership for Peace Act,
the first large-scale Government attempt at building
Israeli-Palestinian peace from the ground up. That is an
opportunity for a multilateral partnership.
I ask the members of the Security Council to take
inspiration from the Irish and American peacemaking
efforts and to commit to investing in the infrastructure
needed for real peace.
Help us build a multilateral international entity like
the Peace Impact Programme of the International Fund
for Ireland; an independent entity with the resources
and the mandate to build capital projects, such as a
peace institute in Jerusalem modelled on the Skainos
Centre in East Belfast, or a laboratory for programme
innovation and capacity-building, impact investments
and microgrants.
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Invest in the infrastructure that peace actually
needs, like the partnership between adjacent
community centres in Jerusalem — one Israeli and one
Palestinian — which are working together to renovate
their communal health-care centres, supporting women
entrepreneurs and making their neighbourhoods safer.
Invest in building economic partnerships through
organizations like Tech2Peace and 50:50 Start-ups,
which are teaching technology and entrepreneurship
to young Israelis and Palestinians and guiding them
to create start-ups addressing climate, food security,
water and other critical issues.
Invest in programmes like Kids4Peace and the
Teachers’ Lounge, which are enabling youth and
educators to not only learn each other’s narratives but
view themselves as agents of change. There are many
more organizations like those, with methodologies
and programmes that work, but they are not yet at
scale. They could be with enough support, capacity
and infrastructure.
In our ancient Jewish text known as Pirkei Avot, or
the Ethics of the Fathers, we read:
“You are not obligated to complete the work, but
neither are you free to desist from it”.
We know that, in order for peace negotiations to work,
we must break the intractable nature of our conflict
into manageable parts and tackle each one of those
parts one by one. We must build a popular belief that
peace is actually possible and that all people — Israelis
and Palestinians — have an integral role to play and
responsibility in its pursuit.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Rothbart

for

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process for his briefing, and I also thank Ms. Rothbart
and Ms. Farsakh for their powerful statements. They
were heard.
I think it is clear that, while present circumstances
are both difficult and concerning, there are steps that
we can take to improve the lives of the Israeli and
Palestinian people in concrete and practical ways now.
We can help today, while also preserving the possibility
of a negotiated two-State solution when the time is ripe.

S/PV. 8869

Of the urgent needs, we assess that we must currently
focus our attention and resources on supporting the
livelihoods of the most vulnerable in Gaza.
The United States once again expresses its thanks
to Qatar for its financial assistance to Palestinians in
Gaza. We welcome the commencement of the stipend
disbursements, and we hope that that stable income will
help families meet their daily needs. In order to facilitate
recovery, the United States calls for regular, predictable
and sustained access to Gaza for humanitarian actors.
In the interest of the people of Gaza and regional
security, crossings should remain open with regular
hours to normal commercial traffic and the expedited
transit of humanitarian goods. It is important that
materials needed for vial relief and recovery efforts
can get to affected areas. We were pleased that the
Israeli Government agreed to provide additional water
to the Gaza Strip. However, there remains a dire need
to get water flowing regularly within Gaza, and we
hope to see the importation of water pipes to allow for
the rehabilitation of water networks in Gaza. The de
facto authorities in Gaza must refrain from interfering
in humanitarian activity, assistance, delivery and
internationally supported reconstruction efforts. Those
efforts are directly supporting Palestinians in Gaza,
especially the most vulnerable.
The Special Coordinator mentioned the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The United
States has already contributed more than $300 million
to UNRWA this year. We call on others to step up and
contribute to help address UNRWA’s imminent shortfall
in funding for its core services. UNRWA is a vital
lifeline and provides schooling to more than 530,000
Palestinian children across the region. In the absence of
UNRWA, many of the children will be unable to attend
school or would be forced to attend schools under the
influence of extremist groups.
At the same time, we will continue to urge UNRWA
to make operational and managerial improvements
to ensure that it can deliver assistance to Palestinian
refugees efficiently and with maximum effect. We
will continue working with UNRWA to ensure that it
upholds commitments to promoting tolerance, respect,
transparency and accountability.
The United States also remains committed to
widening the circle of peace between Israel and its
neighbours. In the past year, we have seen Israel open

21-268459/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Embassies in the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain,
and the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain appoint
their first Ambassador to Israel. Israel and Morocco
also agreed to upgrade their missions to full Embassies
in short order.
The United States is committed to expanding on
those normalization agreements and hopes that those
agreements, which are important in and of themselves,
will also generate momentum between Israel and the
Palestinians. In the meantime, we will continue to
encourage both the Israelis and the Palestinians to
exercise restraint and refrain from provocative actions
and rhetoric. Such actions distract from reconstruction
and threaten the viability of a two-State solution and a
future where Israelis and Palestinians live with equal
measures of freedom, dignity, security and prosperity.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for presenting the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016). We reiterate our support for
his efforts and those of all United Nations personnel
in the occupied territories to alleviate the suffering
of the Palestinian people and strengthen prospects for
peace in the Middle East. We also listened closely to the
briefings by the two civil society representatives.
This meeting coincides with the beginning of the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly. Once
again, the world has demonstrated through statements
by leaders and high-level officials the broad consensus
on the need to end the suffering of the Palestinian
people, end the occupation and establish an independent
sovereign Palestinian State, within the 1967 borders
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Once again, delegations from all over the world call
on the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities,
in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to ensure the implementation of its relevant
resolutions. They also call on the Council to urge the
occupation authorities to comply with international
legitimacy resolutions.
In the light of the broad consensus in the international
community, we cannot help but wonder: when will
we see international action to break the stalemate
in the peace process and facilitate the resumption of
negotiations in order to reach a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement to the Palestinian question, based
10/21

29/09/2021

on the international agreed terms of reference and the
relevant United Nations resolutions?
We remain confident that the international
community, including the Security Council, the Middle
East Quartet, neighbouring countries and effective
actors, will be able to create genuine prospects to
achieve a settlement, which would promote stability
and the maintenance of peace and security in the
region. In that regard, we support the proposal to hold
an international peace conference under the auspices of
the Middle East Quartet as soon as possible.
The obstruction of prospects for settling the
conflict and enabling the Palestinian people to regain
their legitimate rights is accompanied by the insistence
of the occupation authorities on imposing a de facto
policy by continuing to implement settlement plans,
attempting to change the demographic composition
and the legal and historical character of Jerusalem,
demolishing homes, displacing Palestinian civilians
and imposing the unjust blockade on Gaza.
We have expressed our condemnation for the
continuation of those practices. In that regard, we call
on the international community, especially the Security
Council, to fully shoulder its responsibility to compel
the occupying Power to honour its commitments under
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The occupying Power
must put an end to its violations and settlement projects
and any unilateral action that could further exacerbate
and escalate the situation, thereby undermining any
chance of achieving peace and restoring stability
and security to the region. We call also for the full
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate the need to provide protection to
Palestinian civilian people from violence by settlers and
occupation forces that use excessive force. We call for
follow-up on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution ES-10/20, on the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population.
With regard to the deteriorating humanitarian
and economic situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in the besieged Gaza Strip, we
stress the importance of facilitating unfettered delivery
of humanitarian assistance, as well as refraining from
hindering reconstruction efforts. We look forward to
seeing a scaling up of the humanitarian response in
the occupied territories and the securing of sustainable
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

funding to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We reiterate the need to continue Palestinian
reconciliation efforts, and we welcome the renewed
commitment by the Palestinian leadership to hold
general elections in Palestine as soon as there is
approval to hold elections in East Jerusalem.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support to the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to establishing their independent
sovereign State. We hope to undertake collective
efforts in which we focus on practical measures to put
an end to this protracted tragedy, allowing Palestinians
to regain the rights that were stripped from them and
ensure the rule of law.
Mr. Gotru (India): I thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). I also
thank the civil society briefers for their insights from
the ground.
I would like to begin by reaffirming India’s
unwavering commitment to the peaceful resolution
of the Palestinian issue. India strongly supports
a negotiated two-State solution leading to the
establishment of a sovereign, independent and viable
State of Palestine living within secure and recognized
borders, side by side and at peace with Israel, taking
into account the legitimate security concerns of all the
parties concerned.
India has consistently called for direct peace
negotiations between Israel and Palestine based on
the internationally agreed framework to achieve the
ultimate goal of a two-State solution. Resolution 2334
(2016) calls for advancing that two-State solution
through negotiations, as well as for reversing the
negative trends on the ground. It also calls for preventing
all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of
terror, and for both parties to refrain from provocative
acts and unilateral measures.
Furthermore, resolution 2334 (2016) emphasizes
the need to create conditions for peace negotiations
for advancing the two-State solution. In that regard,
we appreciate the regional and international efforts,
including under the auspices of the Middle East
Quartet, towards de-escalation and resuming those
direct negotiations. We have noted the outreach efforts
made between the Israeli Government and Palestinian

S/PV. 8869

Authority, as well as the announcements made by
Israel to alleviate the socioeconomic conditions in the
West Bank.
The planned loan of 500 million Israeli new shekels
to the Palestinian Authority, additional building permits
for construction of Palestinian homes in Area C and
increased numbers of work permits for Palestinians
to travel to Israel for employment are all steps in the
right direction. We hope those measures will provide
impetus for further strengthening the economic and
administrative relationships between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority.
India has always placed great emphasis on the
socioeconomic development of the Palestinian people
and the strengthening of their national institutions.
Our development partnership with Palestine is geared
towards those objectives. Access to stabilized and
enhanced revenues by the Palestinian Authority is a
necessary precondition for Palestinian socioeconomic
development and institution-building. In that regard, we
support a dialogue between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to resolve outstanding issues related to the
transfer of tax revenues.
The regular and predictable entry of construction
material will facilitate the early reconstruction of
Gaza. It is also important that the international donor
community support the reconstruction of Gaza through
the Palestinian Authority. The commencement of cash
assistance transfers to vulnerable Palestinian families
in Gaza through the United Nations is an important
development, as it will provide much-needed relief
to those families. We also appreciate the work of the
United Nations and its agencies in ensuring the delivery
of critical aid to Palestinians in Gaza. We call for the
timely transfer of aid and other essential items to Gaza
to ease the humanitarian situation and facilitate early
reconstruction, as well as for the appropriate use of
such aid.
The recent high-level interactions among Israel,
Palestine and key States in the region provide a window
of opportunity for the resumption of direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine. The Council and the
international community, in particular the Middle East
Quartet, should use that opportunity to make renewed
efforts to kick-start negotiations, as they provide the
best platform to resolve all final-status issues and
achieve a two-State solution. India stands ready to
support such efforts.

21-2684511/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the participation of Special
Coordinator Wennesland, as well as Ms. Rothbart and
Ms. Farsakh, in this meeting.
My delegation expresses its concern about the
lack of progress in the Middle East peace process. The
transfer of settlers, the seizure of land, the demolition
of more than 670 structures and the consequent
displacement of the Palestinian population are all
contrary to international law and represent an obstacle
to any peace initiative. An additional example is today’s
attack on Palestinian civilians in southern Hebron.
Mexico calls, in line with resolution 2334 (2016), for
an end to Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as well as to any actions that limit the
Palestinian population’s access to safe drinking water,
which constitutes a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law.
Nevertheless, Mexico welcomes the recent
announcement by the Palestinian Central Elections
Commission that it will organize municipal elections
next December. Those elections will surely contribute
to strengthening the institutions of the Palestinian State.
We express our dismay at incidents targeting
Palestinian organizations and human rights defenders,
limiting their freedom of expression and association.
We also urge Palestinian and Israeli law enforcement
agencies to protect the human rights of Palestinian
civil society.
Moreover, we commend the efforts to bring to
justice those responsible for the death of activist
Nizar Banat. Mexico also condemns the firing of
rockets and incendiary devices into Israel from Gaza,
as well as the disproportionate use of force by Israel
against Palestinian demonstrators in the vicinity of the
border fence.
We underscore the importance of continuing
to strengthen the ceasefire in Gaza and, therefore,
welcome the recent meeting between the Israeli Prime
Minister and the Egyptian President. We also welcome
the announcement of initiatives for the economic
reconstruction of Gaza, as well as the easing of certain
blockade restrictions, which will allow for an expansion
of the fishing area, as well as the entry of some building
materials. We welcome the implementation of the United
Nations cash assistance programme. Nonetheless, we
12/21

29/09/2021

must reiterate our call for the full lifting of the blockade
of Gaza.
Mexico lauds the commitment made by the
Palestinian Authority, Egypt and Jordan at the
tripartite summit, held at the beginning of this month,
to developing a vision for the resumption of political
negotiations and to working with partner countries to
revive the peace process, in accordance with relevant
United Nations resolutions and under the auspices of
the Middle East Quartet. We also welcome cooperation
between Israel and Palestine for civilian and security
purposes. We highlight in particular the $150 million
loan provided by Israel to the Palestinian Authority.
I reiterate Mexico’s support for the two-State
solution, based on provisions that address Israel’s
legitimate security concerns and lay the foundation for
the establishment of an economically and politically
viable Palestinian State, within pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with relevant
United Nations resolutions.
Before concluding, I am pleased to inform the
Council that Mexico has made an additional contribution
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East to support healthcare operations and provide medical supplies.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
I also listened carefully to the briefings by Ms. Farsakh
and Ms. Rothbart.
Four months after the last round of conflict
in Gaza, the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory remains turbulent. China calls on all parties
concerned, in particular Israel, to exercise restraint
and cease hostile acts, with immediate effect, to avoid
an escalation of the situation. We support Egypt and
other countries in the region in their efforts to enhance
mediation, promote stability and ease tensions. We
commend Qatar for its cooperation with the United
Nations in providing relief to the people of Gaza and
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in its work to
improve the humanitarian situation in Palestine.
Press statement SC/14527, issued by the President of
the Security Council in May, called for reconstruction
and recovery in Gaza. Israel has the responsibility to
open relevant crossings in Gaza, remove obstacles to the
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8869

entry of humanitarian aid and reconstruction material
and fully lift the blockade on Gaza as soon as possible.

sentiments of the international community for fairness
and international justice.

The issue of settlements is a major one that bears
heavily on final-status negotiations for Palestine and the
prospects for the realization of the two-State solution.
Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly states that settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory are
in breach of international law. For some time, Israel
has continued to demolish Palestinian homes, evict
Palestinians and expand settlements. Violence against
Palestinian civilians has also intensified. China urges
Israel to earnestly implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and return to the path of the twoState solution and the Arab Peace Initiative.

China stands ready to work with the international
community to increase efforts to promote peace through
continuous action and to make unremitting efforts to
help alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian people
and settle the turmoil in Middle East.

In his statement at the just-concluded general
debate of the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly (see A/76/PV.12), President Abbas expressed
his readiness to work on the delineation of borders
and on solving final-status issues. At the end of
August, Palestine and Israel also engaged in high-level
contact. We hope that Palestine and Israel will take the
opportunity to continue to build momentum, gradually
rebuild mutual trust, opt to engage in strategic peace
talks and resume dialogue, on an equal footing, as soon
as possible.
Last week, the Security Council and the Arab
League troika had an in-depth exchange of views on
situations in the region, including the Palestinian
question. China supported the strengthening of
coordination and cooperation among the Security
Council, the League of Arab States and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation. We support the holding of a
United Nations-led international peace conference,
with the participation of the permanent members of
the Security Council and various stakeholders in the
Middle East peace process. We call on the country with
considerable influence on the parties to hold an objective
and impartial position and refrain from favouring one
side over the other or using double standards.
Over the past few days, during the general debate of
the General Assembly, the Palestinian question was one
of the most frequently mentioned regional hotspot issues.
The vast majority of countries expressed their support
for the just cause of the Palestinian people, striving
for their national rights. They also support the twoState solution and the realization of a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian question,
through dialogue and negotiation. That reflects the

Mr. Khoroshev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his
informative briefing. We listened carefully to the
briefings by Ms. Mai Farsakh and Ms. Meredith Rothbart.
The stalled Middle East peace process,
compounded by the fact that its core issue, the
Palestinian question, remains unresolved, creates a
constant hotbed of tensions in the region. Following
the escalation of violence in May, the pressing issues
are maintaining the ceasefire, providing humanitarian
assistance to Palestinian victims and reviving the
peace process. Potentially dangerous unilateral actions
are ongoing — the expropriation and demolition of
Palestinian property, settlement building, arbitrary
arrests and violations of holy sites and violence.
We urge Israeli authorities to refrain from unilateral
steps, which would create an irreversible situation
on the ground. Nonetheless, we understand the need
to consider Israel’s natural security concerns. In that
regard, we are of the view that the top priority is to
attain lasting stability and for parties to refrain from
provocative and unilateral actions. It is also important
to create the conditions for the peace process to be
revived on the broadly recognized international legal
basis, including the two-State solution.
It is important to underscore that similar positions
were put forward by world leaders during the general
debate of the General Assembly. It was noteworthy
that the vast majority of all those who mentioned the
Middle East settlement process spoke in favour of the
two-State solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
and confirmed that the approaches of the international
community to the issue remain unchanged.
Regrettably, levels of tension in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip remain high. In that regard, we
urge both sides to show restraint and reject unilateral
steps and provocative actions. We believe that the main
immediate challenge is to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance to all those in need and to the victims on the
Gaza Strip.

21-2684513/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

There is also a need to step up efforts to assist
Palestinian authorities in addressing socioeconomic
difficulties. The coronavirus disease pandemic
continues to have an adverse effect in that area. The
Palestinians cannot cope with it alone. We give
particular importance to providing comprehensive
humanitarian assistance to those in need in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip as well as to Palestinian
refugees in neighbouring Arab States.
We support the efforts of relevant international
organizations, including the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. We continue to work with the parties in conflict,
as well as with interested international players in the
region. For example, on 9 September, Russian Foreign
Minister Lavrov met with the new Israeli Foreign
Minister, Mr. Lapid.
We believe that, in order to overcome the crisis, it
is important to have the Palestinian problem back in
the focus of attention of the new Israeli leadership,
and also to have elections convened in the Palestinian
territories. We also consider it important to continue
to build an international consensus on a fair solution
to the Palestinian problem. An important role in this
regard is played by the Quartet, which remains the only
internationally recognized mechanism to assist the
Palestinian-Israeli settlement process. We also attribute
great importance to Egypt’s efforts aimed at overcoming
intra-Palestinian disunity, which is a precondition for
reviving the peace process. In particular, we welcome
the recent summit between Palestine, Jordan and Egypt,
which took place in Cairo. We cherish the hope that
it will be an important first step towards a qualitative
improvement in the current deadlocked status quo.

29/09/2021

Authority. Palestine needs a stronger Palestinian
Authority. A strong Palestinian Authority is one that
is well-functioning, accountable and enjoys democratic
legitimacy among the Palestinian people.
We are also encouraged by the seemingly more
stable situation in Gaza. The delivery of cash assistance
to tens of thousands of vulnerable families in Gaza
following the memorandum of understanding between
the United Nations and Qatar is especially important. It
is critical that assistance continues to reach those most
in need. Additionally, efforts to secure a long-term and
sustainable ceasefire must be strengthened. And we
welcome the additional lifting of restrictions on Gaza
by Israel. Norway calls on the de facto rulers of Gaza
to keep the situation calm, act in the best interest of the
people of Gaza and protect civilians.
The Special Coordinator’s briefing today has
yet again showcased the negative impact of Israeli
settlement activity, house demolitions, evictions and
settler violence. While we note that there have been no
new announced housing units in the reporting period,
we remain concerned about the projects in the pipeline.
We again underscore that Israeli settlement
activities are illegal under international law. They fuel
violence and undermine the prospects of a contiguous
Palestinian State and a viable two-State solution.
Norway is concerned that, according to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the number
of house demolitions in 2021 has increased by 40 per
cent compared to last year. Displacement has nearly
doubled. This trend is alarming and unacceptable.

Let me begin by welcoming the resumption of
broader dialogue between the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority. The August face-toface meeting between President Abbas and Minister of
Defence Gantz is a first, crucial step towards broader
engagement. We encourage the parties to further
expand this dialogue, including to political issues.

We are also worried about the security situation on
the West Bank, including the high number of violent
clashes between protestors and Israeli security forces.
We are particularly concerned that children continue
to be victims of violence. Children should never be
targeted or put in harm’s way. Just the opposite: they
must be afforded special protection. Let me reiterate
the need to ensure the protection and security of all
civilians, especially during this volatile time at the
start of the olive-harvest season. We urge all actors to
de-escalate and refrain from actions and rhetoric that
fuels tensions.

For example, given the precarious financial
situation, it is urgent to agree on amendments to
the Paris Protocol to improve the long-term fiscal
situation and institutional capacity of the Palestinian

We welcome the recent improvement in dialogue
between Israel and Jordan, especially given Jordan’s
historical role as custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem
and in maintaining stability in Palestine.

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his updates. I also thank Ms. Meredith
Rothbart and Ms. Mai Farsakh for their valuable remarks.

14/21

21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We regret that the ministerial-level meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, planned for 23 September,
had to be postponed. It is urgent that the parties, as
well as donors, meet in person for these important
discussions. Let me assure the Security Council of our
commitment to reconvene as soon as possible. We are
hopeful that a meeting can be arranged later this fall.
Finally, let me conclude by restating the
fundamental truth that only a broad political solution
can solve the underlying problems of the conflict. We
reiterate our call for a two-State solution on the basis of
the 1967 lines, relevant Security Council resolutions,
international law and internationally agreed parameters.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland for his observations and recommendations
during this reporting period. We also welcome all
constructive grass-roots efforts in advancing the peace
process, including the observations and insights shared
with the Security Council by Ms. Meredith Rothbart
and Ms. Mai Farsakh.
I reaffirm Kenya’s condemnation of all acts of
violence and other breaches of resolution 2334 (2016),
by all parties, including terrorist acts, all acts of
provocation, incitement to violence, evictions, collective
punishment and the destruction and demolition of
civilian infrastructure. Nevertheless, we have noted
that there has not been advancement of expansion of
housing units since June.
Kenya continues to strongly condemn the recent
launches of rockets from Gaza by Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and other militant groups. We again
repeat: no cause can justify the deliberate targeting of
civilians, and these acts of terror must cease. The use of
civilian infrastructure for weapons storage or disguise
or as human shields must also be addressed.
As Kenya has stated before, the practicality and full
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) will need to
address the issue of settlements, territorial contiguity
and the viability of the two-State solution. The
establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian
occupied territory, including East Jerusalem, in
violation of international law, remains a major obstacle
to the fulfilment of the vision of a two-State solution,
where two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side
in peace and within secure and recognized borders
based on the 1967 lines.

S/PV. 8869

The recent engagements between senior Israeli and
Palestinians officials are also important positive steps
towards forging cooperation in the areas of security
and economic policies. We urge that the recent ease of
restrictions of entry of goods between Gaza and Israel
continue to be strengthened to this end.
Kenya welcomes the ongoing efforts by the Qatari
Government aimed at rebuilding Gaza in partnership
with the United Nations programme. The strengthened
role and reinforced funding for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East will also go a long way towards addressing
a broader set of socioeconomic challenges in the
occupied Palestinian territory. As the needed focus is
being directed to Gaza, we must not lose sight of the
security and economic challenges in the West Bank.
Every single effort in advancing the Middle East
peace process at the ground level through local actors,
Israeli and Palestinian leaders and key regional partners
needs to be affirmed and encouraged. I would like to
thank Ms. Rothbart for her reminder that the conflicts
we are dealing with today are a result of what was done
20 years ago, and that what we are trying to do today is
not only to respond to the present crisis but to lay the
groundwork for peace in 20 years. I thank her for that
insight, which I think can inform the Security Council
in many of its situations.
The gains achieved also need to be safeguarded
to reinforce the underlying principles of resolution
2334 (2016), namely, achieving the stabilization of
the situation, reversing the negative trends on the
ground and creating conditions for successful direct
final-status negotiations.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. I also thank
Ms. Rothbart and Ms. Farsakh for their statements.
More than four months after the most recent
round of violence in and around Gaza, the tensions
and violence between the parties have unfortunately
not subsided.
The continued launching of rockets and incendiary
balloons towards Israel is unacceptable. Israel has a
right to defend itself, while ensuring the safety and
protection of the civilian population. We call upon the
parties to continue to respect the ceasefire and do their
utmost to avoid further violence.

21-2684515/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We are also worried about the continued incidents
of violence on the West Bank, including the clashes
between the Palestinians and the Israeli security forces,
with several deaths and hundreds of injured during
the past weeks. We call on all parties to refrain from
violence, incitement and acts of provocation.
Such developments once more underline the need
for international and regional efforts to restore the
conditions for direct negotiations aimed at a two-State
solution, based on international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as the only viable path to
a lasting peace.
We welcome the first high-level meeting in years
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, held on
29 August. That was an important step of confidence,
and we hope that it will pave the way for a sustained
political dialogue, as well as further practical
cooperation between the two sides, which would benefit
both the Israelis and the Palestinians.
Estonia also fully supports the continued
international and regional efforts for reconstruction
in Gaza and to improve the dire and unsustainable
humanitarian and socioeconomic situation in the Gaza
Strip. We hope that the planned reconstruction process
can begin promptly. In that context, we also welcome
the proposals to create economic stability and improve
the socioeconomic situation of the Palestinians.
We join the calls for the parties to show commitment
to the two-State solution through concrete steps and
to refrain from unilateral steps that undermine it. We
remain worried about Israel’s plans for advancing
settlements on the West Bank, as well as the continued
demolitions of, and evictions from, Palestinian property.
We call upon Israel to refrain from those activities, as
they are contrary to international law.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our concern about
the recent arrests of Palestinian protesters in relation
to the death of the political activist Nizar Banat. We
call on the Palestinian Authority to ensure freedom of
expression and freedom of assembly.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): As I
do every month, I reiterate France’s support for a twoState solution. That is the only one that is consistent
with international law, the agreed parameters and the
resolutions of the Security Council, including resolution
2334 (2016). It is the only option to date that can bring
about a just and lasting peace in the region, ensure
16/21

29/09/2021

Israel’s security, with which we will never compromise,
and meet the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians.
In that context, France is concerned by the
increasing negative trends on the ground, which
jeopardize the two-State solution. The record increase
in demolitions in 2021 is unacceptable. The issuing of
building permits to Palestinians in Area C cannot justify
the advancement of settlements, which is contrary to
international law. We call on the Israeli authorities to
stop the expansion of settlements, freeze demolitions
and permanently suspend eviction procedures in
East Jerusalem.
France will not recognize any change to the 1967
lines other than those agreed between the parties. We
recall the obligation for all States to distinguish in
their exchanges between the territory of Israel and the
territories occupied in 1967.
We are also concerned about the continuing
increase in violence in the Palestinian territories. The
priority is, of course, to maintain the ceasefire in Gaza.
We condemn any firing of incendiary balloons or
rockets into Israeli territory. In the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, France calls on Israel to use force judiciously,
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
We also call on the Palestinian Authority to shed full
light on the assassination of Nizar Banat and to ensure
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the territories under its control. Strong democratic
institutions, based on respect for the rule of law, remain
crucial to the building of a viable Palestinian State.
The resumption of contacts between the parties
is encouraging and must be accompanied by the
implementation of confidence-building measures.
France welcomes the first measures taken by Israel,
including to allow the delivery of goods to Gaza. We call
for such efforts to continue, in particular to facilitate
the reconstruction of the enclave. In that regard, we
welcome the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We are also ready to work towards the implementation
of the ideas expressed by the Israeli Foreign Minister
concerning Gaza. It is important to focus on projects
that can bring about a significant improvement in
the lives of the Palestinian people. The Palestinian
Authority must play its full part in that. We hope that
the next meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinians will be an opportunity to move forward in
that direction.
France, together with its German, Egyptian and
Jordanian partners, in the framework of the Amman
Group, is determined to continue all specific reciprocal
measures aimed at restoring trust between the parties,
with a view to a resumption of the negotiations.
Confidence-building measures are necessary, but
they will be effective only if they are part of a political
process. It is more urgent than ever to restore that
perspective. France is ready to work to that end, in
conjunction with the Council members.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): My
thanks go to the Special Coordinator for his briefing and
the quarterly report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). I would also like to thank Mai Farsakh and
Meredith Rothbart for their remarks, their insights and
their work on the ground. I would like to pay tribute to
them and to all those civil society members who work
to build social peace and the foundations for peace.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent
engagement between the Israeli Government and the
Palestinian leadership, including the meetings between
Palestinian President Abbas and Israeli Defence
Minister Gantz on 29 August. We urge further direct
engagement and call on both parties to work together
to tackle immediate and long-term threats to peace and
stability. While appreciating the difficulties on both
sides, we urge all parties to be open to further dialogue.
The United Kingdom wants to see greater
cooperation between Israelis and Palestinians, including
on economic initiatives, to help support the recovery
of Gaza, boost the Palestinian economy and improve
the lives of all Palestinians living in the occupied
Palestinian territories. However, those initiatives need
to be part of a political pathway. All parties need to take
steps to avoid exacerbating tensions and avoid unhelpful
rhetoric. Existing agreements must be respected, and
all parties must refrain from harmful unilateral actions.
We remain concerned about Israel’s ongoing
settlement expansion, as well as the demolition of
Palestinian property and the resultant displacement of
protected persons, such as prospective demolitions and
evictions in Silwan, Al-Walaja and Sheikh Jarrah. We
urge Israel to allow for more legal avenues for Palestinian
construction. As has been noted previously, we have
seen a worrisome upward trend in Palestinians killed

S/PV. 8869

by Israeli security forces’ live fire throughout 2021,
particularly around Beita, where eight Palestinians have
been killed by the Israeli Defense Forces since May.
We urge restraint on all sides. Israeli investigations
should be transparent and comprehensive and, where
there has been excessive use of force, those responsible
should be held to account. We condemn any incidents
of violence by settlers against Palestinian civilians and
aid workers. We express particular concern about the
reported attack on 15-year-old Palestinian Tareq Zubeidi
on the 17 August. Communities must be protected
from violence and harassment. Such incidents must
be investigated fully, and those responsible brought
to justice.
We continue to call on the Palestinian Authority
to adhere to international standards on freedom of
expression, association and assembly, and urge respect
for human rights. Reform is needed to rebuild trust
with the public. I reiterate that the United Kingdom
condemns unequivocally Hamas’ indiscriminate
attacks against Israel, including the use of incendiary
balloons. We call on Hamas and other terrorist groups
to permanently end their rocket fire against Israel.
Finally, turning to Gaza, the United Kingdom
welcomed Israeli Foreign Minister Lapid’s speech
proposing positive policy suggestions to support
economic development in Gaza and greater security
for Israel. A long-term solution for Gaza is needed,
not only to end the cycle of violence, but also to make
progress towards the two-State solution — a solution to
which the United Kingdom remains firmly committed.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I thank the briefers for their powerful and
enlightening presentations.
The grave security situation that continues in the
State of Palestine is of particular concern to Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. The Palestinian people and
the territory of the State of Palestine are in more urgent
need of international protection, as Israel continues
its ongoing settlement activities and the demolition of
Palestinian structures in the occupied territory.
We therefore reiterate here again today that the
ongoing occupation of Palestinian territories constitutes
a flagrant violation of international law and remains
a significant threat to lasting and comprehensive
peace. We call on Israel, the occupying Power, to
cease all settlement activities and to abide by its legal

21-2684517/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

obligations and responsibilities under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Furthermore, as reinforced by
resolution 2334 (2016), we condemn all measures aimed
at altering the demographic composition, character and
status of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.
As we have said many times, freedom and justice
for the Palestinian people can be achieved only through
a lasting two-State solution that allows for the peaceful
existence of the State of Palestine, based on the pre-1967
borders, and the full recognition of their sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence.
Moreover, the continued oppression of the Palestinian
people undermines their legitimate claims to dignity,
equality and human rights.
On a positive note, we welcome plans for the
reconstruction of Gaza, which will start in October.
Notwithstanding, the ongoing humanitarian crisis in
Gaza continues to be exacerbated by the 14-year Israeli
blockade. Yet again, we call on Israel to lift the blockade
to allow humanitarian access, building materials and
construction equipment for the reconstruction of Gaza.
Furthermore, we condemn all punitive measures against
the Palestinian people that exacerbate the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.
Despite the many challenges, we commend the
ongoing efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in providing humanitarian assistance to ease
the plight of the Palestinian refugees. The certainty of
support for UNRWA from the international community
is critical to the Agency’s ability to promote human
development and meet the most urgent humanitarian
needs of the Palestinian refugees.
In conclusion, we echo the warning of President
Abbas that undermining the two-State solution based
on international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions will open the way for other alternatives
imposed on the Palestinians by the situation on the
ground, as a result of the continued Israeli occupation
of the State of Palestine.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his comprehensive briefing.
I welcome the presence of Ms. Meredith Rothbart and
Ms. Mai Farsakh at this meeting and thank them for
their statements.
18/21

29/09/2021

I would like to begin by expressing our serious
concern about the recent increase in violence across
the occupied Palestinian territory. In the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, we are troubled by continued
incidents of violence, particularly the recent clashes
between the Israeli security forces and the Palestinians.
The number of casualties since the beginning of 2021
has been five times higher than that for 2020, with 58
Palestinians killed and more than 13,000 injured.
Incidents in other parts of the occupied Palestinian
territory and clashes in the border areas of Gaza could
lead to full-scale hostilities. We call on all parties to
refrain from violence and incitement to provocation. We
urge the Israeli authorities to observe their obligations
under international humanitarian law, stop excessive
use of force and settler attacks and apply the necessary
measures to protect civilians, particularly children.
We remain concerned about the continued
settlement policy of the Israeli authorities. While the
announcement of the intention to grant construction
permits to Palestinians in Area C is an initial and
encouraging sign, the ongoing settlement activities
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, continue
to violate international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. In that respect, we call on the
Israeli authorities to cease all settlement activities, stop
demolitions and definitively suspend procedures aimed
at the expulsion of Palestinian families from Silwan
and Sheikh Jarrah in East Jerusalem.
We are encouraged by the recent engagement and
initial cooperation between the Israeli Government and
the Palestinian Authority. We welcome the stronger
engagement between officials from both sides, which
can contribute to creating an atmosphere of trust
between the parties and meeting common challenges
in humanitarian, health care, financial and economic
areas. We hope that such contact and cooperation can
be helpful in paving a pathway towards broad and
significant dialogues and negotiations. We welcome all
efforts by international actors to facilitate the building
of that momentum.
With regard to the deteriorating socioeconomic
and humanitarian situations in Gaza, it remains
vital that Israel ensure regularized access into and
out of Gaza, especially for humanitarian, medical
and reconstruction purposes, in accordance with
international humanitarian law. Meanwhile, it should
be noted that external humanitarian and economic
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support alone cannot address the challenges facing
the Strip. The unemployment rate has reached 67 per
cent, while the poverty rate has exceeded 70 per cent
and food insecurity is affecting over 68 per cent of
the population.
Therefore, we call upon Israel to lift the blockade
imposed on Gaza as soon as possible, not only to
facilitate humanitarian access, but also to ensure
regular movement into and out of Gaza to improve
the livelihood of Palestinians. We also call upon
international donors to increase the level of assistance
and humanitarian response in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, and to support other relevant United
Nations efforts.
Before concluding, we would like to reaffirm
our strong support for a comprehensive, just and
sustainable settlement of the conflict between Israelis
and Palestinians. Towards that end, we welcome all
initiatives aimed at bringing the relevant parties together.
We reiterate our commitment to supporting a twoState solution that includes the establishment of an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, living
side by side with the State of Israel, within secure and
internationally recognized borders based on the pre1967 lines and a negotiated settlement.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Wennesland for his
detailed briefing on the situation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Ms. Rothbart and Ms. Farsakh
for their valuable contributions to our discussions.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of the
representative of Palestine among us today.
As usual, Mr. Wennesland’s briefing was a
catalogue of horror, detailing multiple violations of
Palestinian rights, including the killing of young
people, all of which seriously contravene the spirit and
the letter of resolution 2334 (2016). How much longer
will that go on?
The announcement by Israel of a recovery plan for the
Gaza Strip, including the rebuilding of infrastructure,
as well as the meeting between the Israeli Minister of
Defense and the President of the Palestinian Authority,
are positive signs and should be commended.
At this juncture, I would like to highlight that those
welcome gestures, which seem to herald an easing

S/PV. 8869

of tensions and increased trust in relations between
Israel and Palestine, must be further consolidated and
maximized in order to contribute to the restoration of
peace and a peaceful coexistence among those two
peoples, who have been exposed to violence, devastation
and despair for far too long.
In order to give the resumption of peace process the
best possible chance of success, certain requirements
remain essential, if not unavoidable.
First of all, Israel must put an end to its policy
of unbridled colonization in the occupied Palestinian
territories and commit to respecting international
parameters, as well as to General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions enshrining the only viable
solution to the conflict, namely, the two-State solution.
Secondly, it is equally important that the violence
from Gaza cease and, with it, Israel’s disproportionate
responses that spare neither human lives nor
essential infrastructure.
Finally, the international community, the Middle
East Quartet and those Council members with influence
on the parties, as well as regional actors, must continue
to work for a rapprochement between Israelis and
Palestinians, as well as to safeguard, at all costs, the
realization of the two-State solution. Only then can
we hope for the return of peace, which we have been
seeking in the Middle East for almost 70 years.
In the context of efforts aimed at easing tensions
between Israel and Palestine, the lifting of the illegal
blockade on the Gaza Strip and the improvement of the
humanitarian situation and general living conditions
remain priorities that require effective action. It cannot
be overstated that the climate of tension in Gaza
reflects the deep frustration and profound despair
of a predominantly young population whose entire
lives have been undermined by the effects of Israel’s
colonization and prolonged siege. Since 2012, several
United Nations reports have warned that, beyond
2020, the Gaza Strip, a veritable open-air prison, could
become unliveable if Israel does not lift its illegal and
inhumane blockade.
Those challenges require urgent responses,
including through reconstruction and recovery
plans for Gaza and the protection and survival of its
population. We therefore call on the international
community to show more compassion and generosity to
that hard-pressed population by supporting the funding

21-2684519/21

S/PV.8869

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Gaza construction process, as well as the vital
programmes of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
ensure the survival of thousands of Palestinian families.
It is equally crucial that Israel, as the occupying
Power, fully comply with all of its obligations under
international humanitarian law, including by ensuring
the well-being and survival of the population under
its control, especially in the fight against the ongoing
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The prospects for holding elections in Palestine are
to be encouraged and supported.
In conclusion, the Niger believes that only a
return to respect for the internationally agreed
parameters and the resumption of the peace process,
with a view to achieving a solution with two viable,
sovereign and independent States, can lead to a just and
lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
In that regard, we commend the tireless efforts of
Mr. Tor Wennesland and reaffirm our full commitment
to supporting all efforts of the international community
to bring about a successful solution to the dispute,
which has had an undeniable impact on the peace and
security and stability of the entire Middle East region
and beyond.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
I want to thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing and extend a very special thanks to
Ms. Farsakh and Ms. Rothbart. They show us the pivotal
work that young women are doing day in, day out, as
agents of change. We are very glad that they are with us
today and we have heard their voices. In my view, it is
their generation and perhaps their gender that hold the
key to a brighter future for both Palestine and Israel.
I thank Ms. Farsakh for setting out the ongoing and
worrying impact of settlements and related issues on the
Palestinian population, which registered with us. I also
thank Ms. Rothbart, whose work on capacity-building
for strategic, sustainable and scalable peace efforts on
the ground has given all of us here in the Council very
useful insights and, in my case, some hope.
Ireland remains steadfast in its view that a two-State
solution offers the strongest prospect for sustainable
peace. Ongoing contacts between the parties and within
the region are welcome, but they are no substitute for
direct negotiations as part of a wider political process.
20/21

29/09/2021

Today, we have heard another deeply concerning
briefing from Special Coordinator Wennesland on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). Once again,
his report reminds us that settlements remain a major
obstacle on the path to peace. I reiterate Ireland’s longstanding condemnation of illegal Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory.
Ireland is extremely concerned at the increase in
demolitions, evictions and seizures of Palestinianowned structures in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. We call on the Israeli authorities to cease
those activities and to provide adequate permits for
legal construction in Palestinian communities, as
well as for the development of Palestinian territories.
In particular, I wish to clearly underline our serious
concerns about the recent increase in the number of
Palestinian families at risk of eviction in Sheikh Jarrah
and Silwan. That remains of serious concern. We again
underscore the importance of maintaining the status
quo at the holy sites, in particular at Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount.
Let us be clear — acts of violence, including
rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel, continue to erode
trust between the parties and trust within their own
communities. All of that adds up to making a political
settlement more difficult to achieve. Ireland condemns
all acts of terrorism.
We are concerned about the increase in violence
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We unreservedly
condemn yesterday’s incidence of settler violence in
the South Hebron Hills, in which a young child was
seriously injured. We call on the Israeli authorities
to hold those responsible accountable and to end
the culture of impunity around all such incidents of
violence. We call out, in particular, the devastating
impact of the occupation and violence on children, as
we just heard from Mr. Wennesland.
We remind all the parties of their obligations
under international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We call on the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority to use their influence
and authority to reduce tensions, prevent violence and
contribute to the resolution of long-standing issues.
Once again, we renew our call on Israel to end the
blockade of Gaza. We welcome the decision by Israel
to allow more reconstruction material to enter Gaza,
its expansion of the fishing area and provision of more
work permits for residents of Gaza. However, that is the
21-26845

29/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8869

minimum we need to see to help Gaza residents on the
path to recovery.

Israel-Palestinian conflict. The time for that has long
passed; we cannot simply afford to wait.

As we all know, Gaza remains far removed from
normal economic activity and the situation there will
continue to pose challenges, including a deepening
humanitarian crisis, until the underlying issues are
addressed. Ireland reiterates its view that it is incumbent
on the Council, the Quartet, partners in the region and
the international community to uphold international
law and remain fully engaged in working to resolve the

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I shall now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussions on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21-2684521/21
