S/2021/735

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 August 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020)
and 2585 (2021)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the seventy-fourth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018),
paragraph 8 of resolution 2504 (2020), paragraph 3 of resolution 2533 (2020) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2585 (2021), in the last four of which the Council requested
the Secretary-General to provide a report at least every 60 days on the implementation
of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to entities of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and other relevant sources. Data from entities of the United Nations system regarding
their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the months of June and July 2021.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
There was an increase in violence in the north-west of the Syrian
Arab Republic during the reporting period. In recent weeks, there has been
an uptick in air strikes and shelling along strategic points, including around
the Jabal al-Zawiyah region in southern Idlib. The number of civilian
casualties remained high compared with the situation earlier in 2021, and
incidents of ceasefire violations rose significantly. The United Nations
documented more than 53 civilian deaths in non-government-held parts of
the north-west during the reporting period. On 12 June, there was an attack
on Shifa‘ hospital in the city of Afrin, which has been financially supported
by the United Nations since July 2019. Civilians, including medical
personnel, were killed and injured, and parts of the hospital were destroyed.

21-11016 (E)

200821

*2111016*

S/2021/735

2.
In the north-east of the country, water levels in the Euphrates
continued to be reduced to a critical point. By late June, 54 of 73 water
stations along the western bank of the Euphrates and 44 of 126 water
stations on its eastern bank had been significantly or severely affected by
critically low water levels.
3.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) verified 191 incidents during the reporting period, in
which at least 153 civilians, including 24 women and 49 children, were
killed and at least 286 civilians, including 49 women and 74 children, were
injured as a result of hostilities across the Syrian Arab Republic.
4.
The situation in the south-west of the Syrian Arab Republic grew
increasingly tense, with tensions principally centred around the Dar‘a
al-Balad district of the city of Dar‘a, where clashes on 28 July resulted in
civilian casualties, with eight civilians, including one woman and four
children, killed and six civilians, including two children, injured. On 28 July,
shelling reportedly hit Dar‘a national hospital, causing damage to the
water tank and rendering the dialysis unit inoperable. Some 10,500 people
had reportedly been displaced owing to hostilities by 29 July.
5.
Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies and their partners
continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. This included World Food
Programme (WFP) food assistance for 4,845,515 people in June and for
4,744,232 people in July, across all 14 governorates, as well as increased
cross-line deliveries and a continuation of the cross-border mechanism after
the adoption of Security Council resolution 2585 (2021) on 9 July 2021.
6.
The access landscape in the Syrian Arab Republic remains complex,
with different geographical areas and types of service requiring the use of
different operating modalities. Between January and July, 1,588 trucks
providing humanitarian assistance crossed lines into the north-east, an
average of 227 a month, compared with 199 a month in the same period in
2020. In June and July, the World Health Organization (WHO) delivered
three cross-line shipments, including two airlifts and one road convoy. In
the north-west, 14 consignments consisting of 1,476 trucks crossed into
the Syrian Arab Republic from Turkey during the reporting period as part
of cross-border operations, all through the Bab al-Hawa crossing.

Humanitarian update
3.
In the Idlib de-escalation area in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic,
there was an increase in violence during the reporting period. Aerial bombardments
took place in rural Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Hama, mostly south of the M4 highway,
reportedly striking military sites, including those of Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, which has
been designated a terrorist group by the Security Council, and damaging civilian
infrastructure. There was also an increase in mutual shelling and limited clashes
across contact lines in the Idlib de-escalation area. There were reports that on 15 July
eight civilians were killed and five injured when southern Idlib was shelled. The
United Nations documented more than 20 civilian deaths, including 13 children, in
the north-west between 1 June and 19 July. More than 20,000 people were displaced
in June owing to the escalation of the conflict in the north-west, which was the largest
displacement in the area since the ceasefire of March 2020.
4.
There was sustained escalation during the reporting perio d in terms of mutual
shelling, occasional skirmishes and raids across and along contact lines in northern

2/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

Aleppo Governorate. On 12 June, there was an attack on the Shifa‘ hospital in the
city of Afrin. Civilians, including medical personnel, were killed a nd injured, and
parts of the hospital were destroyed (see para. 26 for more detail). Attacks involving
improvised explosive devices also continued, with unclaimed vehicle -borne
improvised explosive device attacks in Jarabulus, I‘zaz and Afrin resulting in the
killing of civilians. Incidents of violent infighting among non -State armed groups
continued in the areas of Bab and Afrin. In the first incident since March, civilian
objects in the city of Aleppo were targeted with rockets. Disruption of potable and
agricultural water continued to be reported in the city of Bab and the surrounding
areas, affecting some 185,000 people. Bab has been among the top subdistricts
reporting waterborne diseases across the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2017. The
United Nations continued to advocate the resumption of water supply to the city from
the Ayn al-Bayda station.
5.
In the north-east of the country, water levels in the Euphrates continued to be
reduced to a critical point. Water has reportedly been flowing at reduced levels since
January 2021. Precipitation decreased by between 50 and 70 per cent compared with
the long-term average, while low snowfall and rainfall also had an impact on water
sources in Iraq, Jordan and Turkey. Reserves for the main dams in the area ha ve
shrunk to historic lows, including the Tishrin dam in north -eastern Aleppo
Governorate and the Tabaqah dam in Raqqah Governorate. This has had serious
ramifications for the well-being of civilians in the region, including limited access to
clean drinking water and widespread power blackouts. By late June, 54 of 73 water
stations along the western bank of the Euphrates had been significantly or severely
affected by critically low water levels, and 44 of 126 water stations on the eastern
side had reportedly been significantly or severely affected. According to current
estimates, over 5 million people, including in the north-east of the Syrian Arab
Republic, are reliant on the Euphrates for their drinking water, and approximately
3 million depend upon it for electricity. Vital infrastructure, including hospitals,
irrigation networks and water stations, has also reportedly been affected. Should the
situation not improve, possible longer-term impacts include damage to agriculture, a
worsening of already dire food insecurity, loss of livelihoods and a severe
undermining of overall public health. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) projects an extremely low harvest in the third quarter of 2021,
compared with 2020. A second projected consequence is the likely shortage of seed
for future planting later in 2021.
6.
In Manjib in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, the implementation of
conscription by local authorities linked to the Syrian Democratic Forces sparked
widespread protests, followed by a violent crackdown in which at least eight people
were killed. On 2 June, agreements were reached to de-escalate tensions after
negotiations with tribal leaders, including on the suspension of conscription, the
release of the detained and investigations into the violent crackdown on protesters.
7.
At Uluk water station, pumping remained limited during the reporting period.
From 23 June to 30 July, the station stopped functioning owing to a number of factors,
including reduced access for technicians to carry out maintenance and repairs and
insufficient electricity, which limited access to water across Hasakah Governorate,
directly affecting up to 460,000 people. Water levels were insufficient to reach most
of the population ordinarily served by the station, including in the city of Hasakah
and Hawl camp. Electricity supply to the water station also remained insufficient,
reducing the amount of water that could be pumped. Technicians from the Hasakah
water and electricity directorates were able to gain access to the water station on
30 July after 83 days without access, but have only been able to spend up to two hours
there at a time.

21-11016

3/24

S/2021/735

8.
Some 59,000 people, including 31,000 children under 12 years of age, remained
at Hawl camp during the reporting period. The total includes around 8,800 thirdcountry nationals. The security situation at the camp continued to deteriorate, with
over 63 murders reported since January 2021. There are increasing concerns about
killings of and threats to women and girls in the camp, which have increased since
the beginning of the year, with a surge in June and July. Refugee and internally
displaced persons in the camp, in particular the female population of the camp,
continue to receive threats. Humanitarian workers also continue to be threatened on
a regular basis, including camp management staff.
9.
Da’esh, which has been designated a terrorist group by the Security Council,
continued to launch attacks in areas across Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah and eastern rural
Homs. There were reports of military casualties, as well as the destruction of energy
infrastructure due to Da’esh attacks. Government and pro-government forces carried
out counter-Da’esh operations in various areas of the central Syrian desert.
Separately, the Syrian Democratic Forces continued their counter-Da’esh operations
in areas east of the Euphrates. OHCHR reported that one operation had resulted in
civilian casualties (see annex I).
10. The situation in the south-west of the Syrian Arab Republic grew increasingly
tense, with ongoing attacks and killings against both government forces and former
armed opposition forces. Since 24 June, tension has principally been centred around
the Dar‘a al-Balad district of the city of Dar‘a, where there were reports of a bu ildup of government forces around the district controlled by former members of
non-State armed opposition groups. Clashes in the Dar‘a Al-Balad neighbourhood on
28 July resulted in civilian casualties. Eight civilians, including one woman and four
children, were killed and six civilians, including two children, were injured. On
28 July, shelling reportedly hit Dar‘a national hospital, causing damage to the water
tank and rendering the dialysis unit inoperable. Some 10,500 people had reportedly
been displaced owing to hostilities by 29 July.
11. The United Nations remained without humanitarian access to the 12,000 people
living in Rukban. Residents of the Rukban area continued to live in dire conditions,
with limited access to food, water, health care and other basic services. Residents
remained unable to obtain access to the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side
of the border since its full closure in March 2020 as part of the preventive measures
in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Access to medical
treatment in areas under the control of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
continued to be facilitated by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and coordinated by the
United Nations. The United Nations continued to advocate immediate humanitarian
access and assistance to reach those who remained at the camp and continued its
efforts to support voluntary departures. In June and July, the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), in partnership with the Ministry of Health in Damascus,
assisted one child and two pregnant women who had left the camp to seek medical
attention. In parallel, discussions on organized voluntary departures from Rukban to
government-held areas are ongoing.
12. The available information continued to indicate a high degree of COVID-19
transmission in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period, far exceeding
the officially announced infection rates. As at 29 July, 25,942 cases, including 1,912
deaths, had been reported by the Ministry of Health. Another 26,3 82 cases, including
722 deaths, were reported in areas outside government-held areas in the north-west
since the onset of the pandemic. In addition, 18,660 cases, including 764 deaths, were
reported in areas outside government-held areas in the north-east. The vaccine rollout continued during the reporting period. For the 203,000 doses received in
Damascus, 100 per cent of the first batch for the first dose had been utilized by the

4/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

end of June, with 105,417 individuals vaccinated in the first round. Vaccin ation with
a second dose started on 13 July in some parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. WHO
continued to roll out its vaccination campaign through 93 vaccination teams targeting
495 health facilities. Priority was given to vaccinating health -care workers, who had
received 47,281 vaccinations as at 23 July. Some Member States have provided
additional vaccines to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
13. The economic crisis continued to affect civilians across the country. Syrian
households continued to face difficulties in sustaining income-generating activities,
while prices remained high and coping capacities were further eroded. In June, close
to a third of households interviewed by WFP in the Syrian Arab Republic (32 per
cent) indicated that they had lost one or more sources of income over the previous
month, with a higher proportion recorded among male-headed households (33 per
cent) compared with female-headed households (24 per cent). This trend was more
pronounced among returnees (36 per cent) and internally displaced persons (33 per
cent) compared with residents (30 per cent). Moreover, nearly one in four households
nationwide (23 per cent) reported having lost more than half of its monthly income in
June, with a peak recorded in Suwayda’ (31 per cent).
Update on overall developments
14. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria continued to work towards
a political solution to the conflict that is credible, comprehensive and meets the
demands of the Syrian people, within the framework of Security Council resolution
2254 (2015). In discussions with Syrian interlocutors, including the Co -Chairs of the
Constitutional Committee, nominated respectively by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the Syrian Negotiations Committee, and with international and
regional actors, the Special Envoy continued to stress that a potential sixth session of
the small body of the Constitutional Committee must be built on assurances that it will
adhere to and implement the terms of reference and core rules of procedure of the
Constitutional Committee. It must also restore and build trust and confidence between
the parties, in order to produce results and progress on the Committee’s mandate to
prepare and draft, for popular approval, a constitutional reform. In Rome from 27 to
29 June and in Nur-Sultan on 7 and 8 July, as well as before the Security Council on
19 July, the Special Envoy stressed that all parties to the conflict should define, with
greater precision, reforms and steps that they are willing to take if concrete steps are
taken by other parties. He noted that any steps should be reciprocal and mutual,
realistic and precise, and should be implemented in parallel.
15. Meeting at the invitation of Italy and the United States of Americ a to discuss
the Syrian conflict in Rome on 28 June, a number of international and regional
interlocutors issued a joint statement in which they reaffirmed strong support for
United Nations-led efforts to implement all aspects of Security Council resolutio n
2254 (2015), including an immediate nationwide ceasefire, the unimpeded and safe
delivery of aid and the Constitutional Committee, as well as fighting against terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. In Nur-Sultan on 7 and 8 July, representatives of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey reaffirmed, inter alia,
their commitment to advancing a viable and lasting Syrian-led and Syrian-owned,
United Nations-facilitated political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015), and
emphasized the important role of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. They
welcomed the simultaneous release operation carried out in the north of the Syrian
Arab Republic on 2 July within the framework of the Working Group on the release
of detainees/abductees, the handover of bodies and the identification of missing
persons, noting that the operation reaffirmed the determination of the Astana
guarantors to increase and expand their cooperation within the Working Group.

21-11016

5/24

S/2021/735

16. On 29 June, the Special Envoy met virtually with over 100 members of the Civil
Society Support Room, who continued to stress their hope that a political process
could recommence in earnest in order to create the conditions necessary for an end to
conflict.
Protection
17. Civilians across the Syrian Arab Republic continued to suffer the direct and
indirect consequences of armed conflict and violence. From 1 June to 26 July,
OHCHR documented 191 incidents in which at least 153 civilians, including
24 women and 49 children, were killed as a result of hostilities. In addition, at least
286 civilians, including 49 women and 74 children, were injured as a result of
hostilities across the country. The hostilities included air strikes, ground-based strikes
and attacks carried out with improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of
war, as well as armed clashes and targeted killings at the hands of various parties to
the conflict or by unidentified perpetrators.
18. Although front lines have remained largely unchanged for 15 months, military
activity across the Syrian Arab Republic increased significantly during the reporting
period and, in the light of the patterns observed, it appears that parties to the conflict
seemingly failed to respect key principles under international humanitarian law,
including the obligation to distinguish civilians from fighters and civilian objects
from military objectives; to refrain from indiscriminate attacks; to respect
proportionality in attack; and to take constant care to spare civilians and civilian
objects in the conduct of military operations.
19. In non-government-held parts of the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic,
OHCHR documented that at least 53 civilians, including 11 women and 28 children,
were killed and at least 106 civilians, including 19 women and 38 children, were
injured as a result of air strikes, ground-based strikes and explosions involving
explosive remnants of war. In one incident on 12 June, OHCHR documented at least
12 civilian deaths, including two boys, and 36 civilian injuries as a result of ground based strikes by unidentified perpetrators that hit several residential areas in the city
of Afrin in north-western rural Aleppo. According to other reports, as many as 19
were killed and 40 injured. The shelling also directly hit the Shifa‘ hospital. The
hospital was damaged, and casualties were reported among hospital staff,
humanitarian workers, patients and visitors.
20. In the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, dozens of peaceful protesters took
to the streets in the Manbij area of Aleppo Governorate, following a conscription
campaign by the de facto authorities in the north-east. Protesters were faced with
disproportionate use of force by members of the Syrian Democratic Forces, such as
stray bullets fired into the air to disperse crowds, resulting in the loss of lives and
injuries among protesters.
21. In Dar‘a, despite a cessation of hostilities following the re-establishment of
government control in July 2018, OHCHR continued to document incidents of
targeted killings of civilians and former members of non-State armed opposition
groups. Most of these attacks were carried out by unidentified perpetrators.
22. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) recorded an increase in reported
cases of child and early marriage in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
economic crisis, along with the compounding impact of the COVID -19 pandemic,
overcrowded households in displacement shelters and a perceived need among
families to protect their daughters, has exacerbated the occurrence of this form of
gender-based violence. Killings of and threats to women and girls in Hawl camp have
also increased since the beginning of the year, with a surge in June and July, creating
a climate of fear among women and girls. The dire needs in the camp and the aid
6/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

dependence of the camp community further increases the risk of sexual exploitation
and abuse.
23. Parties to the conflict continued to detain individuals arbitrarily in areas under
their control. In most cases recorded by OHCHR, detainees were denied information
about the reasons for their detention and other due process rights. The families of
detainees were denied information concerning the detainees’ whereabouts or their
fate, raising concerns that, in some cases, such detentions may constitute enforced
disappearance. In areas under the control of the Government, OHCHR continued to
document cases of detainees who had died in custody. Families learned about these
deaths either coincidently as they were processing unrelated papers at the personal
status registry office or when they were contacted directly by government authorities.
In many such cases, individuals appear to have been subjected to enforced
disappearance, and their detention by the Government did not become known until
their deaths were acknowledged. The bodies are rarely returned to their families.
Family members are also denied the opportunity to question th e stated cause of death
or to learn the whereabouts of the bodies of the deceased.
24. Parties to the conflict continued to systematically intimidate and harass
civilians, including those working in the media and health services. Such tactics
included targeted killings, abductions, deprivation of liberty, ill-treatment, torture,
enforced disappearances, looting and confiscation of property. The whereabouts and
fate of many of those deprived of their liberty remain unknown.
25. During the reporting period, the country task force on monitoring and reporting
verified five incidents of hostilities in June and July causing damage to educational
facilities. On 9 June, three artillery rockets hit Abrar camp in the village of
Suwwaghiyah, Idlib, leading to the complete destruction of Abrar school. On 3 July,
Tishrin primary school in the town of Ariha, Idlib, was affected by artillery shelling.
The attack resulted in no casualties, but one of the rockets penetrated the ceiling of a
classroom. On 3 July, Abdul Ghani al-Sayyadi school was affected by artillery
shelling targeting Ariha. No civilians were injured, as the incident occurred after
school hours. The same school had already been impacted by an attack in November
2020. On 11 July, Mara‘yan primary school in the town of Mara‘yan, Idlib, was
impacted by artillery shelling. A rocket fell in front of the school and damaged doors
and windows. On 21 July, Ismail Lattah primary school in the town of Barah, Idlib,
sustained material damage when a rocket from artillery shelling landed near its fence.
Additional incidents have been reported but are yet to be verified as part of the United
Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism.
26. The WHO Surveillance System for attacks on health care reported one incident
affecting health care during the reporting period. On 12 June, Shifa‘ hospital in Afrin
was struck by artillery shells, killing at least 13 people, including one physician, other
health workers and two children. In addition, 26 people were reportedly wounded, of
whom 11 were staff, including one midwife who was severely injured. This brings the
total number of confirmed attacks on health care in the north -west of the Syrian Arab
Republic since the beginning of 2021 to 10, resulting in 43 injuries and 23 deaths.
Additional incidents have been reported but are yet to be verified as part of the WHO
Surveillance System. On 29 July, a mortar reportedly hit Dar‘a national hospital,
destroying the water tank of the kidney dialysis department. The department was
affected and is currently not operational. No deaths or injuries were reported.
Humanitarian response
27. Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies and their partners continued
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic (see table 1). Assistance included WFP foo d
assistance for 4,845,515 people in June and for 4,744,232 people in July, across all
21-11016

7/24

S/2021/735

14 governorates. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) supported 126 operational community/satellite centres and 119 mobile units
across the country, providing comprehensive community-based protection services to
persons of concern. Additional support was provided for mine risk education for
181,140 children and caregivers in June. Explosive ordnance risk education teams
trained by the Mine Action Service delivered awareness sessions to more than 10,000
civilians, promoting safe behaviour in communities most affected by explosive ordnance
contamination. The United Nations continued to support the COVID-19 response
across the Syrian Arab Republic, including by enhancing surveillance and diagnostic
capacity, procuring vital medical supplies and equipment, supporting clinical readiness,
protecting the delivery of essential health-care services, supporting protective measures
in schools, promoting vaccine acceptance and supporting the roll-out of vaccinations.
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other organizations
through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic: June and July 2021
Organization

Average number of people
reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

8 000

International Organization for Migration

103 500

Mine Action Service

10 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

209 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

777 000

United Nations Development Fund

80 000

United Nations Population Fund

192 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

56 000

World Food Programme

4 795 000

World Health Organization

1 327 000

28. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, assistance provided by United Nations
agencies included the delivery by WFP of food assistance for 3,508,490 people in
June and for 3,407,207 people in July. UNHCR reached 356,797 people with
protection, shelter and core relief items. FAO reached 16,741 people through regular
programming. In June and July, under a joint UNFPA-WFP project, 77,556 pregnant
and lactating women were provided with monthly e-vouchers to purchase hygiene
items based on their needs. UNFPA delivered life-saving services relating to
reproductive health and gender-based violence to 379,898 people and reached another
2,510 through cross-line deliveries. Under the Expanded Programme on Immunization,
WHO conducted a special activity in Dayr al-Zawr, where teams are mobilized to
support unvaccinated children as part of the Periodic Intensification of Routine
Immunization programme. WHO reached 14,500 people through cross-line deliveries.
The Mine Action Service reached over 9,700 people through regular programming
and surveyed more than 200 hectares in Dar‘a and Rif Dimashq. UNICEF provided
safe water to 480,307 people, including 254,468 children in nine subdistricts.
Through mobile teams and fixed clinics in 114 subdistricts, UNICEF provided
outpatient consultations to over 176,000 people, of whom 146,500 were children. It
reached over 373,000 people in three subdistricts in June with sanitation support and
provided health and nutrition support to 14,500 children through cross-line convoys.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) provided cash assistance for 103,403 Palestine refugees, of whom 73 per
cent were in Damascus and Rif Dimashq.
8/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

29. Among the cross-border humanitarian assistance delivered into the north-west
of the Syrian Arab Republic in June and July, WFP delivered food assistance for
1,337,025 people in June and for 1,337,025 people in July. UNICEF delivered cross border assistance to 393,600 people in the north-west in June and July. UNHCR
assisted 62,000 people. The International Organization for Migration brought
multisectoral assistance to 139,253 people. WHO provided COVID -19 testing and
vaccines, as well as medical supplies representing 756,829 treatments (see figure I
and table 2).
30. Assistance delivered through the United Nations cross-border mechanism is
monitored throughout its delivery. Monitoring is conducted at four distinct levels:
(a) at the border by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab
Republic, which verifies the humanitarian nature of United Nations cross -border
assistance; (b) at warehouses inside the Syrian Arab Republic, where aid is confirmed
upon arrival at the warehouses by trusted and vetted implementing partners and by
United Nations-contracted third-party monitors; (c) at distribution points, where
videos and time-stamped, geotagged photos are used; and (d) after distribution with
beneficiaries, including through beneficiary inter views and community feedback
mechanisms. United Nations agencies have adopted accountability systems suited to
individual operational needs, such as Quick Response Codes to track individual items
in real time. These monitoring and oversight measures are further outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General on the review of United Nations humanitarian cross line and cross-border operations, dated 14 May 2020 (S/2020/401).
31. The United Nations continues to engage with donors and partners to ensure
accountability, including preventing aid diversion in areas where Security Council designated terrorist groups are present. Transparency is critical in such a complex
operating environment, and the United Nations works closely with implementing
partners and donors on all aspects of the response.
Cross-border distribution mechanisms
32. In the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian assistance is
provided through different cross-border distribution mechanisms. Food and non-food
items are provided directly (in-kind assistance) or in some cases indirectly through
cash or voucher systems. Beneficiaries of in-kind food assistance are selected
according to needs-based assessments undertaken by humanitarian organizations and
based on agreed eligibility and vulnerability criteria. Humanitarian partners in the
north-west perform distributions at a specific time and place, often monthly, at a
market square or another central location, or through door-to-door distributions, in
particular on account of COVID-19-related preventive measures. People must show
proof of identification matching their name on distribution lists of partner non governmental organizations (NGOs).
33. In May, the month for which the latest numbers are available, 15 per cent of
food assistance was delivered as cash and vouchers, while cash/voucher assistance
represented approximately 30 per cent of total assistance for non -food items. People
receiving vouchers or cash are selected on the basis of needs assessments and agreed
eligibility and vulnerability criteria, similar to beneficiaries of in -kind assistance. The
mode of assistance chosen in each location is based on a determination of the most
efficient means of meeting critical needs. Prior to starting the programme, a market
assessment is performed to assess the availability and frequency of supplies in
markets, as well as the accessibility of markets and vendor capacity. Vouchers with a
security seal and a serial number are created for u se with verified vendors. People
receive their vouchers at an agreed location on a specific day and must show proof of
identification. All used vouchers are collected from the vendors for verification. For
cash assistance, an agreed amount of money is transferred to the individual on the
21-11016

9/24

S/2021/735

basis of the survival minimum expenditure basket, which is reviewed and updated
monthly. People obtain their cash through a money service contracted for the delivery.
34. Other forms of assistance are provided through a wide range of services,
including supplying existing medical facilities and systems for health and schools for
education. In these cases, medication is supplied to pharmacies or medical facilities
for their use, requiring prescriptions. Support also includes providing salaries to
medical workers and teachers.
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries targeted by the United Nations and its partners (see
annex II) through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: June and
July 2021 (monthly average)
(Thousands)

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted by the United Nations and its partners through crossborder deliveries, by sector and by district: June and July 2021 (monthly average)

Governorate

District

Early
recovery/
livelihood

Aleppo

Afrin

–

–

Aleppo

Bab

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

–

87 858

117 853

4 500

–

–

Aleppo

Jarabulus

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

–

–

51 813

–

–

–

51 500

Idlib

Harim

–

39 480

633 943

691 945

11 600

93 842

171 537

Idlib

Idlib

–

53 788

82 158

–

32 002

–

319 085

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

–

–

–

–

–

28 890

Education

Food

102 738

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

–

–

–

9 000

35. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and Refugee Migration Monitoring,
which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
Early recovery and livelihoods activities
36. Early recovery and livelihoods activities represent a pillar of the United Nations
humanitarian response in the Syrian Arab Republic, with the aim of enabling people

10/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

in need to regain their way of life by reconnecting them with essential services and
livelihoods opportunities, including for the most vulnerable, such as the displaced as
well as returning and host communities. While these activities represent only about
5 per cent of the total support requested in the Syria Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan, they are an important part of the humanitarian response, designed in
a conflict-sensitive and consultative manner that supports and strengthens local
ownership, capacities and resilience. The United Nations and its partners support
early recovery and livelihoods projects across five distinct domains: (a) repair and
rehabilitation of critical civilian infrastructure; (b) removal of debris and solid waste;
(c) income-generating activities and market-based interventions; (d) vocational and
skills training; and (e) social cohesion and community interventions.
37. In July, for instance, the United Nations Development Programme supported the
rehabilitation of two health facilities, in Damascus and Rif Dimashq, benefiting
24,600 users, and two markets in Ariha, benefiting over 550 shop owners and creating
300 day jobs. It also facilitated the creation of nearly 2,000 jobs across all parts of
the Syrian Arab Republic. FAO supported more than 1,500 herders in obtaining access
to fodder and water by rehabilitating a nursery in the Badia desert in Hama
Governorate, creating up to 40 jobs. In addition, UNFPA contributed to restoring
obstetrics and gynaecological services at Al-Baath University hospital in Homs.
Humanitarian access
38. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. Principled humanitarian action depends on the
ability to independently assess needs and deliver assistance and to monitor and
evaluate impact independently, including by engaging regularly and directly with
affected people. The access landscape in the Syrian Arab Republic remains complex,
with different geographical areas and different types of services requiring the use of
different operating modalities. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are
based in the country, with more than 600 deployed in humanitarian hubs outside
Damascus, in Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’
and Tartus. A further 3,610 UNRWA staff members are deployed across the country.
This decentralized presence contributes to greater access and proximity to affected
populations. Across the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian aid is distributed and
implemented primarily by national actors, including NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent.
Access in government-controlled areas
39. In government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to reach owing to administrative impediments and security approvals
included Shaffuniyah, Mayda‘a and Kafr Batna in eastern Ghutah and Bayt Jinn and
Mazra‘at Bayt Jinn in western Rif Dimashq. In the south of the Syrian Arab Republic,
there were increased tensions in Dar‘a Governorate, in particular in Dar‘a al-Balad,
during the reporting period. This situation has affected United Nations staff mobility
in some locations. Humanitarian partners continue to report access restrictions,
including road closures, which affect the delivery of assistance to the displaced and
treatment of the injured in Dar‘a al-Balad. On 30 July, WFP trucks were prevented
from entering Dar‘a Governorate because of insecurity, and some health and nutrition
partners were unable to reach the affected areas on 27 July. Education activities have
been suspended in all education centres in Dar‘a al-Balad.
40. United Nations personnel and third-party contractors continued to travel to field
locations along with national NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to conduct
assessment, monitoring, logistics and administrative support missions. In June and
21-11016

11/24

S/2021/735

July, 1,960 regular programmatic movements took place with programme or blanket
approvals. That represented a 12 per cent increase compared with April and May,
when 1,722 such missions took place (see table 3). 1
Table 3
Total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals a from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by type: June
and July 2021
Type of mission

Assessment missions
Missions accompanying aid deliveries
Monitoring missions
Security, logistics and administrative support missions
Total

Blanket approval

Programme approval

Total number

9

2

11

732

32

764

1 141

9

1 150

27

8

35

1 909

51

1 960

a

Missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals do not require specific approval from the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs.
Note: The total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals does not include the missions
conducted by WHO third-party monitors during June and July 2021.

Figure II
Total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals from within
the Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by
governorate: June and July 2021

41. For missions requiring specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
United Nations submitted 218 new requests, of which 116 (53 per cent) were approved
(see table 4). This represents an increase of three percentage points from the previous
reporting period.
__________________
1

12/24

United Nations personnel and third-party contractors operating at humanitarian hubs outside
Damascus obtain “blanket approvals” to carry out movements as part of their regular
programming. These enable regular access and reduce bureaucratic requirements. The total
number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals does not include the
missions conducted by World Health Organization third -party monitors during June and July
2021 and by World Health Organization staff in July 2021.
21-11016

S/2021/735

Table 4
Missions from within the Syrian Arab Republic requiring specific approval by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs: June and July 2021
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Percentage approved

Assessment missions

31

11

29

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

43

20

47

Monitoring missions

69

32

46

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

38

16

42

Explosive ordnance assessment missions

37

37

100

218

116

53

Total

Note: Missions by United Nations personnel departing from Damascus or travelling cross -line generally require
specific approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The total number of requested missions does not
include WHO activities in July 2021.

Cross-line access in the Syrian Arab Republic
42. In the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations and
humanitarian partners maintained regular and sustained humanitarian access in most
parts of Hasakah Governorate and some parts of Raqqah Governorate. On 12 July,
United Nations agencies conducted a first inter-agency mission to Washukanni camp in
Hasakah Governorate. The camp was established in November 2019 to accommodate
internally displaced persons from Ra’s al-Ayn. Other areas, including Manbij and Ayn
al-Arab, remained difficult for the United Nations and its partners to reach from
Damascus, owing to the lack of agreement between parties in control. The la st United
Nations cross-line convoy to Manbij was deployed in March 2019. During the reporting
period, 718 missions were conducted in Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr, of which
679 were conducted by third-party monitors and facilitators, 24 by United Nations
personnel with blanket approvals to deploy and 15 by United Nations personnel that
required specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Between January and
July, at least 1,588 trucks providing humanitarian assistance crossed into the north -east,
an average of 227 a month, compared with 199 a month in the same period in 2020.
43. Efforts continued towards the delivery of sufficient and sustained medical
assistance to areas in the north-east outside government control. In June and July,
WHO delivered three cross-line shipments, including two airlifts and one road
convoy, carrying 59,228 kg of aid representing 11,658 treatments. WHO reported no
major operational or logistical challenges in those deliveries. In July, UNFPA
delivered 259 reproductive health kits to Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr
Governorates, including to Hawl, Mahmudli, Arishah, Washukanni and Nawruz
camps. While the United Nations has continued to scale up deliveries of health
supplies to the north-east across lines of control, needs continue to outstrip the
response. Humanitarian organizations in the north-east continued to report limited
functionality and capacity on the part of health -care facilities, a lack of adequately
trained medical staff and imminent stockouts of medical supplies, including critical
medicines, such as insulin and cardiovascular and antibacterial medicines.
44. The most recent United Nations humanitarian convoy to reach Rukban from
within the Syrian Arab Republic was undertaken in September 2019. Access by
commercial trucks, using informal routes, has been sporadic. Since the decision by
the Government of Jordan in March 2020 to close the border as a preventive measure
to contain the spread of COVID-19, people from Rukban who require medical care
have been unable to gain access to the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of
21-11016

13/24

S/2021/735

the border. Critical health cases continued to be referred to Damascus, in coordination
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, but those who left for treatment have not been
allowed to return to the Rukban area.
45. The United Nations continued to engage with the parties concerned regarding
cross-line assistance to the north-west from inside the Syrian Arab Republic. Various
options are being explored and discussions are ongoing, though agreement has not
yet been reached on the operational details, including on the distribution modality.
Cross-border access in the Syrian Arab Republic
46. United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to address the
logistical and operational challenges resulting from the reduction to one authorized
border crossing following the adoption of Security Council resolution 2533 (2020).
All United Nations humanitarian assistance into the north-west of the Syrian Arab
Republic continues to be routed through the Bab al-Hawa crossing, and 9,798 trucks
carrying humanitarian supplies have used that crossing point since resolution 2533
(2020) came into effect.
47. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533
(2020) and 2585 (2021). The Monitoring Mechanism monitored and confirmed the
humanitarian nature of 14 consignments consisting of 1,476 trucks that crossed into
the country from Turkey, all through the Bab al-Hawa crossing. That brought the total
number of trucks monitored since the beginning of operations to 49,832 (39,860
through Bab al-Hawa, 5,268 through Bab al-Salam, 4,595 through Ramtha and 109
through Ya‘rubiyah). There were no concerns or questions regarding the humanitarian
nature of those consignments. For every shipment that crossed the border, the United
Nations provided 48-hour advance notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, including information on the humanitarian goods to be delivered, t he number
of trucks, the United Nations owner and the destination (district). The Mechanism
continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Government of Turkey.
Visas and registrations
48. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: June and July 2021
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Number rejected

Number pending

Visas requested during reporting period

58 a

22

–

35

Renewals requested during reporting period

151

108

–

43

Visas pending from before reporting period

62

a

30

3

28

Renewals pending from before reporting period

54

47

–

7

a

The United Nations withdrew one visa request and two visa renewal requests submitted during the reporting
period and one visa request pending from before the reporting period. The number of pending visa requests
and visa renewal requests shown in rows 3 and 4 covers the period from December 2020 to May 2021.
Note: Figures outlined in the table are based on data reported internally by United Nations agencies and reflect
submissions made and approvals received during the reporting period for the present report. T he figures may
therefore differ from those recorded by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, with which discussions
are being held to align methodologies.

14/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

49. A total of 41 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
50. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in areas
affected by frequent armed clashes, air strikes and regular exchanges of indirect
artillery fire and other types of attacks by or among parties to the conflict.
Humanitarian relief personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with
unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war and landmines.
51. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and of the
entities of the United Nations system, 20 of whom were staff members of UNRWA;
66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff
members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members
of international and national NGOs have also been killed.
52. During the reporting period, at least four humanitarian workers were killed. On
12 June, two female hospital workers and two other humanitarian workers were
reportedly killed in the attack on Shifa‘ hospital in the city of Afrin.
53. A total of 14 staff members of the United Nations system (all from UNRWA)
are still detained or missing as at the end of the reporting period. One staff member
from the Department of Safety and Security who had been detained in the previous
quarter (11 February 2021) was released on 20 May 2021.

III. Observations
54. The combination of ongoing hostilities, economic crisis, water shortages and
the COVID-19 pandemic is driving humanitarian needs for millions of already
vulnerable people to some of the highest levels seen since the start of the conflict. I
am particularly concerned by renewed clashes that have caused civilian death s and
displacement in the north of the Syrian Arab Republic and in and around Dar‘a
al-Balad in the south. There has been an increase in hostilities in the past six months,
with the number of incidents affecting civilians recorded by OHCHR doubling
compared with the previous six months. I reiterate my call for all parties to the conflict
to respect and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in accordance with
international humanitarian law. I remind all States, in particular those with direct
influence over parties to the conflict, that they are bound to take proactive steps to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law, including as it relates to the
protection of civilians.
55. The economic crisis and related increases in the cost of food, fuel and other
basic items affect Syrian people in every governorate and have been one of the largest
drivers of needs over the past year. Water shortages in the Euphrates, exacerbated by
drought, are set to further increase costs at a time when people cann ot afford to pay
more for basic food items. In regular assessments conducted by the United Nations in
June, nearly one third of all Syrians interviewed indicated that they had lost a source
of income over the previous month, with almost a quarter losing at least half of their
income.
56. I welcome the authorization by the Security Council for the United Nations and
its implementing partners to carry out cross-border humanitarian assistance through
the Bab al-Hawa border crossing. The authorization ensures that millions of people
in need in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic can continue to receive life saving assistance. The United Nations will do its part to increase transparency in
21-11016

15/24

S/2021/735

reporting on humanitarian operations, including both cross-border and cross-line
operations, as well as on early recovery projects. Reporting on the requested elements
will continue to be provided in the coming months.
57. The United Nations continues to engage with all parties in an effort to deliver
assistance through cross-line convoys. There has already been progress on deliveries
to the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, as highlighted in the present report.
Further progress is critical for the expansion of the overall response as humanitarian
needs continue to grow, in particular for health and medical items for which needs
continue to outstrip the United Nations response. I reiterate my call for all parties to
the conflict to allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of impartial
humanitarian relief for all civilians in need through the most direct routes, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
58. The first delivery of 256,800 COVID-19 doses received through the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility has largely been distributed , with a second
tranche of about the same size expected in the coming weeks. However, taken
together, the first two tranches are sufficient to cover only approximately 1 per cent
of the population in the Syrian Arab Republic. It remains critical to continu e and
expand the timely delivery of COVID-19 vaccines to the country using all access
modalities. Without a dramatic increase in the scale and pace of vaccinations, the
pandemic will continue to take a devastating toll on Syrians for the foreseeable future .
59. In March 2020, I called for the waiving of sanctions that may impede access to
essential health supplies, COVID-19-related medical support or food in the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is encouraging that a technical dialogue between relevant Member
States and humanitarian actors about sanctions and humanitarian operations in the
Syrian Arab Republic is under way. I hope that the relevant parties can find ways to
address the challenges that several humanitarian actors in the country face in ensuring
adequate and reliable access to financial services.
60. The Special Envoy continues his efforts towards the unilateral release of persons
arbitrarily deprived of their liberty, with priority given to women, children, older
persons and those who are sick, who are especially vulnerable during the COVID-19
pandemic. The majority are held by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. I
call upon the Government and other parties to account for the fate and whereabouts
of those whom they are detaining and to allow humanitarian and human rights
agencies access to all places of detention. All persons in detention should be promptly
informed of any charges against them. Persons facing prosecution should be afforded
fair trial guarantees. They should be brought promptly before a judge and immediately
released if their deprivation of liberty is arbitrary. Detaining authorities should carry
out prompt, effective, thorough and transparent investigations of deaths in custody
and, if it is found that such deaths resulted from criminal acts, the perpetrators should
be brought to justice. Families of persons who have died in custody should be
informed and should receive full and adequate reparations within a reasonable period
in the case of wrongful death. Respect for these principles would also build
confidence, both within society and between the parties and international
stakeholders. A failure to address arbitrary deprivation of liberty would leave credible
justice, true reconciliation and sustainable peace elusive.
61. Continued impunity for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
serious violations of international humanitarian law remains of grave concern.
Perpetrators of such violations and abuses must be held accountable. I call upon all
parties to the conflict, in particular the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as
well as all States, civil society and the United Nations system, to cooperate fully with
the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
16/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, in
particular by providing relevant information and documentation. Accountability for
serious violations and abuses of human rights and serious violations of international
humanitarian law is both a legal requirement and central to achieving sustainable
peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in the country
to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
62. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the Syrian Arab Republic,
I continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line wit h
Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council and with OHCHR, including thr ough the
establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human
rights.
63. I continue to support my Special Envoy in his efforts to facilitate a political
solution to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. Equally important are the
regional and international interlocutors’ ongoing support for his efforts and consensus
on ways to end the conflict, including through parallel steps that could be taken by
all parties to the conflict in order to generate momentum and trust towards a
settlement of the conflict that ends violence and addresses the aspirations of the
Syrian people. A nationwide ceasefire remains an imperative for the safety of the
Syrian people and for efforts to resolve the conflict, and I continue to urge all
stakeholders to achieve a nationwide ceasefire, in line with Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015), to end the immense suffering that the Syrian people have
endured year after year and to pave the way for sustainable peace.

21-11016

17/24

S/2021/735

Annex I
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: June and
July 2021*
Idlib Governorate
• On 22 July, seven civilians, including one woman, one boy and three girls, were
killed and four civilians, including one woman and two girls, were injured as a
result of a reported ground-based strike that hit a residential area in the village
of Iblin in southern rural Idlib.
• On 17 July, six civilians (three women and three girls) were killed and eight
civilians, including one woman, three boys and three girls, were injured as a
result of a reported ground-based strike that hit a residential area in the village
of Ihsim in southern rural Idlib.
• On 17 July, six civilians, including a member of a non-governmental
organization (NGO), were killed and nine civilians, including one woman, three
girls and two members of an NGO, were injured as a result of a reported groundbased strike that hit a residential area in the village of Sarjah in the Jabal
al-Zawiyah area in southern rural Idlib.
• On 15 July, five civilians, including four boys, were killed and eight civilians,
including two boys, were injured when a reported ground-based strike hit near
a rock factory in the area between the towns of Binnish and Fu‘ah in northern
rural Idlib.
• On 3 July, the building of the NGO White Helmets and the water pumping
station in the village of Shaykh Yusuf were damaged when a reported groundbased strike hit the Sahl al-Ruj plain area in western rural Idlib.
• On 3 July, 8 civilians (a humanitarian worker from the NGO Banafsaj, one
woman, three boys and three girls) were killed and 14 civilians, including three
women and four boys, were injured as a result of a reported ground -based strike
that hit residential areas in the villages of Iblin and Balyun and the city of Ariha
in southern rural Idlib. In addition, the shelling damaged Tishrin elementary
school in the west of Ariha.
• On 23 June, three civilians, including one boy, were killed and four civilians
were injured as a result of a reported ground-based strike that hit near a funeral
close to the village of Afis in the Saraqib area in southern rural Idlib.
• On 18 June, seven civilians, including one woman and two girls from the same
family, were injured when a reported ground-based strike hit a residential area
in the village of Bzabur in the Jabal al-Zawiyah area in southern rural Idlib.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 25 July, seven civilians, including two women, three boys and one girl, were
injured when several reported ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the

* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
18/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

city of Afrin, including at the Mari‘ roundabout. One of the strikes damaged at
least one ambulance in addition to causing structural damage.
• On 19 July, the body of a Kurdish civilian male detainee, who had been arrested
in May 2021 at a government checkpoint, was delivered to his family in the city
of Aleppo.
• On 18 July, a media worker and a camera operator from the Al-Jazeera Mubashir
media outlet survived a killing attempt when a magnetic improvised explosive
device attached to their personal vehicle detonated in the city of Afrin in north western rural Aleppo.
• On 16 July, a house was damaged as a result of a reported ground-based strike
in the village of Awn al-Dadat in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 15 July, one boy was killed and 15 other civilians, including three women
and two boys, were injured as a result of a reported ground-based strike that hit
the Ziyadiyah neighbourhood in the city of Afrin in north-western Aleppo.
• On 9 July, four civilian men were injured as a result of a reported ground -based
strike that hit a residential area in the village of Sukkariyah in eastern rural
Aleppo.
• On 30 June, a civilian man was killed when a landmine exploded in the village
of Awn al-Dadat in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 26 June, a civilian man and his young daughter were killed when a reported
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attached to an armed group vehicle
detonated near their vehicle in the city of Afrin in north-western rural Aleppo.
• On 12 June, at least 12 civilians, including two boys, were killed and 36 civilians
were injured when a reported ground-based strike hit several residential areas
in the city of Afrin in north-western rural Aleppo. The shelling also directly hit
Shifa‘ hospital. The hospital was damaged, and casualties were reported among
hospital staff, humanitarian workers, patients and visitors, while the highest
number of casualties was reported among civilians subjected to shelling in
residential areas.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 21 July, a boy was shot and killed during a house raid in the village of
Khirbat Jamus in eastern rural Hasakah.
• On 14 July, an Iraqi refugee woman was shot dead at Hawl camp in eastern rural
Hasakah.
• On 28 June, the body of a deceased male detainee, who had been arrested at his
home earlier that month, was released to his family from a hospital in the city
of Hasakah.
• On 28 June, two Syrians (one girl and one woman) were shot dead at Hawl camp
in eastern rural Hasakah.
• On 1 June, a civilian man was killed and three other civilians, including one
boy, were injured when an improvised explosive device attached to a motorcycle
reportedly detonated in the village of Humar in eastern rural Hasakah.
Hama Governorate
• On 19 July, 11 civilians, including a woman and her young son, were injured
when a reported ground-based strike hit a residential area in the village of Na‘ur
Jurin in the Suqaylibiyah area in north-western rural Hama.
21-11016

19/24

S/2021/735

• On 16 July, a civilian man was killed when a landmine reportedly detonated near
him in an agricultural area near the town of Tel Moh in northern rural Hama.
• On 20 June, a girl was killed and her young brother and father were injured
when a reported ground-based strike hit a residential area of the village of Na‘ur
Jurin in the Suqaylibiyah area in north-western rural Hama.
• On 19 June, a member of an NGO was killed and five other members injured
when a reported ground-based strike hit the NGO centre in the village of Qastun
in western rural Hama. The centre and a number of its vehicles were damaged.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 18 July, a civilian man (a former secretary of the Baath Party in Da‘il) and
his adult son were killed and one male family member injured in a drive -by
shooting in the town of Da‘il in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 13 July, a reconciled former member of an armed group was killed in a drive by shooting in the city of Jasim in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 10 July, a civilian woman was killed and her husband injured in a drive-by
shooting in the city of Shaykh Miskin in northern rural Dar‘a. Two boys were
also killed while walking in a nearby area as the perpetrators were shooting
heavily in the vicinity.
• On 7 July, six civilian men were arrested near the town of Nafi‘ ah in western
rural Dar‘a. The reasons for their arrest are not known, and their families were
denied information about their fate and whereabouts.
• On 7 July, 36 male civilians were arrested in a search and arrest campaign in the
city of Muta‘iyah in eastern rural Dar‘a Governorate. They were all released
over the following days; one died two days after his release, reportedly owing
to alleged torture.
• On 19 June, a reconciled former member of an armed group was shot and killed
in an agriculture area near the town of Tasil in western rural Dar‘a.
• On 8 June, two civilian men (a reconciled former leader of an armed group and
a humanitarian worker) were killed in a drive-by shooting in the city of
Sanamayn in northern rural Dar‘a.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 15 July, a civilian man was killed in a drive-by shooting in the village of
Jurdi al-Sharqi in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 15 July, a civilian man was killed as a result of indiscriminate shooting
during a search and arrest campaign in the village of Tukayhi in eastern rural
Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 3 July, a civilian man was arrested in a house raid in the village of Tayyani
in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. He was reportedly severely beaten, before being
released after several hours.
• On 10 June, a boy was killed as result of a landmine explosion in the village of
Shahabat in western rural Dayr al-Zawr.
Qunaytirah Governorate
• On 27 June, the chief of the local council of the town of Ghadir al -Bustan in
southern rural Qunaytirah was killed in a drive-by shooting.

20/24

21-11016

S/2021/735

• On 25 June, a father was killed and his two young sons injured when a magnetic
improvised explosive device attached to their vehicle detonated in the town of
Girgis in southern rural Qunaytirah.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 20 July, four men were arrested in a house raid in the village of Huzaymah
in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 14 July, three men were arrested in a house raid in the village of Sahl in
western rural Raqqah.
• On 29 June, the family of a male detainee from the village of Ayid Saghirah, in
the Tabaqah area of western rural Raqqah, who was arrested in April 2020,
learned about his death in custody. His family was denied access to information
about the reasons behind his detention, his fate and his whereabouts until his
death was acknowledged.
• On 14 June, a civilian man and woman were arrested and detained in a house
raid in the area of Hammam al-Turkman in the city of Tall Abyad in northern
rural Raqqah.
• On 13 June, two nurses (one man and one woman) were arrested from the
national hospital in the city of Tall Abyad in northern rural Raqqah.

21-11016

21/24

S/2021/735

Annex II
List of United Nations humanitarian cross-border
operating partners

22/24

1.

AFAQ

2.

ATAA Humanitarian Relief Association

3.

Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development

4.

Al Resala Foundation

5.

Al Sham Humanitarian Foundation

6.

Al-Ameen for Humanitarian Support

7.

Alseeraj for Development & Healthcare

8.

BAHAR

9.

BINAA for Development

10.

Basma for Relief and Development

11.

Basmeh & Zeitooneh for Relief and Development

12.

BigHeart

13.

Bonyan

14.

CARE International

15.

Children of One World

16.

Deutsche Welthungerhilfe e.V. (German Agro Action)

17.

Doctors of the World Turkey

18.

GOAL

19.

Ghiras Al Nahda

20.

Global Communities

21.

Hand in Hand for Aid and Development

22.

Handicap International

23.

Hope Revival Organization

24.

Human Appeal Turkey

25.

Human Rights and Freedoms and Humanitarian Relief Foundation

26.

Humanitarian Relief Association

27.

Ihsan for Relief and Development

28.

Independent Doctors Association

29.

Insan Charity

30.

Insani Inisiyatif Dernegi

31.

International Humanitarian Relief

32.

Islamic Relief Worldwide

33.

KUDRA

21-11016

S/2021/735

21-11016

34.

Maram Foundation

35.

Massrat – The Establishment for Human Care and Development

36.

Medina Association

37.

Mercy without Limits

38.

Mercy-USA for Aid and Development

39.

Muzun for Humanitarian and Development

40.

NAS

41.

Nasaem Khair

42.

Norwegian Refugee Council

43.

Orange

44.

Orient for Human Relief

45.

POINT

46.

People in Need

47.

Physicians Across Continents

48.

Qatar Charity

49.

Qatar Red Crescent Society

50.

REACH Initiative

51.

Relief Experts Association - UDER

52.

SANED Organization

53.

SENED Organization

54.

SKT organization

55.

Sadad Humanitarian Organization

56.

Saed Charity Association

57.

Shafak Organization

58.

Social Development International

59.

Solidarités International

60.

Space of Peace

61.

Syria Relief

62.

Syria Relief and Development

63.

Syrian American Medical Society Foundation

64.

Syrian Engineers for Construction and Development

65.

Syrian Expatriate Medical Association

66.

Takaful Alsham Charity Organization

67.

The HALO Trust

68.

The Mentor Initiative

69.

The Syrian Association for Relief and Development

70.

Turkish Red Crescent
23/24

S/2021/735

24/24

71.

Ufuk for Relief and Development

72.

Union of Medical Care and Relief Organization

73.

Violet Organization

74.

War Child Holland

75.

Watan Foundation

76.

White Hands

77.

White Hats Organization for Sustainable Development

78.

Woman Support Association

79.

World Vision International

80.

Yol Rehberi Insan Haklari Dernegi

21-11016
