S/2018/143

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 February 2018
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
I. Introduction
1.
In line with my agenda on reforming the peace and security pillar of the United
Nations, I directed the Under-Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support to undertake reviews of eight major peacekeeping operations b y June
2018. The independent review of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) was conducted from November 2017 to January 2018 by an integrated
team that included representatives of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support and agencies, funds and programmes, and was led by an
independent expert and former acting Under-Secretary General for Safety and
Security, Kevin Kennedy. The team initially undertook a conflict analysis and
consultations at Headquarters, before proceeding to South Sudan, where it received
detailed briefings and held extensive consultations with UNMISS and the United
Nations country team, the Transitional Government of National Unity, the diplomatic
community and non-governmental organizations. The team also visited Addis Ababa
and engaged with African Union officials and representatives from the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition, former detainees, the National
Salvation Front and other political parties, as well as United Nations officials. In the
first parts of the report I present and summarize the main findings of the review team,
and in the final section I offer my observations and recommendations prior to the
renewal of the mandate of UNMISS, on 15 March 2018.
2.
The review process was focused on assessing five fundamental issues: the scope
of the mandate and the validity of the assumptions underlying its current four pillars
(protection of civilians, monitoring and reporting on human rights violations, creating
conditions conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance and support to the
political process); the performance of the Mission in implementing its mandate and
how it could be improved; the conditions for achieving a political solution to the
conflict in South Sudan; possibilities for greater synergies among UNMISS, the
United Nations country team and other international partners to achieve our common
strategic objectives in South Sudan; and finally, how a viable exit strategy for the
Mission would be defined.

18-02131 (E)

220218

*1802131*

S/2018/143

II. Evolution of the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan
3.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan was established on 8 July 2011 by
the Security Council in its resolution 1996 (2011) of 8 July 2011. A strategic
assessment conducted at the time identified the principal political and security risks
for the newly created country to be the outstanding disputes with the Sudan resulting
from the non-implementation of some of the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, as well as the threat posed by local rebellions, militias, poor governance
in the management of oil revenue and the lack of cohesive national security
institutions. Intercommunal violence was also identified as a major source of concern
for the protection of civilians. Capacity-building and providing support to
government institutions were considered essential to assisting in State -building,
delivering public services and mitigating the risks of conflict. UNMISS was thus
mandated to support extending state authority throughout the country, and to provide
assistance to local state structures through the establishment of county support bases.
Concurrently, the Council authorized a peacekeeping force with a ceiling of 7 ,000
military and 900 police personnel. Through my Special Envoy for the Sudan and
South Sudan, the United Nations also supported the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel in addressing outstanding disputes between South Sudan and
the Sudan.
4.
Following the outbreak of violence in Juba in December 2013 between forces
loyal to the President, Salva Kiir, and the former Vice -President, Riek Machar, the
country progressively descended into a state of civil war. The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) assumed the lead of the political negotiations to
resolve the conflict, supported by my Special Envoy and UNMISS. The Government
became a party to a bitter and extremely violent conflict, which included repeated
atrocities committed against defenceless and vulnerable civilians. As a result of the
increased fighting, in its resolution 2132 (2013) of 24 December 2013, the Security
Council raised the Mission’s troop ceiling to 12,500 troops with a more robust
protection of civilians mandate. Subsequently, Council resolution 2155 (2014) of
27 May 2014 established the current four-pillar mandate and terminated the Mission’s
capacity-building tasks due to concerns that any assistance to the Government would
indicate political support and could facilitate its war effort.
5.
After 18 months of negotiations, the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan (hereinafter referred to as peace agreement)
was signed in August 2015 and was later complemented by further provisions
regarding the transitional security arrangements, in October 2015. On 15 December
2015, the Security Council adopted resolution 2252 (2015), which raised the force
levels of UNMISS up to a ceiling of 13,000 troops and 2,001 members of the police
force, maintained the first three pillars of its mandate and revised the fourth pillar to
add the provision of support to the implementation of the peace agreement. The
mandate also included significant logistical and force protection support to the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism.
6.
The outbreak of violence in July 2016 was further evidence of the continued
unwillingness of the parties to resolve their disputes through peaceful means. To
address the crisis and enable UNMISS to better protect civilians, the Security Council,
through resolution 2304 (2016), once again raised the ceiling of the Mission to 17,000
troops, including, at the request of IGAD, a 4,000 -strong regional protection force.
The mandate of the regional protection force was specifically defined to improve
security and protection of civilians in Juba, including to ensure movements at exit
and entry points around Juba, contribute to security at the airport and secure key
installations. The Government of South Sudan first opposed and then reluctantly
2/14

18-02131

S/2018/143

accepted the regional protection force deployment, criticizing the deployment as an
attack against its sovereignty, motivated by a regime change agenda. As a result, the
Government created serious impediments to the deployment of the regional protection
force which has yet to be completed more than a year after its authorization.

III. Operating environment of United Nations Mission
in South Sudan
7.
Since May 2017, IGAD, supported by the African Union and the United Nations,
has been working to revive the political process. A high-level revitalization forum on
the peace agreement was convened on 18 December 2017 and delivered a new
Cessation of Hostilities Agreement on 21 December. Since the new Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement entered into force on 24 December 2017, it has been breached
repeatedly by parties in various parts of the country. Should the high -level
revitalization forum process succeed in producing a new momentum for the peace
process, UNMISS could find itself in a significantly more positive operating
environment, enabling the Mission to more easily fulfil its mandated tasks.
8.
Violence and instability are, therefore, likely to remain prevalent throughout
South Sudan, leading to more atrocities being committed against civilians and the
flight of many more to neighbouring countries. There are now some 1.9 million people
displaced within South Sudan, and more than 2 million refugees in neighbouring
countries. More than 5.1 million people, nearly half the population, are severely food
insecure. Additional conflict will also lead to more displacement and greater
humanitarian needs and will further complicate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
9.
Meanwhile, the economic situation in South Sudan is expected to continue to
deteriorate, owing to minimal revenue and sparse external support. The army and
security agencies have not received salaries for several months. Criminality is
increasing and adding to the prevailing insecurity. Civil servant arrears are
accumulating and many public sector employees are no longer reporting for work.
Juba continues to function as the only real monetized economy in the country, kept
afloat largely by diplomatic, United Nations and international non -governmental
organizations employment as well as diaspora remitta nces and private investments.
In the World Bank assessment of the economy of South Sudan, an exceptionally bleak
situation is predicted — with minimal governmental and institutional capacity, falling
oil production and prices, contraction of the gross dome stic product, an extreme
poverty rate, rising food prices and falling food production, as well as high infant and
maternal mortality rates. South Sudan is ranked 181 of 188 countries in the human
development index. The survival of its population will, ther efore, require massive
levels of international assistance for the foreseeable future.

IV. Assessment of the Mission’s current mandate,
implementation and effectiveness
A.

Protection of civilians
10. The dangerous security situation affecting civilians in South Sudan is a direct
outcome of the leadership of the country’s disregard for its responsibility to protect,
even though protecting civilians is its primary responsibility. As a result, the
protection of civilians is the most challenging aspect of the Mission ’s mandate. Tasks
associated with the protection of civilians include deterrence, early warning, public
safety and security of and within the protection of civilians sites, reaching out to as

18-02131

3/14

S/2018/143

many as possible of the nearly 2 million persons displaced throughout the country,
preventing sexual and gender-based violence, addressing local conflicts and fostering
a secure environment for the safe and voluntary return of internally displaced persons
and refugees. The Mission is expected to protect civilians in a vast country with scarce
infrastructure and a long rainy season, during which movement is largely restricted
to transport by air. Since the outbreak of violence in December 2013, more than
200,000 internally displaced persons have sought refuge in UNMISS protection of
civilians sites throughout the country, and 4 million others have been displaced,
largely as a result of military operations, intercommunal violence and criminality.
Even if political progress is made, fragmentation among the warring parties in South
Sudan and the high risk of revenge killings imply that the protection crisis will likely
continue; and the Mission must be prepared to respond accordingly.
11. Women and children continue to bear the brunt of the conflict. Gender-based
violence is pervasive, yet underreported throughout South Sudan owing to social
stigma and fear of retaliation by perpetrators. Life-saving services and reporting
mechanisms are not immediately available to survivors in many of the affected areas.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a serious concern. Women and girls, in particular
those in female- and child-headed households, remain most at risk and are vulnerable
to sexual assault while carrying out the most basic acts of survival. The Security
Council has mandated that monitoring and reporting mechanisms continue to verify
cases of child recruitment, use, abduction and other grave violations directly affecting
some 100,000 children since the beginning of the conflict. More than 19,000 children
are estimated to have been recruited and used by armed actors since the beginning of
the conflict, up from an estimate of 17,000 in 2016. The destruction of schools and
the departure of teachers from many affected areas have had an increasing impact on
access to education, with 2 million children out of school.
12. It is in this challenging situation that UNMISS must chart a course to increase
its protection of civilian activities to the maximum extent possible within its existing
resources, and to find ways to work with the Government and other parties in order
to do so. The Government will remain the main actor with whom the Mission needs
to engage to bring about fundamental changes in the behaviour of the security f orces.
In that regard, the Mission’s strategy to foster “more peace at any level” is the
appropriate course of action among a limited range of options.
13. The operation of the protection of civilians sites continues to dominate the
related activities of UNMISS. By a conservative estimate, 50 per cent of the Mission’s
efforts, in time, money, staffing and energy, are devoted to managing and protecting
those sites. At least 5 of the 12 infantry battalions are engaged in protection of
civilians site security, as are five formed police units and nearly 400 individual police
officers. The review team found that while the vast majority of the people in the
protection of civilians sites are there for their physical protection, the sites present
their own sets of problems. Some sites have become highly politicized, characterized
by the activities of competing gangs and the smuggling of contraband goods as well
as a level of criminality that is extremely difficult to manage without adequate
resources, notwithstanding sustained efforts to improve security. The sites also remain
a point of friction with the Government, which claims that they provide refuge to
elements of the armed opposition. Notwithstanding UNMISS efforts, sexual and
gender-based violence remain a serious problem at the sites, where, in some cases,
approximately 80 per cent of the population is made up of women and children.
Managing and providing for humanitarian needs within these sites, a collective effort
shared by the Mission and the humanitarian community, is also a major undertaking.
14. The protection of civilians sites have been and will remain the responsibility of
the Mission until the hosted population feels safe enough to return home. The physical
protection provided in the protection of civilians sites is at the core of the UNMISS
4/14

18-02131

S/2018/143

mandate and is being accomplished, notwithstanding the many challenges. Efforts are
under way to better secure and police the sites, with weapons -free zones being
established around their perimeters, more frequent weapons sweeps being undertaken,
larger berms being built and increasing cooperation among the Mission, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that work in the sites.
Nevertheless, despite a substantial investment in securing the sites, they remain
vulnerable to large-scale attacks, as witnessed in Bor in 2014 and Malakal in 2016.
While the Mission is making a significant effort to locate and expel members of the
armed opposition in the protection of civilians sites, such attacks remain a possibility
if opposition figures continue to live in these sites and their populations are perceived
to be supportive of the opposition. The provision of permanent security to protection
of civilians sites reduces the Mission’s ability to project its force outside United
Nations bases and maintain a presence in areas in which the vast majority of the
people in need of protection reside, or to which they have been displaced.
15. There are no easy answers to this dilemma. There will never be enough troops
to protect both the protection of civilians sites and extend the protection footprint of
UNMISS to other areas of large displacements, in a country as large as South Sudan.
Increasing the effectiveness of protection efforts beyond the protection of civilians
sites is a major priority of the Mission, though, and more emphasis is being placed by
the Mission on early warning, greater involvement of the communities inside the
camps in ensuring security and greater reliance on traditional dispute resolut ion
practices. Efforts on the part of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General
and the Force Commander to make the Force more robust, nimble and proactive, in
particular by projecting their protection activities beyond the sites, are beginning t o
make an impact. Plans are in place to expand the Mission’s presence to include
locations in the Equatorias, which have experienced intense fighting and
displacement in the past year.
16. Nevertheless, with approximately 50 per cent of the military resources deployed
in securing the protection of civilians sites, only a maximum of 20 per cent of troop
strength is available for outward projection of force, supporting humanitarian
operations and other mandated tasks; the remainder are being utilized to secu re United
Nations bases and support activities. Within existing resources, an increase in the
percentage of forces available to provide some measure of protection to an estimated
1.7 million internally displaced persons who are not in protection of civilia ns sites
can only occur through two avenues: (a) by sequentially closing the protection of
civilians sites as the security situation improves and internally displaced persons
voluntarily depart; and (b) by reassessing the current model of providing securit y to
protection of civilians sites in order to explore whether other options exist, requiring
fewer troops for static security in order to increase the Mission ’s footprint outwards.
An optimal strategy would be a combination of the two. However, since the closure
of protection of civilians sites depends on external factors that are out of the Mission ’s
control, the reassessment of the current security model vis-à-vis the protection of
civilians sites is essential. Some early success in closing sites has bee n achieved. The
protection of civilians site in Melut was closed after registering the residents as
internally displaced persons, providing a transition package and assurances of
continued food assistance, while relocating some families with safety concern s to
another site. The lessons learned in Melut will help in addressing the closure of larger
sites in due course.
17. While the physical protection of civilians under imminent threat of violence is
a mandated responsibility of UNMISS, the entire United N ations presence in South
Sudan and NGO partners also have complementary protection responsibilities. While
all the organizations appear to be seized of the importance of protection and have
their respective strategies, it does not automatically translate i nto a joined up,
18-02131

5/14

S/2018/143

comprehensive approach that draws upon all the parties’ strengths to best utilize
scarce resources.
18. An integrated and people-focused United Nations protection approach is needed
in South Sudan so as to enhance protection for the vulnerable, especially women and
children. A system-wide approach would need to address, for example, the needs of
displaced persons for immediate physical protection and humanitarian assistance to
eventual safe and voluntary returns to their places of origin o r choice. That approach
should also be aimed at filling existing gaps, generating synergies and avoiding
duplication of effort and any possible related waste of resources.
Regional protection force
19. The regional protection force was mandated by Security Council resolution
2304 (2016) at the request of States members of IGAD and in response to the July
2016 violence in Juba. The two main troop-contributing countries of the force, which
contributed one infantry battalion each, are States members of IGAD involved in
supporting and facilitating the peace process, while the third is actively participating
in the process. Given its mandate and the specific tasking by the Security Council,
the regional protection force was also configured to include its own enablers, which
comprise attack helicopters, two high-readiness companies, a level II hospital, two
engineering companies and one unmanned aerial vehicle unit.
20. According to the review team, since the Security Council adopted resolution
2304 (2016) on 12 August 2016, the security conditions in the capital have changed
substantially. Sixteen months ago, the operating environment in Juba was insecure,
owing to the persistent threat of military conflict. Today, while the risk of instability
and violence remains, the threat of military conflict in Juba city has diminished
considerably because the Government is now largely in control of the capital, and t he
likelihood of a major external threat to Juba remains low. The current environment in
Juba, therefore, necessitates the adjustment of some elements of the regional
protection force mandate as currently scripted. Moreover, it is expected that the
high-level revitalization forum will address the requirement for new security
arrangements and that UNMISS would be expected to support such arrangements. As
a result, the concept, mandate and configuration of the regional protection force might
require review so that it can adapt to the current political and security environment
and provide the most appropriate contribution to the protection of civilians and
support to the implementation of the agreement on the revised transitional security
arrangements, once agreed upon by all parties.
Capacity-building in support of protection of civilians
21. South Sudan came into being with extremely limited institutional capacity in all
areas of governance and government services with the exception of military forces.
This situation has not improved in subsequent years. Poor governance and economic
collapse have compromised the already weak rule of law institutions in the country.
Civil servants, the national police and judicial actors have not been paid in months.
The complete collapse of an already weak institutional framework is a big risk for a
country and does not bode well for the future safety and security of civilians.
22. While a broad range of interlocutors — including from civil society, the donor
community and UNMISS — recommended to the review team that the Mission
resume some form of capacity-building activity, others recommended against an
extensive re-entry into that area. The Government has advocated a reversion to the
original 2011 mandate, which included full-fledged State- and capacity-building, but
under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. In the current environment, a
full-scale return to supporting State-building through capacity-building is not
6/14

18-02131

S/2018/143

warranted. There is, however, space for a careful and conditional increase in the role
of UNMISS in providing technical assistance, support and advice to South Sudanese
offices in areas that will directly advance the core pillars of the mandate. Such
assistance would need to mitigate the risk of UNMISS contributing to the conflict,
would be subject to a review of human rights due diligence policy on United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces where applicable, and should be done
in close collaboration with the United Nations country team so as to avoid a
duplication of efforts.
23. Potential areas for technical assistance, training or advice include the training
of the South Sudan National Police Service, the Joint Integrated Police, if
reconstituted by the high-level revitalization forum, and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) in matters relating to international humanitarian law and
support for the investigation and prosecution of sexual and gender-based violence,
sexual violence in conflict and other significant human rights viol ations. In addition,
advocacy and outreach towards rebel groups on these issues could be conducted .
Much can be done in many of these areas under the current mandate, if Mission
leadership is given the flexibility to move resources within existing budget l ines.
24. Offering training in preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based
violence and human rights is not only useful but would also be a good test of how
serious SPLA leadership is about improving the conduct, standards and accountability
of its military forces. In that respect, the overall behaviour of the security forces can
only fundamentally change with a long-term security sector reform programme. In
the current climate, initiating a security sector reform programme would be
premature. However, security sector reform efforts would need to be undertaken as
part of a political settlement of the conflict, because without such reform, the
long-term outlook for the political and security situation in the country is unlikely to
change. The project would also need to be led by resourceful donors, because the
United Nations alone does not possess the wherewithal to take charge of such an
endeavour.
Military and police performance
25. The Mission has saved and continues to save the lives of tens of thousands of
civilians in South Sudan. In the review, it was concluded, however, that the quality of
response to a protection of civilians challenge or incident greatly depended on the
quality of the military or police contingent and its commander. While dedicated
investigations have been conducted in response to the most severe incidents of
unsatisfactory performance, existing formal mechanisms for assessing the
performance of a troop- or police-contributing country have been unsatisfactory. In
view of various incidents concerning a lack of performance or a disregard for orders
of the Force Commander, it is clear that the current systems need improvement. Some
incidents are not reported, or remedial action is not taken, owing primarily to
self-censorship within the Force or political sensitivities vis-à-vis the troop- and
police-contributing countries.
26. A revised and independent appraisal system is needed with a view to ensuring
effective and well-equipped troops to more efficiently implement the mandates while
also enhancing the safety and security of peacekeepers. In that regard, the Office of
Military Affairs is working to develop a more effective unit performance evaluation
tool to evaluate the performance of contingents. Action must be taken a gainst units
and commanders who have been found to be in dereliction of their mandate.

18-02131

7/14

S/2018/143

Mission leadership and field offices
27. The review team found that my Special Representative and his team have
demonstrated strong leadership in providing a clear vision of the Mission’s priorities
with an outcome-oriented approach. The operational concept devised by UNMISS is
aimed at ensuring that all activities undertaken by the Mission include a clear goal at
the outset and support the Mission’s priorities. While a work in progress, this
approach has altered the status quo and sharpened the focus of leaders and managers
on the analysis of their operations and what they are or are not achieving.
28. Part of this strategy is a recognition of the importance of the field offices in
UNMISS operations. More authority is being delegated to the field both to promote
quicker responses to emerging situations as well as to provide each office the latitude
to address local issues. This is particularly important for the role that the field offices
play in mediating local disputes that threaten peace and stability. These subnational
reconciliation efforts, which can involve workshops, conferences and mediation
efforts led by the local Head of Office, have had a direct impact o n mitigating and
alleviating intercommunal tensions. Recent successful engagements include a
de-escalation of tensions between the Bor Dinka and Murle communities in Jonglei
and Boma and an early Murle mediation process in Boma. Absent a larger political
settlement at the national and regional levels, these efforts are invaluable in mitigating
conflict and violence at the subnational level.

B.

Monitoring, investigating and reporting on the human
rights situation
29. The Mission has been mandated to monitor, investigate and report on human
rights violations and abuses, as well as violations of international humanitarian law.
The Security Council tasked UNMISS with paying particular attention to conflict related sexual violence and violations and abuses against children, as well as
monitoring incidents of hate speech and incitement to violence. The human rights
mandate of the Mission is inextricably linked to its protection of civilians function
and should contribute to early warning efforts.
30. Human rights violations in South Sudan continue as a consequence of the
conflict. The extreme cruelty of attacks against civilians has caused mass
displacement on an unprecedented scale. The conflict has also spread to previously
peaceful regions of the country and exacerbated ethnic tensions. The full extent of
conflict-related sexual violence in the country remains unclear, but it is decidedly one
of the prominent features of the crisis. Grave violations against the rights of children,
including child recruitment and use, also continue unabated.
31. Despite the deplorable human rights situation in South Sudan, and the resources
available to the Mission, public reporting of violations has been relatively scarce and
slow. While recognizing that difficulties have been encountered in collecting human
rights information (surveillance, intimidation of potential witnesses, fear of reprisals
and constant access restrictions), more must be done to expose the full scale of human
rights violations in the country through accurate, strategic and timely monitoring and
reporting. Ensuring more systematic and detailed documentation of conflict -related
violations will assist in identifying patterns and systems of abuse, contribute to the
Mission’s analysis of the conflict and its toll on civilians and inform its protection of
civilians responses. It will also help in pinpointing responsibility for violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law in particular. This need is fully
recognized by the Mission’s leadership, which has embarked on a major
reorganization of the structure, operating procedures and reporting of the Mission ’s
Human Rights Division with the support of the Office of the United Nations High

8/14

18-02131

S/2018/143

Commissioner for Human Rights. The effort is now under way and is expected to be
completed by March 2018.
32. A particularly egregious feature of the human rights situation in South Sudan is
that human rights defenders and journalists are subjected to constant surveillance and
harassment. They operate in a climate of fear, often finding themselves under threat
or risk of being arbitrarily detained, or forced into exile. In order to prevent the further
erosion of democracy in the country, the protection of civic space should be reinforced
as one of the main priorities of the Mission. Work in that area would include the
protection of civil society actors under threat and the prevention of the additional
deterioration of freedom of expression in the country. The recent release of several
political prisoners, as part of the Government’s national dialogue process, provides
opportunities for the Mission to advocate with the authorities regarding the need to
create a more permissive and democratic environment for human rights work and
discussions of issues of public interest. This is particularly important at a time when
the Government is increasingly expressing its intention to push ahead with truth seeking and reconciliation processes, as well as with the organization of elections in
the country.
33. The Mission faces significant constraints in implementing its human rights
mandate owing to access restrictions imposed by state security forces, in particular in
areas in which grave human rights violations are reported and in those controlled by
the opposition, to which the Government restricts access. Surveillance and a lack of
security also make it difficult for the Mission to interview witnesses, victims and
survivors of such violations without putting them at risk. On some occasions,
UNMISS has been able to collect testimonies from survivors and witnesses in
neighbouring countries, but access to such populations occurs only on an ad hoc basis.
Restrictions on the Mission’s human rights and other activities are routinely reported
to the Security Council as violations of the Status of Forces Agreement. The review
team found that, to date, those reports have not elicited any collective response from
the Council and there is a strong need for the Council to react to the reports more
vigorously and seek the compliance of the Government of South Sudan with the
Agreement.
34. State security forces are responsible for a disproportionately large part of the
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law recorded by UNMISS,
and they currently pose the single biggest threat to the protection of civilians in the
country. A Mission-wide strategy aimed at identifying channels through which the
authorities and parties to the conflict can be held accountable for those violations and
abuses, including for conflict-related sexual violence, is lacking. Without such an
approach, the Mission will fail to address the main threats to civilians and neglect to
strengthen accountability for past crimes to deter further large -scale human rights
abuses in the country. In the current environment, the prospects for accountability
remain weak and, in the assessment of the review team, the Hybrid Court for South
Sudan seems to be the only viable option, given its acceptance by both the
Government and the opposition. The Hybrid Court may, however, be insufficient to
address the full spectrum and urgency of accountability needs in South Sudan.

C.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
35. The humanitarian situation in South Sudan is grim. The compo unding effects of
widespread violence and sustained economic decline have further diminished the
capacity of people to face threats to their health, safety and livelihoods. Humanitarian
organizations predict that at least 7 million people throughout South Sudan will

18-02131

9/14

S/2018/143

require some form of humanitarian assistance in 2018, that is to say, over 60 per cent
of the population. Moreover, 60 per cent of those in need are children. The Greater
Equatorias, the traditional breadbasket of the country, are now beset by c onflict,
severely restricting the country’s ability to produce its own food and potentially
affecting the main supply routes from Kenya and Uganda.
36. While the humanitarian crisis deepens, the operating environment for
humanitarian agencies is becoming increasingly complex and dangerous.
Notwithstanding a November 2017 Presidential order granting unrestricted access,
humanitarian actors face a range of factors that limit it: security conditions,
impassable roads and blockage by armed forces at the local l evel on the part of both
SPLA and opposition factions, as well as administrative impediments. Aid workers
continue to be killed, injured and harassed throughout the country. At least 92 aid
workers have been killed since the beginning of the crisis in Dece mber 2013,
including 25 who were killed in 2017. While the review team was in South Sudan,
another 6 NGO workers were killed in an attack on the village of Duk Payuel, in
Jonglei.
37. The Mission’s assistance to humanitarian partners includes the provisio n of
security at UNMISS protection of civilians sites and, upon request, the provision of
air transport, extraction/relocation support, route and area security through longrange patrols or escorts, and the exchange of information about security conditions ,
access negotiation and coordination with armed forces. Mine action teams survey and
clear routes, airstrips and locations for the delivery of aid and provide updated hazard
mapping to allow free and safe movement of humanitarian organizations and affecte d
populations. More than 600 United Nations agency and NGO staff currently co -locate
in UNMISS bases and the Mission also secures warehouses, fuel supplies and other
critical infrastructure in conflict areas. While 95 per cent of humanitarian movements
are conducted without armed escort, agencies call upon the Mission for armed escorts
in particularly dangerous areas. However, there remain areas that are inaccessible to
both the Mission and humanitarian actors.
38. Humanitarian representatives in South Sudan noted that the Mission’s
coordination with and responsiveness to humanitarian organizations ’ requests has
improved markedly in the past year. One challenge for the Mission is that many
humanitarian organizations, in particular NGOs, operate in areas in which the United
Nations has an infrequent presence, or none at all. A planned expansion of UNMISS
into Equatoria will partially fill this gap and increase the Mission ’s ability to further
support humanitarian operations. As a result of this improved colla boration, the
Mission is receiving more requests for various types of support, which it has been
able to meet thus far.
39. Humanitarian organizations and donors have strongly praised UNMISS for its
efforts to create conditions conducive to the delivery o f humanitarian assistance, and
recommended against any changes to this aspect of the Mission’s mandate. UNMISS
has been characterized as a key enabler of the massive humanitarian operation and
essential to humanitarian actors delivering aid. The support of the Mission and the
Mine Action Service in mine action, in particular, has been praised. The review team
found that, without the presence and support of UNMISS, the access and reach of
humanitarian organizations would be reduced considerably, in particula r in the
conflict areas in which they reside in UNMISS camps and in locations in which
UNMISS secures warehouses, fuel supplies and other critical infrastructure.

10/14

18-02131

S/2018/143

D.

Support to the political process
40. The main factor determining the ability of UNMISS to fulfil its mandate and
eventual exit strategy is progress in the political process towards a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. If no sustained progress is made on the political front, the Mission is
likely to have to continue to implement the other three pillars of its mandate for a
significant and indefinite period of time. Yet, the key factors for the success of the
political process are not in the hands of the Mission.
41. The implementation of the peace agreement fell apart in July 2016 owing
primarily to a lack of political will on the part of the parties to implement the
agreement in good faith and to their preference for achieving political objectives
through military means. The review team assessed that the conflict in South Sudan
could not have been sustained for this long without a steady resupply chain of
weapons and ammunition to the parties, notably the Government, enabled by some of
its neighbouring countries. It found that this has directly affected the safety of United
Nations personnel and the Mission’s ability to carry out its mandate, and advised that
unless these dynamics change, and the neighbours of South Sudan provide consistent,
coherent, concerted and unequivocal support to the peace process, including through
disabling the parties’ ability to procure weapons and ammunition, the peace process
is unlikely to succeed.
42. The launch by IGAD of the high-level revitalization forum on 18 December was
the most significant peace-related development since 2015. Following three days of
intense negotiations between a wide cross-section of opposition actors and the
Government, a Cessation of Hostilities Agreement was signed on 21 December 2017.
Under the Agreement, parties were obligated to cease all hostile military actions and
operations as from 24 December 2017, including attacks against civilians and
humanitarian actors, and to facilitate unfettered humanitarian access. The agreement
also includes a clause regarding the release of children recruited by armed groups and
the release of detained persons. The forum provided the first opportunity for the
signatories of the peace agreement and newly emerged political forces to meet under
one roof.
43. There have been reports of clashes in multiple locations in South Sudan since
the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement came into effect. These have been
concentrated mainly in areas in which fighting was ongoing prior to the Agreement
entering into force, such as Western and Central Equatoria and Unity. The review
team noted that the entire period has also been characterized by media propaganda,
through which each side accuses the other of attacks and violations of the Agreement.
The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism has
attributed the responsibility for the clashes to both SPLA and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Opposition. Maintaining a genuine cessation of hostilities will
depend largely on the effectiveness of the Mechanism in performing its duties, and
on the freedom of movement of UNMISS. The Mission should therefore enhance its
support to the Mechanism’s proactive monitoring and reporting of violations and
overall effectiveness in identifying those responsible.
44. Reporting on ceasefire violations by the Monitoring Mechanism should be
shared more rapidly with the Security Council, in order to inform its deliberations
and put urgently needed pressure on the parties to cease such violations. As expressed
by the IGAD Council of Ministers and other regional leaders during the African Union
summit held in Addis Ababa in 2018, unless a political cost and accountability
measures are attached to these violations, they are likely to continue.
45. During the second phase of the high-level revitalization forum, which began on
5 February, discussions have been focused on issues of governance, a permanent

18-02131

11/14

S/2018/143

ceasefire and transitional security arrangements as well as on revised timelines for
the implementation of the peace agreement of 2015. That will also include revised
timelines and implementation schedules towards democratic elections at the end of
the transitional period.
46. While the initial progress in the high-level revitalization forum process is
encouraging, the chances of reaching a comprehensive political solution in the near
term without applying political leverage on the parties are slim. The Government of
South Sudan perceives itself to be in a dominant position and has voiced strong
reservations regarding the IGAD approach. The opposition is fragmented and
internally divided. South Sudan has also become a flashpoint where regional
geopolitical tensions and competition converge, further undermining prospects for
peace. If the high-level revitalization forum results in the conclusion of a political
agreement, the implementation process will require a stronger monitoring and
implementation mechanism on the ground.
47. There is a clear imperative for the United Nations and the wider international
community to continue to pursue peace in South Sudan. The crisis will not be resolved
absent a political solution. The review team assessed that the current military
dominance of the Transitional Government of National Unity may not be sustained in
a context of economic collapse and internal fragmentation, and government
engagement aimed at incremental improvements on the ground will not be sufficient
to reverse the current dynamics of the crisis. The team is of the view that generating
support for the high-level revitalization forum, resisting the pressure of unrealistic
timelines, bringing the region on board in a coherent and united approach and
highlighting the great importance of unity of purpose within the Security Council are
the most important steps towards peace in South Sudan.

V. Observations and recommendations
48. I believe that progress in the peace process, leading to a sustainable political
resolution of the conflict, should be the key objective of the United Nations in South
Sudan, as that is the only way towards a viable exit strategy for UNMISS. In the past,
the Security Council has prioritized increasing the troop strength of the Mission,
rather than strengthening the political process. As a result, UNMISS evolved from an
enabling instrument to one mainly focused on the protection of civilians. Thus, I
encourage the Security Council to continue exerting increased political leverage on
the parties, in coordination with regional organizations, and to address the restrictions
placed on the Mission, as well as the repeated violations of the Status of Forces
Agreement.
49. The Mission was established in 2011, with a focus on the consolidation of peace
and security and assisting the new Government in developing institutions and its
capacity. UNMISS remains a necessary presence in South Sudan, without which tens
of thousands of South Sudanese would face dire and dangerous circumstances. In this
environment of conflict, supporting humanitarian access, as well as monitoring of and
publicly reporting on human rights and humanitarian law violations, are important
supporting elements of the Mission’s protection mandate.
50. The Status of Forces Agreement is frequently violated and these violations are
regularly reported to the Security Council. The Mission continues to work with the
Government to move it towards a peaceful and helpful approach while simultaneously
doing its maximum to protect a significant portion of the population .
51. Current trends indicate that the political process will require a considerable
amount of time, effort and united political support from the Security Council in order

12/14

18-02131

S/2018/143

for it to deliver an implementable outcome, as the process must overcome a security
situation, which in the absence of a resolution is very likely to see a resumption of
violence; a dire human rights situation, where impunity for violations against civilians
in general and against women and children in particular will continue; and a
humanitarian situation, which is likely to worsen. In the light of these circumstances,
it is my view that the current mandate of UNMISS remains valid and should be
extended for another year, albeit with some modifications as recommended in the
paragraphs below.
52. While the current language on the Mission’s protection of civilians mandate
remains valid, there is a need to adopt a system-wide United Nations protection
approach for South Sudan, drawing on all capacities — those of the military, the
police, civilians and United Nations agencies — to ensure better integration and
coordination of efforts. This approach should not only utilize to the maximum extent
possible all United Nations resources in South Sudan, but also fill existing gaps and
avoid duplication of activities. This can only happen if we overcome the challenge of
United Nations actors working in silos, which is an issue that I am addressing in my
reforms. I have directed the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNMISS to
conduct a military and police capability study, to review the current model for
providing security to the protection of civilians sites and to explore whether a more
efficient model requiring fewer troops could be contemplated with the overall aim of
freeing up more troops for outward projection of the Mission ’s military footprint.
53. The mandate of UNMISS could be amended to include the capacity-building
and training of security and government institutions in matters relating to
international humanitarian law, and the investigation and prosecution of cases of
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual violence, as well as of
other serious human rights violations, with due reference to the implementation of the
human rights due diligence policy. A Mission-wide strategy aimed at identifying
channels through which those responsible can be held acco untable for violations and
abuses, in particular for sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual
violence, should be urgently developed. Consideration should also be given to
community violence-reduction projects. All this could be achieved within existing
resources, provided that my Special Representative is given the authority to reallocate
resources towards these objectives.
54. In order to raise the visibility of the human rights situation in South Sudan, the
Mission should strengthen its outreach and advocacy aimed at reducing violations and
enhancing the protection of civilians, including through documenting responsibility
as a deterrent, as well as a basis for future accountability. There should also be a
renewed international push to support the efforts of the African Union towards the
establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, which was agreed to by the parties
to the conflict. The language in the mandate related to creating conditions conducive
to the delivery of humanitarian assistance remains valid, and its successful
implementation deserves recognition.
55. I commend the engagement of IGAD to revitalize the political process, and urge
the region to make further efforts to overcome its divisions in order to reach a politi cal
solution to the crisis in South Sudan. I urge the Security Council to continue
supporting the peace process, including by taking into account the call by the African
Union and IGAD to hold the parties accountable for the violations of their own
agreements. Without regional and international leverage, the parties to the conflict
are unlikely to change their existing calculus and to support political dialogue. I urge
the States members of IGAD and members of the Council to ensure consistent and
unequivocal messages to the parties in that respect and to strengthen their political
support for the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and UNMISS in
18-02131

13/14

S/2018/143

addressing the violations of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and the Status of
Forces Agreement.
56. In conclusion, I would like to thank the UNMISS review team and its leader,
Kevin Kennedy, for their excellent work. I would also like to thank my Special
Representative, David Shearer, UNMISS leadership and staff as well as members of
the United Nations country team in South Sudan for their hard work under very trying
circumstances.

14/14

18-02131
