S/2017/745

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 August 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2366
(2017), in which the Council requested that, within 45 days of the adoption of the
resolution, I present detailed recommendations regarding the size, operational
aspects and mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
consistent with the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace between the Government of Colombia and the Re volutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army (FARC-EP) (see S/2017/272, annex II).
It also follows my report to the Council on the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia, dated 23 June 2017 (S/2017/539).

II. Mandate
2.
The Final Agreement, which was signed on 24 November 2016, provided for
the establishment of a second special political mission that would begin operations
upon completion of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, which
was given responsibility for the verification of the Agreement between the
Government and FARC-EP on the Bilateral and Definitive Ceasefire and Cessation
of Hostilities and Laying Down of Arms (Ceasefire Agreement). Section 6.3.3 of the
Final Agreement specifies that the second United Nations mission should be
responsible for the verification of the reintegration of FARC -EP members into
political, economic and social life; the implementation of personal and collective
security and protection measures; and comprehensive security and protection
programmes for communities and organizations in the territories.
3.
On 5 June 2017, in identical letters addressed to the Secretary -General and the
President of the Security Council, the President of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos
Calderon, formally requested, on behalf of the Government and FARC -EP, the
establishment of the second mission by 10 July 2017 (see S/2017/481, annex). In his
letter, the President emphasized that the support of the international community, in
particular through the United Nations Mission in Colombia, had been instrumental
in ensuring full compliance with the Ceasefire Agree ment. The letters outlined the
proposed mandate for the second mission in accordance with section 6.3.3 of the
Final Agreement. It also requested that the second mission operate for a period of
three years, renewable if necessary, and specified that the mi ssion would be of a
political nature and encompass both regional and local verification.

17-14700 (E)

010917

*1714700*

S/2017/745

4.
On 9 June 2017, in a letter addressed to me, the President of the Security
Council requested that I provide the Council with initial recommendations for the
establishment of the second political mission. In response, in my report to the
Council of 23 June (S/2017/539), I recommended that the Council respond
favourably to the parties’ request. I also specified that the ab ility of the United
Nations to meet the parties’ request would be facilitated if the Council authorized
me to initiate preparations for the second mission immediately. With that authority,
I would undertake an integrated planning process for the second mis sion and present
detailed proposals regarding the mission’s functions, size, structure and operational
aspects, informed by practical experience on the ground. I also noted that, until such
time as the second mission could be fully established, the United Nations Mission in
Colombia was in a position, if so authorized by the Council, to initiate some tasks of
the second mandate on a provisional basis, within available resources and from its
current 9 regional and 26 local headquarters, pending further asses sment to
determine the requirements for full implementation.
5.
On 10 July 2017, by its resolution 2366 (2017), the Security Council established
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia (the Verification Mission) for an
initial period of 12 months and decided that it should begin all verification activities
on 26 September, immediately after completion of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia. The resolution specifies that the Verification Mission should
verify implementation by the Government of Colombia and FARC -EP of sections 3.2
and 3.4 of the Final Agreement, including the political, economic and social
reintegration of FARC-EP and the implementation of personal and collective security
guarantees and of comprehensive programmes on security and protection measures
for communities and organizations in the territories, as well as carrying out the
required regional and local verification. In the resolution, the Counci l requested that
I report to it every 90 days on the implementation of the mandate of the Verification
Mission. The Council also directed the United Nations Mission in Colombia to begin
provisional work anticipated by the Verification Mission, as set out in my report o f
23 June, within its current configuration and capacity.

III. Mission tasks
6.
The tasks for the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will be
related exclusively to verification, as opposed to those of the current Mission, which
included the coordination of the tripartite Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
as well as operational tasks, such as the recently concluded destruction of unstable
armaments and the extraction of weapons containers, as well as the ongoing
neutralization of weapons. The commitments to reintegration and security
guarantees that the new Mission will be required to verify are articulated in detail in
sections 3.2 and 3.4 of the Final Agreement.
Verification of political, economic and social reintegration
7.
The new Mission will be charged with verifying commitments regarding the
political and socioeconomic reintegration of FARC -EP members. Section 3.2 of the
Final Agreement outlines the context and spirit in which the reintegration process
must be understood:
Laying the foundations for building a stable and lasting peace requires the
effective reintegration of FARC-EP into the country’s social, economic and
political life. The reintegration process confirms the commitment of FARC -EP
to contribute to the ending of the armed conflict, to become a legal political
entity and contribute decisively to the consolidation of national reconciliation,

2/12

17-14700

S/2017/745

coexistence and guarantees of non-repetition, and to transform the conditions
that allowed violence across the country to break out and persist.
8.
With regard to political reintegration, the Final Agreement provides that the
transition of FARC-EP from an armed organization into a new legal political party
or movement, which has rights and which fulfils the obligations and du ties inherent
to constitutional order, is an essential condition for ending the armed conflict,
building a stable and lasting peace and, in general, for strengthening democracy in
Colombia. Guarantees for the new political movement or party that emerges fr om
the transition of FARC-EP into a legal entity taking part in political life include the
right to: register with and be recognized by the National Electoral Council;
technical assistance, operational funding and support; assured access and funding
for participation in the 2018 and 2022 elections; access to the media; and special
security guarantees for the movement and its leaders. It also includes guarantees
regarding political representation, on a temporary basis, for the new movement or
party in the national Congress during two constitutional periods, starting in 2018,
and a temporary non-voting delegate on the National Electoral Council.
9.
The Final Agreement also outlines the general philosophy of the process of
socioeconomic reintegration, which should be aimed at strengthening the social
fabric across the country, coexistence and reconciliation among its inhabitants and
developing and deploying socially productive activities and local democracy. A road
map agreed to by the parties on 29 May 2017 stressed that socioeconomic
reintegration should be community based. The Final Agreement also points out that
the process of reintegration should have, in all its aspects, a differentiated approach,
with an emphasis on the rights of women.
10. A number of commitments relating to socioeconomic reintegration have already
been implemented, including the establishment of the National Reintegration Council;
the legal establishment of a social and economic solidarity organization (Ecomun) for
the purpose of the productive reintegration of FARC-EP; the creation of a centre for
political thought and education; the transformation of the Colombian Agency for
Reintegration into the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization; a presidential
decree on socioeconomic reintegration; and a social and economic census of
FARC-EP members. Another set of commitments are currently being implemented,
including the transition to legal status of former FARC-EP fighters and militias; the
reintegration of minors who have left FARC-EP camps; access to bank accounts for
FARC-EP members; and training and educational activities.
11. Further economic and social reintegration measures that require verification
include the identification and implementation of sustainable, socially productive
projects and programmes; a fund for reintegration projects that will be set up
through Ecomun; the availability of funds for individual projects; and a number of
measures under the rubric of “guarantees for sustainable social and economic
reintegration”. The latter includes provisions for a basic income for former
FARC-EP members for a period of 24 months, a normalization allowance, social
security payments and social programmes. It should be noted that, for all the above
activities, the Final Agreement allows for the provision of economic support from
the private sector and foundations, as well as bilateral and multilateral cooperation,
without prejudice to funds dedicated to those activities by the Government.
Verification of security guarantees
12. Section 3.4 of the Final Agreement comprises a broad range of measures
aimed at enhancing the security of the citizens of Colombia in the aftermath of the
conflict between the State and FARC-EP in a context where, notwithstanding the
ceasefire, the laying down of weapons by FARC-EP and its conversion into a
17-14700

3/12

S/2017/745

peaceful political organization, illegal groups and entrenched patterns of violence
continue to exist, affecting in particular the rural areas and communities that have
suffered most from decades of violence. The security measures are consistent with
the overall orientation of the Final Agreement, which, in order to secure lasting
peace, focuses peace consolidation efforts on the stabilization of rural areas of the
country, in particular in poor and extremely poor areas that were significantly
impacted by the conflict, that have weak State institutions and where illicit crops are
cultivated and there are other forms of illegal economic activity.
13. The security guarantees included in section 3.4 of the Final Agreement can be
categorized into four broad areas: (a) the establishment of national bodies;
(b) specific measures for personal and collective security, (c) a comprehensive
security system for the exercise of politics, aimed especially at the political
opposition; and (d) a comprehensive security and protection programme for the
communities and organizations in areas most affected by the conflict.
14. At the national level, the National Commission on Security Guarantees has
already been established. This body, chaired at the highest levels, has wide-ranging
responsibilities associated with the planning, monitoring and cross -sector
coordination of measures to dismantle organizations responsible for attacks on
human rights advocates, social movements, political movements and those taking
part in the implementation of the peace process. The Commission has contributed to
the establishment of the legal framework for enhanced security guarantees,
including a legal decree for the establishment of a special invest igation unit within
the Office of the Attorney General and a programme on reconciliation, coexistence
and prevention of stigmatization.
15. Other relevant national bodies that have already been established include the
Police Elite Corps, which will operate primarily in areas most affected by the
conflict to combat criminal organizations; the Technical Committee on Security and
Protection, with the participation of members of the Government and FARC -EP; the
Sub-Directorate of the National Protection Unit; and the Security and Protection
Corps, a body of mixed composition that includes former members of FARC -EP
who have received appropriate training and equipment.
16. A number of measures related to the comprehensive security system for the
exercise of politics have already been or being taken, including guarantees for the
security of political parties and movements, as well as for members of the new party
or movement that will emerge from the transition of FARC -EP. Pending tasks
include the strengthening of the early warning system of the Office of the
Ombudsman and the programmes to support reconciliation, coexistence and
prevention of political stigmatization.
17. A centrepiece of the set of security guarantees is the comprehensive security
and protection programme for communities and organizations, highlighted in the
letter of the President of Colombia. This programme, which includes a broad range
of physical protection, education and awareness-raising measures to support the
groups, organizations and people most at risk, also contains specific measures for
the protection and participation of women.

IV. Deployment, staffing and structure
18. On the basis of the mandate set out in resolution 2366 (2017), a number of
considerations have been taken into account and consultations have been held with
the Government of Colombia and FARC-EP in order to ensure the best possible
design for the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Discussions with

4/12

17-14700

S/2017/745

the Government involved entities with which the new Mission will be called upon to
cooperate most closely in carrying out its mandate, in particular the Office of the
High Commissioner for Peace, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of
National Defence, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, the Office of
the Ombudsman, the Office of the Attorney General, the national police and the
armed forces. As part of those consultations, on 14 August 2017, my Special
Representative for Colombia and Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia
sent a letter outlining the concept that would guide verification, dispute resolution
and confidence-building for the new Mission to the members of the Commission for
Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement, the National Reintegration Council and the National Commission for
Security Guarantees, the three entities identified as key interlocutors in resolution
2366 (2017). The current Mission has also taken stock of the practical experience
gained since 10 July with the initial verification of reintegration and security
guarantees within its current configuration and capacity. In addition, an integrated
planning process between the current Mission and the United Nations country team
has been carried out with a view to maximizing synergies and avoiding duplication
in the implementation of their respective mandates. B ased on these considerations,
I am in a position to make the following recommendations on the size and operational
aspects of the Verification Mission.

A.

Geographical deployment
19. In keeping with the need for verification to be local and regional, as requested
in the letter of the President of Colombia (S/2017/481, annex) and in resolution
2366 (2017), and to design the most effective deployment for the Verification
Mission, I have considered the lessons learned from the challenges encountered
during the deployment of the current Mission as well as the following parameters:
(a) The need to retain a presence in or near the 26 territorial areas for
training and reintegration, which were fully established as agree d by the parties on
15 August 2017, where the members of FARC-EP are in the process of reintegration
and where guarantees are being provided for their security. With regard to the latter,
the Government has already determined the combination of police and military
forces required to ensure the protection of the territorial areas for training and
reintegration, depending on the degree of risk present in each area. This
arrangement will also provide the security environment needed for the activities of
the Verification Mission;
(b) The need to establish a presence in locations that have been designated
as priorities for the provision of security and protection of communities, in view of
the risk factors present in those areas. They encompass some 170 municipa lities,
which the national police and the armed forces have identified in their respective
stabilization plans, the Institutional Strategic Plan: Safe and Peaceful Communities
2015-2018 and the Strategic Military Plan for Stabilization and Consolidation
“Victory”. The deployments will accompany the Government’s overall peace
consolidation programme, which includes a broader presence of civilian institutions,
the provision of basic goods and services, rural development initiatives and illicit
crop substitution programmes. Many of those municipalities can be accessed by
verification teams operating from the 26 territorial areas for training and
reintegration mentioned above, as well as from the 9 regional offices where the
tripartite Monitoring and Verification Mechanism is currently deployed. However,
additional small sub-offices will need to be established to ensure that the new
Mission can engage with the most vulnerable communities and liaise effectively
with the military and police units responsible for pr otection in those areas;

17-14700

5/12

S/2017/745

(c) The need to ensure, to the greatest extent possible, co -location between
the new Mission and the United Nations country team, so as to maximize
collaboration between the Mission and the United Nations entities in Colombia;
(d) The need to redeploy the staff of several regional offices, whose locations
do not allow them to provide the best possible support to local verification activities.
20. Based on these considerations, the new Mission would retain essentially the
same geographical deployment as the current Mission, namely, 1 Mission
headquarters office in Bogota, 9 regional offices and 26 local teams, with the latter
coinciding with the territorial areas for training and reintegration with the following
modifications: (a) the Bucaramanga regional office would be transferred to Cúcuta
(department of Norte de Santander), where it would be better placed to support local
teams in the area, and where United Nations entities are also present; (b) a new
regional office would be established in Pasto (department of Nariño) given that the
current Popayán regional office is unable, owing to distance, to adequately support
the local teams in Nariño, and given that United Nations entities are also present in
Pasto; and (c) the establishment of small sub-offices at seven locations: Montería
(department of Córdoba); Puerto Rico (department of Meta); Arauca (department of
Arauca); Mocoa (department of Putumayo); Apartadó (department of Antioquia);
Buenaventura (department of Valle del Cauca); and Barrancabermeja (department of
Santander). This geographical deployment would enable the new Mission to cover
the priority areas for the implementation of its mandate in relation to reintegration
and security guarantees. It would also allow for co -location of and close
coordination among the Verification Mission and 9 of the 13 local coordination
teams deployed by the United Nations country team in Colombia.

B.

Staffing
21. The majority of the staff of the Verification Mission will be civilians, working
in teams with unarmed, non-uniformed international observers. The presence of
combined teams at the local, regional and national levels will provide the Mission
with the set of skills and knowledge necessary to address both the security and
non-security matters pertaining to its mandate and to engage effectively with its
civilian, military and police counterparts. To the extent possible, civilian staff and
observers will transfer from the current Mission to the Verification Mission, in order
to give the latter the benefit of in-depth experience with the peace process and the
opportunity to maintain and build upon well-established professional relationships.
The Verification Mission will seek to employ suitably experienced national staff in
as many roles as possible, given the availability of highly qualified Colombians in
the functional and thematic areas covered.
22. Local teams in the territorial areas for training and reintegration and
sub-offices will be small and composed of United Nations civilian personnel and
observers with a balance of military and police expertise. The core staff of the
regional offices will be larger, consisting of United Nations civilian staff and
observers, providing verification, public information, liaison, mission sup port and
security capabilities. Depending on the region, the regional offices will have
additional small teams, identical to the local teams in the territorial areas for
training and reintegration, which will be able to travel, as required, to areas withou t
a permanent presence where reintegration and security and protection programmes
for the communities and organizations are being implemented.

6/12

17-14700

S/2017/745

C.

Structure
23. The Verification Mission will be led by my Special Representative for
Colombia and Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, who will exercise
full political and operational responsibility for the Mission. In order to enable the
Mission to effectively fulfil its mandate, my Special Representative will be assisted
by a Deputy Special Representative, whose primary role will be to supervise the
Mission’s field presence, and a Chief of Staff, whose role will be to ensure that the
Mission’s headquarters, in Bogota, functions in an efficient and coordinated manner.
24. The Office of the Special Representative will be composed of a Senior
Military Adviser and a Senior Police Adviser, a public information office, a legal
affairs section, an analysis and reporting unit (including a fusion cell where
information from the various components will be processed) and an operations and
planning section.
25. The Verification Mission will have four components, following a structure
similar to that of the current Mission: a verification component, a mission support
component, a field coordination component and a security component. The
verification, mission support and security components will report to the Special
Representative. The field coordination component will re port to the Deputy Special
Representative, whose office will also include a conduct and discipline team and a
training unit.
Verification component
26. The verification component will: (a) collect and process observations carried
out by the teams deployed at the local, sub-office and regional levels; (b) engage
with the two parties, as required, based on the results of verification, in particular
with those national agencies responsible for security guarantees and reintegration;
(c) prepare inputs for my reports to the Security Council; and (d) work closely with
the Commission for Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement, the National Reintegration Council and the National
Commission for Security Guarantees, as requested by the Security Council and the
parties. The interaction with these bodies will be focused on sharing information
gathered in the process of verification, discussing the assessment by the Verification
Mission of progress with regard to reintegration and security guarantees, and
formulating observations and recommendations as required.
27. The two sections within the verification component, one focused on
reintegration and the other on security guarantees, will each be composed of a small
team with expertise in the respective subject matter. A small group of advisers with
expertise in gender issues, child protection, ethnic issues and other cross -cutting
themes will support both verification sections. These advisers will be selected in
close consultation with relevant members of the United Nations country team and
will constitute a key linkage with the relevant United Nations entities, with a view
to enhancing coordination.
Field coordination component
28. As amply demonstrated by the experience of the current Mission, the
Verification Mission will require very close substantive, operational, logistical and
security coordination at the national, regional and local levels. Doing so will
continue to be a significant management challenge owing to the n umber and
remoteness of locations in which the new Mission will operate.

17-14700

7/12

S/2017/745

29. In order to ensure effective coordination and synchronized implementation
across the country, the Verification Mission will put in place a robust field
coordination structure. Uninterrupted information flow and timely feedback from
Mission headquarters and across regional offices will be of particular importance for
the purpose of verification. The field coordination component, under the leadership
of the Deputy Special Representative, will be in permanent contact with the heads
of the regional offices to monitor the situation at the regional and local levels and
ensure that issues of concern are raised quickly with senior Mission leadership and
responded to in a timely and effective manner, and that the verification, mission
support and security sides of the Mission work seamlessly in support of the
Mission’s operations in the field. The leadership of the field coordination
component will travel extensively throughout the country t o ensure regular
engagement with Mission staff and regional and local authorities. The field
coordination component will be in a position to identify trends across the Mission’s
field presence, implement solutions and ensure that best practices from differ ent
locations are shared across the Mission. Importantly, the field coordination
component will oversee a 24-hour “operations room” to monitor and track all the
Mission’s field activities and ensure that the Mission responds immediately and in a
unified and coordinated manner to emerging situations.
Mission support component
30. Since the Verification Mission will be solely responsible for the provision of
the full range of support services to all its locations and personnel, a task that, with
respect to the current Mission, has been shared with the Government of Colombia, a
significant shift in the mission support approach will be required. Moreover, the
logistical complexity of supporting verification activities over long distances and in
inhospitable terrain will only increase as the new Mission expands its presence to
new areas of the country.
31. Wherever possible, the Verification Mission will build upon existing contracts
and agreements, adapting them where necessary, or will seek rapidly implementable
“turnkey” solutions to meet its support needs. The current Mission is alr eady in the
process of undertaking detailed cost-benefit analyses of the most efficient
modalities for ground and air transportation. Regarding the latter, the new Mission
will maintain the current internationally provided aviation capabilities in the shor t
term while working closely with national and regional aviation authorities and
providers to fulfil United Nations certification requirements, allowing a transition
from a dedicated to a stand-by aviation capability during the current mandate
period.
32. The current Mission is already working closely with United Nations entities on
operational and logistical aspects. To the extent possible, the Verification Mission
will co-locate with members of the United Nations country team to maximize cost
efficiencies and benefit from enhanced coordination through co -location. At the
local level, the current Mission has and will continue to work closely with both the
Government and FARC-EP to ensure that the local sites of the new Mission will be
in close proximity to areas where verification will be required and be deployed in a
manner that is aligned with the logistical and security deployment plans of the
Government. At local sites, emphasis will be on the immediacy of service provision,
acceptance by local communities, cost, sustainability and environmental impact. In
this latter respect, the mission support component will have staff devoted to
ensuring that the new Mission operates in an environmentally sustainable manner, in
accordance with the “Greening the Blue” initiative.

8/12

17-14700

S/2017/745

Security component
33. The Government of Colombia has overall responsibility for the safety and
security of all United Nations personnel in Colombia. Working closely with the
national police and associated security agencies, the Department o f Safety and
Security will put in place a system that balances the requirement to effectively
implement the mandate of the Verification Mission with the need to do so in a safe
and secure manner.
34. In order to improve service, operational and financial efficiency, the United
Nations security management system in Colombia will operate in a unified manner,
with a single structure responsible for safety and security services to both the
Verification Mission and the United Nations country team. This approach will
enable the Mission to benefit from support in areas such as security analysis and
assessments, investigations, 24-hour radio contact, access control, training, staff
tracking, fire safety, stress counselling and security advice.
35. At the national level, the Chief Security Adviser will act as the principal
security adviser to the designated official and as the Chief Security Officer of the
Verification Mission, directly supporting the Special Representative in the provision
of security support and advice. The Mission will deploy security staff at the regional
level and appoint security focal points at the local level. Those staff members will
support the provision of appropriate safety and security measures in the Mission’s
field locations. Mission safety and security staff will participate in information
fusion cells at the national and regional levels, working closely with the staff of the
Mission and United Nations county team, and, where applicable, external partners,
to produce multisource security-related analysis.
Observers
36. As outlined above, unarmed, non-uniformed international observers will serve
with civilian staff in combined teams, at the local, sub -office, regional and national
levels. At the regional level, the most senior observer will serve as an adviser to the
head of office on police and military matters.
37. Observers will be selected on the basis of criteria designed to ensure the most
effective implementation of the mandate. The criteria include prior experience with
verification mandates, knowledge of the issues under verification, gender balance,
regional representation and adherence to United Nations values and standards.
Owing to the fact that both the national police and the armed forces will play a role
in the provision of security and protection to communities, the Verification Mission
will seek to select and deploy an equal number of observers from the military and
police services.
38. In addition to the provision of expert advice to the Special Representative, the
most senior observers in the Verification Mission, in their respective capacities as
the ranking police and military officer serving with the United Nations in Colombia,
will also undertake important administrative and welfare functions. A small number
of observers will be employed at Mission headquarters to handle administrative and
welfare functions.
39. Having a wide range of countries contribute observers to the United Nations
Mission in Colombia has proved to be an asset to its effectiveness and credibility. As
such, all countries contributing to the current Mission, in particular non -neighbouring
countries of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, will be invited
to continue to contribute observers to the Verification Mission. In order to ensure a
seamless transition, countries that have contributed observers will be requ ested to
transfer a certain number of observers from the current Mission to the new Mission.
17-14700

9/12

S/2017/745

Representation of women
40. The commitment of the current Mission to increasing the number of women
serving in all functions, positions and geographical locations has been an important
factor contributing to its success. The Verification Mission will maintain this
commitment through the prioritized recruitment of qualified female applicants and
close engagement with countries that contribute observers to encourage the
nomination of female observers. Indeed, the need to ensure a high level of female
representation is borne out by the fact that nearly a quarter of all former members of
FARC-EP in the process of reintegration are female. The experience of previous
reintegration processes, both in Colombia and beyond, has confirmed the importance
of considering the specific capacities and needs of women in such dynamics.
Coordination with the United Nations country team
41. In its resolution 2366 (2017), the Security Council requested that the Verification
Mission work in coordination with members of the United Nations country team in
Colombia in accordance with their respective mandates. The Verification Mission
will deepen the already highly developed relationship between the current Mission
and members of the United Nations country team and establish strong coordination
arrangements in order to ensure coherence in United Nations support for the
implementation of the Final Agreement, given that various entities of the United
Nations system have been called upon to provide such support a nd/or have related
protection or verification mandates. As noted above, the current Mission, the
members of the United Nations country team and the Office of the Resident
Coordinator in Colombia have jointly undertaken an integrated planning process.
That process has resulted in the following outcomes:
(a) The development of a shared vision on how the United Nations can
contribute to sustainable peace and assist the parties in the implementation of their
commitments; and the decision to establish a common information system to ensure
appropriate follow-up of implementation and verification activities;
(b) The establishment of new coordination arrangements, including a
permanent coordination group co-chaired by the Verification Mission and the Office
of the Resident Coordinator, as well as two working groups, focusing on security
guarantees and reintegration, respectively, with the participation of the Verification
Mission and relevant United Nations entities. This will ensure full consistency and
effective coordination in the implementation and verification activities of the United
Nations entities in Colombia;
(c) A modified geographical deployment of the Verification Mission so as to
ensure co-location between the Mission and 9 of the 13 existing local coordination
teams. This will ensure better coordination and allow for the optimum use of resources ;
(d) Given the importance of the human rights dimension for peace
implementation in general and for the mandate of the Verification Mission in
particular, the Mission and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights will have specific arrangements for coordination with a view to
ensuring complementarity in the implementation of their respective mandates.
Overall resources
42. Considering the detailed analysis and planning outlined above, the Verification
Mission will be smaller overall than the current Mission, while maintaining the
required local and regional presence. In order to be able to effectively and
efficiently implement the mandate set out in resolution 2366 (2017), the Verification
Mission will require approximately 120 unarmed international observers, as well as
an appropriate civilian component, as to be decided by the General Assembly in the
context of its consideration of the Mission’s budget.
10/12

17-14700

S/2017/745

V. Observations
43. With the consolidation of the ceasefire and the finalization of the laying down
of weapons by FARC-EP, the implementation of the commitments related to the
Ceasefire Agreement set out in item 3.1 of the Final Agreement is nearing
completion, with the support of the United Nations Mission in Colombia. The
Government of Colombia and FARC-EP have requested that, in the wake of this
remarkable success, the United Nations undertake verification of the implementation
of the reintegration of FARC-EP members and the establishment of security for all
in the areas most affected by the five decade-long conflict.
44. From the outset of the negotiations, the parties agreed that bringing an end to
the conflict would be an integral and simultaneous process. As mentioned in the
present report, since the signing of the Final Agreement, a number of mechanisms
and measures have been put in place with regard to both the reintegration of
FARC-EP members and the implementation of security guarantees. I have informed
the Security Council regularly on several of these developments as part of my
reports on the work of the United Nations Mission in Colombia.
45. The United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, established pursuant to
Council resolution 2366 (2017), will begin operations on 26 September 2017. The
Mission will aim to consolidate the peace process and assist the parties in their
efforts to ensure that full social, economic and political reintegration of FARC -EP
members is achieved in the shortest time possible and that the rural areas of
Colombia hardest hit by the conflict can recover the peace and security to which
their communities aspire.
46. Pursuant to resolution 2366 (2017), the United Nations Mission in Colombia,
within its current configuration and capacity, has begun some of the provisional
work anticipated by the Verification Mission. That work has informed the
conclusions of the present report and will also help to ensure a seamless transition
from the current Mission to the new one. In addition, it is important to note the
extensive consultations that my Special Representative and the current Mission have
undertaken with both parties regarding the design, structure and vision for the
Verification Mission.
47. I am also highly encouraged by the close coordination and interaction between
the current Mission and the United Nations country team, in particular in the
integrated planning process that led to many of the recommendations outlined in the
present report. The Verification Mission will continue to build on the coordination
arrangements with members of the United Nations country team, both in Bogota and
at the local level, in order to maximize efficiency and ensure a “whole-of-United
Nations” approach. The new Mission will also rely on the expertise of United
Nations entities in key thematic areas, including gender, child protection, human
rights and ethnic and indigenous issues.
48. One important difference between the current Mission and the new Mission is
that the cost-sharing agreements with the Government of Colombia will no longer
be applicable, and the Verification Mission will be responsible for providing all
support services for its personnel, for which it will require a robust mission support
component. To maximize efficiency and ensure a seamless transition, the
Verification Mission will build upon existing contracts and arrangements with key
providers of the range of mission support assets.
49. While the Verification Mission and the current Mission differ in several
respects, they also have key features in common. First, in their areas of deployment,
which respond to the need to be present in the rural areas most affected by the

17-14700

11/12

S/2017/745

conflict, which are also the areas where the FARC-EP reintegration will take place.
Second, in their composition, which include civilian staff and observers with
military and police backgrounds, in recognition that both civilian institutions and
security forces have key roles to play in the consolidation of peace.
50. In addition the two missions also share a common vision of verification. In
keeping with the current Mission, the Verification Mission will maintain close ties
at all levels with institutions in charge of implementation and with the beneficiaries
of reintegration measures and security guarantees. In particular, the presence of
mixed civilian-observer verification teams at the local level must be a tool for the
early resolution of differences that inevitably emerge in the process of
peacebuilding. Their presence must also be an instrument for building trust, not only
in the Verification Mission, but more importantly among all the actors involved in
reintegration and the provision of security guarantees. T he current Mission has been
able to preserve confidence and cooperation in the face of a multiplicity of
incidents, that could have undermined the basic level of collaboration required for
the consolidation of peace. The Verification Mission will seek to maintain that high
level of confidence and cooperation.
51. In conclusion, let me reiterate my appreciation to the Government of Colombia
and FARC-EP for entrusting the United Nations with the new task of helping to
ensure that the end of the conflict is indeed stable and lasting. In his letter of 5 June
2017, the President of Colombia expressed confidence that the firm support of the
United Nations would be instrumental in ensuring that the peace process in
Colombia would continue to be implemented as agreed between the parties and
would reach a successful conclusion. Through the Verification Mission and the
activities of the members of the United Nations country team in Colombia, the
United Nations will make every effort to ensure that the peace process in Colombia
meets its ambitious goals, and in doing so, continues to inspire other countries to
follow the path of peaceful conflict resolution.

12/12

17-14700
