A/61/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions
and
Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its sixty-first session
Volume III

23 December 2006 – 17 September 2007

General Assembly
Official Records  Sixty-first Session
Supplement No. 49 (A/61/49)

United Nations  New York, 2008

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General
Assembly from 23 December 2006 to 17 September 2007. Resolutions adopted by the
Assembly from 12 September to 22 December 2006 appear in volume I. Volume II
contains the decisions adopted by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee...........................................................1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)...........................................................................................................................31
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee .................................................................... 35
IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee .................................................................127
V. Decisions .......................................................................................................................................129
A. Elections and appointments.....................................................................................................131
B. Other decisions .......................................................................................................................135
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee.........................................................135

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee.............................................................138

3.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee............................................................142
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items............................................................................................................145
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions ..........................................................................................147

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

61/255.

Holocaust denial....................................................................................................................................................... 2

61/256.

Strengthening of the capacity of the Organization in peacekeeping operations .............................................................. 2

61/257.

Strengthening of the capacity of the Organization to advance the disarmament agenda.................................................. 3

61/266.

Multilingualism........................................................................................................................................................ 4

61/268.

United Nations Population Award ............................................................................................................................. 8

61/269.

High-level Dialogue on Interreligious and Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for Peace ................................ 8

61/270.

The Ethiopian Millennium ........................................................................................................................................ 9

61/271.

International Day of Non-Violence .......................................................................................................................... 10

61/272.

Commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of the special session
on children ............................................................................................................................................................. 11

61/292.

Revitalizing the role and authority of the General Assembly and strengthening its performance................................... 13

61/293.

Prevention of armed conflict.................................................................................................................................... 14

61/294.

Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic................................................................................................. 14

61/295.

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples ............................................................................... 15

61/296.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union................................................................................ 25

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 61/255
Adopted at the 85th plenary meeting, on 26 January 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.53 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu

61/255. Holocaust denial
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 60/7 of 1 November 2005,
Recalling that resolution 60/7 observes that remembrance of the Holocaust is critical to
prevent further acts of genocide,
Recalling also that, for this reason, resolution 60/7 rejects efforts to deny the Holocaust
which, by ignoring the historical fact of those terrible events, increase the risk they will be
repeated,
Noting that all people and States have a vital stake in a world free of genocide,
Welcoming the establishment by the Secretary-General of a programme of outreach on the
subject of “the Holocaust and the United Nations”, and also welcoming the inclusion by Member
States within their educational programmes of measures to confront attempts to deny or minimize
the importance of the Holocaust,
Noting that 27 January has been designated by the United Nations as the annual
International Day of Commemoration in memory of the victims of the Holocaust,
1.

Condemns without any reservation any denial of the Holocaust;

2. Urges all Member States unreservedly to reject any denial of the Holocaust as an
historic event, either in full or in part, or any activities to this end.
RESOLUTION 61/256
Adopted at the 88th plenary meeting, on 15 March 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.54,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

61/256. Strengthening of the capacity of the Organization in peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the objective of strengthening the United Nations capacity to manage, sustain
and increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping activities while at the same time ensuring the safety
and security of all United Nations personnel and improving accountability and effective
management of personnel and resources,
1. Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts to enhance the performance of the
Organization in the conduct of peacekeeping operations;

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Supports the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including
the establishment of a Department of Field Support, and notes in this regard the intention of the
Secretary-General to appoint an Under-Secretary-General to head that Department;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report, as soon as possible,
elaborating on the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
establishment of the Department of Field Support, including functions, budgetary discipline and
full financial implications – taking into account, inter alia, the recommendations in the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services1 – for the consideration of and decision by the General
Assembly during its sixty-first session, in accordance with established procedures;
4. Calls upon the Secretary-General to take full account of the views of the Member
States in this regard, including those expressed at the 2007 session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, in particular the need to take all measures to guarantee unity of
command, to promote integration of efforts and to strengthen operational capacities, both at
Headquarters and in field missions;
5. Stresses that the actions to restructure the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
should be implemented with full respect for the relevant mandates, decisions and resolutions of
the General Assembly and of the Security Council;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session a report to review the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 61/257
Adopted at the 88th plenary meeting, on 15 March 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.55,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

61/257. Strengthening of the capacity of the Organization to advance the disarmament
agenda
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/90 of 14 December 1976, 37/99 K of 13 December 1982 and
52/12 A of 12 November 1997,
Reaffirming the central role and primary responsibility of the United Nations in the field of
disarmament,
Bearing in mind the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the Organization,2
Taking note of the intention of the Secretary-General to establish an Office for Disarmament
Affairs and to appoint a High Representative as the head of this Office,
1. Supports the establishment of an Office for Disarmament Affairs, while maintaining
the budgetary autonomy and the integrity of the existing structures and functions of the current
Department for Disarmament Affairs, and the appointment of a High Representative as the head
of the Office for Disarmament Affairs at the rank of Under-Secretary-General, and welcomes the
fact that the High Representative will report directly to the Secretary-General and be part of the
policy decision-making process of the Secretariat;
2. Stresses that the Office for Disarmament Affairs will fully implement the relevant
mandates, decisions and resolutions of the General Assembly;

_______________
1
2

A/61/743.
ST/SGB/2003/7.

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, as soon as possible
following the appointment of the High Representative, a report, in accordance with established
procedures, on the financial, administrative and budgetary implications arising from the
appointment of the High Representative and the implementation of the mandates assigned to the
Office for Disarmament Affairs;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixtysecond session on the activities of the Office for Disarmament Affairs;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for its
consideration at its sixty-third session a report to review the implementation of the present
resolution.
RESOLUTION 61/266
Adopted at the 96th plenary meeting, on 16 May 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.56 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia

61/266. Multilingualism
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the United Nations pursues multilingualism as a means of promoting,
protecting and preserving diversity of languages and cultures globally,
Recognizing also that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity and international
understanding, and recognizing the importance of the capacity to communicate to the peoples of
the world in their own languages, including in formats accessible to persons with disabilities,
Stressing the need for strict observance of the resolutions and rules establishing language
arrangements for the different bodies and organs of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration
on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,3 in particular article 27 thereof,
concerning the rights of persons belonging to ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities,
Recalling also its resolutions 2 (I) of 1 February 1946, 2480 B (XXIII) of 21 December
1968, 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, 50/11 of 2 November 1995, 52/23 of 25 November 1997,
54/64 of 6 December 1999, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 59/309 of 22 June 2005, 61/121 B of
14 December 2006 and 61/236 and 61/244 of 22 December 2006,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General4 and the letter dated 26 February
2007 from the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural

_______________
3
4

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
A/61/317.

4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Organization to the Secretary-General on the proclamation of 2008 as International Year of
Languages,5
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General4 and the letter dated 26 February
2007 from the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to the Secretary-General;5
2. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of
the United Nations;
3. Underlines the need for full implementation of the resolutions establishing language
arrangements for the official languages of the United Nations and the working languages of the
Secretariat;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are given equal
treatment and are provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view
to achieving maximum quality of those services, with full respect for the specificities of the six
official languages and taking into account their respective workloads;
5. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all
important older United Nations documents onto the United Nations website in all six official
languages on a priority basis, so that those archives are also available to Member States through
that medium;
6. Reiterates that all content-providing offices in the Secretariat should continue their
efforts to translate into all official languages all English-language materials and databases posted
on the United Nations website in the most practical, efficient and cost-effective manner;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure, through the provision of
documentation services and meeting and publishing services under conference management,
including high-quality translation and interpretation, effective multilingual communication among
representatives of Member States in intergovernmental organs and members of expert bodies of
the United Nations equally in all the official languages of the United Nations;
8. Stresses the importance of providing United Nations information, technical assistance
and training materials, whenever possible, in the local languages of the beneficiary countries;
9. Recalls its resolution 61/236, in which it reaffirmed the provisions relating to
conference services of its resolutions on multilingualism;
10. Also recalls its resolution 61/121 B, and emphasizes the importance of multilingualism
in United Nations public relations and information activities;
11. Notes with satisfaction the willingness of the Secretariat to encourage staff members,
in meetings with interpretation services, to use any of the six official languages of which they have
a command;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a new Coordinator for Multilingualism, and
takes note of the proposal contained in the report of the Secretary-General regarding the informal
network of focal points to support the Coordinator;
13. Emphasizes the importance of:
(a) Making appropriate use of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the
activities of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, with the aim of eliminating
the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other official languages;
(b) Ensuring the full and equitable treatment of all the official languages of the United
Nations in all the activities of the Department of Public Information;
_______________
5

A/61/780, annex.

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and, in this regard, reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the Department has
appropriate staffing capacity in all the official languages of the United Nations to undertake all its
activities;
14. Reaffirms the need to achieve full parity among the six official languages on United
Nations websites, and in this regard:
(a) Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to develop multilingual
United Nations websites;
(b) Reaffirms that the United Nations website is an essential tool for the media, nongovernmental organizations, educational institutions, Member States and the general public, and
reiterates the continued need for efforts by the Department of Public Information to maintain and
improve it;
(c) Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to ensure, while maintaining an up-todate and accurate website, the adequate distribution of financial and human resources within the
Department of Public Information allocated to the United Nations website among all official
languages, taking into consideration the specificity of each official language on a continuous basis;
(d) Notes that the multilingual development and enrichment of the United Nations website
has improved, although at a slower rate than expected owing to constraints that need to be
addressed;
(e) Requests the Department of Public Information, in coordination with contentproviding offices, to improve the actions taken to achieve parity among the six official languages
on the United Nations website, in particular by expediting the filling of current vacant posts in
some sections;
(f) Recognizes that some official languages use non-Latin and bidirectional scripts and
that technological infrastructures and supportive applications in the United Nations are based on
Latin script, which leads to difficulties in processing non-Latin and bidirectional scripts, and
requests the Department of Public Information, in cooperation with the Information Technology
Services Division of the Department of Management of the Secretariat, to continue its efforts to
ensure that technological infrastructures and supportive applications in the United Nations fully
support Latin, non-Latin and bidirectional scripts in order to enhance the equality of all official
languages on the United Nations website;
15. Welcomes the cooperative arrangements undertaken by the Department of Public
Information with academic institutions to increase the number of web pages available in some
official languages, and requests the Secretary-General to explore additional cost-neutral ways to
further extend these cooperative arrangements, in coordination with content-providing offices, so
as to include all the official languages of the United Nations, bearing in mind the necessity of
adherence to United Nations standards and guidelines;
16. Notes with satisfaction the official launch of iSeek in Geneva in the two working
languages of the Secretariat, and encourages the Secretariat to continue its efforts to implement
iSeek at all duty stations as well as to develop and implement cost-neutral measures to provide
Member States with secure access to the information currently accessible only on the Intranet of
the Secretariat;
17. Notes with appreciation the work carried out by the United Nations information
centres, including the United Nations Regional Information Centre, in favour of the publication of
United Nations information materials and the translation of important documents into languages
other than the official languages of the United Nations, with a view to reaching the widest possible
audience and extending the United Nations message to all corners of the world in order to
strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization; and encourages United
Nations information centres to continue their multilingual activities in the interactive and proactive
aspects of their work, especially by arranging seminars and debates to further the spread of

6

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

information and the understanding and exchange of views regarding United Nations activity at the
local level;
18. Recalls its resolution 61/244, in which it reaffirmed the need to respect the equality of
the two working languages of the Secretariat, reaffirmed the use of additional working languages
in specific duty stations as mandated, and in that regard requested the Secretary-General to ensure
that vacancy announcements specified the need for either of the working languages of the
Secretariat, unless the functions of the post required a specific working language;
19. Also recalls paragraph 17 of section II of its resolution 61/244, in which it
acknowledged that the interaction of the United Nations with the local population in the field was
essential and that language skills constituted an important element of the selection and training
processes, and therefore affirmed that a good command of the official language(s) spoken in the
country of residence should be taken into account as an additional asset during those processes;
20. Stresses that the employment of staff shall continue to be carried out in strict
accordance with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations and in line with the relevant
provisions of General Assembly resolutions;
21. Also stresses that the promotion of staff in the Professional and higher categories
should be carried out in strict accordance with Article 101 of the Charter and in line with the
provisions of resolution 2480 B (XXIII) and the relevant provisions of resolution 55/258 of
14 June 2001;
22. Encourages United Nations staff members to continue to use actively existing training
facilities to acquire and enhance their proficiency in one or more of the official languages of the
United Nations;
23. Recalls that linguistic diversity is an important element of cultural diversity, and takes
note of the entry into force on 18 March 2007 of the Convention on the Protection and Promotion
of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions;6
24. Welcomes the decision taken by the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on 17 November 1999 that 21 February should
be proclaimed International Mother Language Day, and calls upon Member States and the
Secretariat to promote the preservation and protection of all languages used by peoples of the
world;
25. Proclaims 2008 International Year of Languages, pursuant to the resolution adopted by
the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at
its thirty-third session on 20 October 2005,7 invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization to serve as the lead agency for the Year, and in this context:
(a) Invites Member States, the United Nations system and all other relevant stakeholders
to develop, support and intensify activities aimed at fostering respect for and the promotion and
protection of all languages, in particular endangered languages, linguistic diversity and
multilingualism;
(b) Invites the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session on the impact of the
activities carried out during the Year;
26. Reaffirms its resolution 61/185 of 20 December 2006 concerning the proclamation of
international years, in which it stressed the need to take into account and apply the criteria and
_______________
6

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-third
Session, Paris, 3–21 October 2005, vol.1 and corrigenda: Resolutions, chap. V, resolution 41.
7
Ibid., resolution 51; see also A/61/780, enclosure.

7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

procedures contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July
1980 on international years and anniversaries in considering future proposals for international years;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session a comprehensive report on the full implementation of its resolutions on multilingualism;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Multilingualism”.
RESOLUTION 61/268
Adopted at the 102nd plenary meeting, on 25 May 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.59 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Malaysia, Peru, Sweden, United Republic of Tanzania

61/268. United Nations Population Award
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/201 of 17 December 1981, entitled “Establishment of the United
Nations Population Award”,
Recalling also its decision to set up the Trust Fund for the United Nations Population Award
and to finance all costs relating to the Award from the investment income of the Fund,
Stressing the importance of the Award in promoting excellence in the field of population and
development for the reduction of poverty and for sustainable development,
Noting that the investment income of the Trust Fund has fallen below the monetary value of
the Award and related expenditure,
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund on the 2006 United Nations Population
Award;8
2. Invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for the United
Nations Population Award in order to generate adequate investment income and sustain the Award;
3.

Welcomes additional contributions from foundations, individuals and other sources.
RESOLUTION 61/269

Adopted at the 102nd plenary meeting, on 25 May 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.60 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Armenia, Belarus, Benin, Cameroon, China, Egypt, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guinea, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Madagascar, Mongolia, Morocco, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Senegal, Somalia, Suriname, Thailand, Uzbekistan

61/269. High-level Dialogue on Interreligious and Intercultural Understanding and
Cooperation for Peace
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 61/221 of 20 December 2006, entitled “Promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”, in particular its decision to
convene in 2007 a high-level dialogue on interreligious and intercultural cooperation for the
promotion of tolerance, understanding and universal respect on matters of freedom of religion or
belief and cultural diversity, in coordination with other similar initiatives in this area,
Acknowledging the developments in mutually reinforcing and mutually inclusive initiatives,
such as the progress in the implementation of the plan of action on dialogue among civilizations,
_______________
8

A/61/273.

8

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the appointment of the High Representative for the Alliance of Civilizations and other interfaith
and intercultural initiatives at the national, regional, interregional and international levels,
1. Decides to hold the High-level Dialogue on Interreligious and Intercultural
Understanding and Cooperation for Peace on 4 and 5 October 2007 at the ministerial or highest
possible level, and decides that it shall be organized as follows:
(a) Three plenary meetings will be held, one on the morning of 4 October and two on
5 October 2007;
(b) The overall theme of the High-level Dialogue will be “Interreligious and intercultural
cooperation for the promotion of tolerance, understanding and universal respect on matters of
freedom of religion or belief and cultural diversity”;
2. Also decides to hold an informal interactive hearing on the afternoon of 4 October with
representatives of civil society, including representatives of non-governmental organizations and
the private sector, to be chaired by the President of the General Assembly;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly to determine the list of invited
participants to the informal interactive hearing and its exact format and organization, in
consultation with Member States, taking into account the views of the High Representative for the
Alliance of Civilizations, the relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council, and to prepare an informational note on the organization of work of the informal
interactive hearing;
4. Also requests the President of the General Assembly to include in his closing remarks
the highlights of the informal interactive hearing and, later, to circulate a summary of the
discussions of the hearing;
5. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in
cooperation with the concerned United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and other
relevant bodies of the United Nations system, to contribute to the preparation of the High-level
Dialogue and the informal interactive hearing.
RESOLUTION 61/270
Adopted at the 103rd plenary meeting, on 15 June 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.61 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Botswana, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, India, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

61/270. The Ethiopian Millennium
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular the achievement of international cooperation in the economic, social and cultural fields,
Affirming the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, adopted by the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirtyfirst session,9 for its appeal for greater solidarity on the basis of recognition of cultural diversity, of
awareness of the unity of humankind and of the development of intercultural exchanges,
_______________
9

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirtyfirst Session, Paris, 15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum: Resolutions, chap. V, resolution 25,
annex I.

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, adopted at the High-level Plenary Meeting of
the General Assembly,10 which recognizes, inter alia, that all cultures and civilizations contribute
to the enrichment of humankind,
Acknowledging that the Ethiopian Millennium starts on 12 September 2007,
Taking note of the decision of the Government of Ethiopia to celebrate the Ethiopian
Millennium through various activities aimed at advancing the national socio-economic, political
and cultural goals,
Bearing in mind the contribution of the decision of the Government of Ethiopia to celebrate
the Ethiopian Millennium towards the promotion of the culture of peace at the national, regional
and international levels,
Welcoming the Declaration on the Ethiopian Millennium adopted by the Assembly of the
African Union at its eighth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 29 and 30 January 2007,11 in
which it recognized the Ethiopian Millennium as a unique African occasion and called upon all
member States of the African Union, the Commission of the African Union and regional
economic communities to extend their support towards its successful celebration,
Recognizes the year from 12 September 2007 to 11 September 2008 as the year
commemorating the Ethiopian Millennium.
RESOLUTION 61/271
Adopted at the 103rd plenary meeting, on 15 June 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.62 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

61/271. International Day of Non-Violence
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations, including the principles and purposes
contained therein,
Recalling its resolutions 53/243 A and B of 13 September 1999, containing the Declaration
on a Culture of Peace and the Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, 55/282 of 7 September
2001 on the International Day of Peace and 61/45 of 4 December 2006 on the International
Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World, 2001–2010, as
well as other relevant resolutions,

_______________
10
11

See resolution 60/1.
See African Union, document Assembly/AU/Dec. 1–6 (VIII).

10

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Bearing in mind that non-violence, tolerance, full respect for all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, democracy, development, mutual understanding and respect for
diversity are interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming the universal relevance of the principle of non-violence, and desiring to secure a
culture of peace, tolerance, understanding and non-violence,
1. Decides, with effect from the sixty-second session of the General Assembly and
guided by the Charter of the United Nations, to observe the International Day of Non-Violence on
2 October each year, with the International Day being brought to the attention of all people for its
celebration and observance on this date;
2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, regional and
non-governmental organizations and individuals to commemorate the International Day of NonViolence in an appropriate manner and to disseminate the message of non-violence, including
through education and public awareness;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to recommend ways and means by which the United
Nations system and the United Nations Secretariat could, within existing resources, assist Member
States, upon request, in organizing activities to commemorate the International Day of NonViolence;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to take necessary measures, within existing
resources, for the observance by the United Nations of the International Day of Non-Violence;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed at its
sixty-third session of the implementation of the present resolution, within the United Nations
system, as regards the observance of the International Day of Non-Violence.
RESOLUTION 61/272
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.63,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

61/272. Commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to the follow-up to the
outcome of the special session on children
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration and the Plan of Action contained in the final document of the
special session of the General Assembly on children, entitled “A world fit for children”,12 and
recognizing that their implementation is a major contribution to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and to protecting the rights and promoting the well-being of
children,
Recalling the provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,13 which reflect the
commitment of Member States to protect the rights and interests of children,
Acknowledging that the Convention on the Rights of the Child,14 the most universally
embraced human rights treaty in history, and the Optional Protocols thereto,15 contain a
comprehensive set of international legal standards for the protection and well-being of children,
_______________
12

Resolution S-27/2, annex.
See resolution 60/1.
14
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
15
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531; and ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
13

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling its resolution 58/282 of 9 February 2004 devoted to the follow-up to the outcome
of the special session on children,
Recalling also its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and coordinated
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields,
Bearing in mind that, by 2007, several of the time-bound and quantified commitments set
out in the Declaration and the Plan of Action should have been met and that other targets are to be
met by 2010 and 2015,
1. Decides to convene a commemorative high-level plenary meeting to evaluate progress
made in the implementation of the Declaration and the Plan of Action contained in the document
entitled “A world fit for children”12 on 11 and 12 December 2007;
2. Encourages all Member States and observers to be represented and to address the
commemorative high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly at the highest possible level;
3. Decides that the commemorative high-level plenary meeting will comprise plenary
meetings and two thematic interactive round tables;
4. Also decides that the President of the General Assembly, the President of the
Economic and Social Council, the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund will address the commemorative high-level plenary meeting at its
opening plenary meeting;
5. Invites intergovernmental organizations and entities that have observer status in the
General Assembly, relevant entities of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as those
accredited to or in a collaborative relationship or partnership with the United Nations Children’s
Fund, to participate in the commemorative high-level plenary meeting;
6. Decides that a girl and a boy, selected through a process led by the President of the
General Assembly and organized by the United Nations Children’s Fund, and a representative of a
non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council will
address the commemorative high-level plenary meeting at its closing plenary meeting;
7. Requests the President of the General Assembly, following consultations to be held
with all Member States no later than 30 September 2007, with due regard to gender balance and
equitable geographical representation, to draw up and circulate a list of three speakers for the
closing plenary meeting in accordance with paragraph 6 above and a list of twenty children and
twenty representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, as well as those accredited to or in a collaborative relationship or
partnership with the United Nations Children’s Fund, who will participate in the two round tables
on the understanding that ten children and ten representatives of non-governmental organizations
will participate in each of the round tables and that non-governmental organizations in a
collaborative relationship or partnership with the United Nations Children’s Fund will be
considered on a no-objection basis for a final decision by the General Assembly;
8. Also requests the President of the General Assembly, following consultations with all
Member States and with support from the United Nations Children’s Fund, to finalize
organizational arrangements for the commemorative high-level plenary meeting, including the
assignment of participants and the identification of themes and chairpersons for the two interactive
round tables;
9. Encourages Member States and observers to include children and young people in
their delegations participating in the commemorative high-level plenary meeting;
12

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive analytical report on
progress achieved and challenges remaining in implementing the commitments set out in the
Declaration and the Plan of Action at least six weeks prior to its consideration by the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session;
11. Decides that the chairpersons of the interactive round tables will present summaries of
the discussions at the closing plenary meeting;
12. Requests the President of the General Assembly to hold open consultations with
Member States, the Observer State and observers in order to prepare, as an outcome document to
be adopted at the commemorative high-level plenary meeting, a brief declaration reaffirming the
commitments to the full implementation of the Declaration and the Plan of Action contained in the
document entitled “A world fit for children”;
13. Decides that the arrangements for the commemorative high-level plenary meeting will
in no way create a precedent for other similar events of the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 61/292
Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 2 August 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.65,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

61/292. Revitalizing the role and authority of the General Assembly and strengthening its
performance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions relating to the revitalization of its work, including
resolutions 46/77 of 12 December 1991, 47/233 of 17 August 1993, 48/264 of 29 July 1994,
51/241 of 31 July 1997, 52/163 of 15 December 1997, 55/14 of 3 November 2000, 55/285 of
7 September 2001, 56/509 of 8 July 2002, 57/300 of 20 December 2002, 57/301 of 13 March
2003, 58/126 of 19 December 2003, 58/316 of 1 July 2004, 59/313 of 12 September 2005 and
60/286 of 8 September 2006,
Stressing the importance of implementing resolutions on the revitalization of its work,
Commending the President of the General Assembly for her efforts during the sixty-first
session, in particular with regard to holding thematic debates on issues of high importance to the
Member States, as well as increasing the visibility of the Assembly and its work in the public,
especially the media,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, at its sixty-second session, an update to
his report16 on the implementation of resolutions on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly, in particular resolutions 58/126, 58/316, 59/313, 60/286 and the present
resolution;
2. Decides to establish, at its sixty-second session, an ad hoc working group on the
revitalization of the General Assembly, open to all Member States, to evaluate and assess the
status of implementation of relevant resolutions, to identify ways to further enhance the role,
authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly, inter alia, by building on previous
resolutions, and to submit a report thereon to the Assembly.

_______________
16

A/61/483.

13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 61/293
Adopted at the 107th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.68,
sponsored by: Germany, Switzerland

61/293. Prevention of armed conflict
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003,
Bearing in mind its responsibilities, functions and powers under the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular with respect to matters related to the prevention of armed conflict,
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item entitled
“Prevention of armed conflict”.
RESOLUTION 61/294
Adopted at the 107th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.66
and Add.1, sponsored by: Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Honduras, Ireland, Italy, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Spain, Timor-Leste, Uganda, Uruguay, Zambia, Zimbabwe

61/294. Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/11 of 27 October 1986, in which the Atlantic Ocean, in the region
situated between Africa and South America, was solemnly declared a zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic,
Reaffirming that the questions of peace and security and those of development are
interrelated and inseparable, and considering that cooperation among States, in particular those of
the region, for peace and development is essential for the promotion of the objectives of the zone
of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic,
Reaffirming also the importance of the purposes and objectives of the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic as a basis for the promotion of cooperation among the countries
of the region,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of Member States towards fulfilling the goals of the
zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic and their engagement in its revitalization by,
among other actions, holding thematic workshops in the framework of the Luanda Initiative, as a
preparatory process of the sixth ministerial meeting of the zone, held in Luanda, on 18 and
19 June 2007,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, in which it urged States of the region to continue their
actions aimed at fulfilling the objectives of the zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic, especially through the implementation of specific programmes,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,17

_______________
17

A/60/253 and Add.1.

14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Stresses the role of the zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic as a forum
for increased interaction among its member States, and acknowledges the valuable contribution
made by the first Africa-South America Summit, held in Abuja from 26 to 30 November 2006,
particularly in reference to paragraph 7 of the Abuja Declaration in which participants mandated
the strengthening of regional cooperation on peace and security among organizations and
mechanisms of which they were members, mentioning the zone as an important instrument for
consolidating peace and security;
2. Welcomes the holding of the sixth ministerial meeting of the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic, and takes note with appreciation of the adoption of the Luanda
Final Declaration18 as well as the Luanda Plan of Action;19
3. Calls upon States to cooperate in the promotion of the objectives of peace and
cooperation established in resolution 41/11 and reiterated in the Luanda Final Declaration and the
Luanda Plan of Action;
4. Requests the relevant organizations, organs and bodies of the United Nations system,
and invites relevant partners, including international financial institutions, to render all appropriate
assistance that States members of the zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic may
seek in their joint efforts to implement the Luanda Plan of Action;
5. Welcomes the offer by the Government of Uruguay to host the seventh ministerial
meeting of the States members of the zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic in 2009;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the implementation of its resolution 41/11 and
subsequent resolutions on the zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic under review
and to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session, taking into account, inter
alia, the views expressed by Member States;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic”.
RESOLUTION 61/295
Adopted at the 107th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2007, by a recorded vote of 143 to 4, with 11 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/61/L.67 and Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Nauru, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Portugal,
Serbia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste

*

In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United

_______________
18
19

A/61/1019, annex II.
Ibid., annex I.

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, United States of America
Abstaining: Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burundi, Colombia, Georgia, Kenya, Nigeria, Russian Federation,
Samoa, Ukraine

61/295. United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Human Rights Council contained in its resolution
1/2 of 29 June 2006,20 by which the Council adopted the text of the United Nations Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 61/178 of 20 December 2006, by which it decided to defer
consideration of and action on the Declaration to allow time for further consultations thereon, and
also decided to conclude its consideration before the end of the sixty-first session of the General
Assembly,
Adopts the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples as contained in
the annex to the present resolution.
Annex
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and good faith
in the fulfilment of the obligations assumed by States in accordance with the Charter,
Affirming that indigenous peoples are equal to all other peoples, while recognizing the right
of all peoples to be different, to consider themselves different, and to be respected as such,
Affirming also that all peoples contribute to the diversity and richness of civilizations and
cultures, which constitute the common heritage of humankind,
Affirming further that all doctrines, policies and practices based on or advocating superiority
of peoples or individuals on the basis of national origin or racial, religious, ethnic or cultural
differences are racist, scientifically false, legally invalid, morally condemnable and socially unjust,
Reaffirming that indigenous peoples, in the exercise of their rights, should be free from
discrimination of any kind,
Concerned that indigenous peoples have suffered from historic injustices as a result of, inter
alia, their colonization and dispossession of their lands, territories and resources, thus preventing
them from exercising, in particular, their right to development in accordance with their own needs
and interests,
Recognizing the urgent need to respect and promote the inherent rights of indigenous
peoples which derive from their political, economic and social structures and from their cultures,
spiritual traditions, histories and philosophies, especially their rights to their lands, territories and
resources,
Recognizing also the urgent need to respect and promote the rights of indigenous peoples
affirmed in treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements with States,
_______________
20

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/61/53), part one, chap. II,
sect. A.

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the fact that indigenous peoples are organizing themselves for political,
economic, social and cultural enhancement and in order to bring to an end all forms of
discrimination and oppression wherever they occur,
Convinced that control by indigenous peoples over developments affecting them and their
lands, territories and resources will enable them to maintain and strengthen their institutions,
cultures and traditions, and to promote their development in accordance with their aspirations and
needs,
Recognizing that respect for indigenous knowledge, cultures and traditional practices
contributes to sustainable and equitable development and proper management of the environment,
Emphasizing the contribution of the demilitarization of the lands and territories of
indigenous peoples to peace, economic and social progress and development, understanding and
friendly relations among nations and peoples of the world,
Recognizing in particular the right of indigenous families and communities to retain shared
responsibility for the upbringing, training, education and well-being of their children, consistent
with the rights of the child,
Considering that the rights affirmed in treaties, agreements and other constructive
arrangements between States and indigenous peoples are, in some situations, matters of
international concern, interest, responsibility and character,
Considering also that treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements, and the
relationship they represent, are the basis for a strengthened partnership between indigenous
peoples and States,
Acknowledging that the Charter of the United Nations, the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights21 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,21 as well as the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,22 affirm the fundamental
importance of the right to self-determination of all peoples, by virtue of which they freely
determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development,
Bearing in mind that nothing in this Declaration may be used to deny any peoples their right
to self-determination, exercised in conformity with international law,
Convinced that the recognition of the rights of indigenous peoples in this Declaration will
enhance harmonious and cooperative relations between the State and indigenous peoples, based
on principles of justice, democracy, respect for human rights, non-discrimination and good faith,
Encouraging States to comply with and effectively implement all their obligations as they
apply to indigenous peoples under international instruments, in particular those related to human
rights, in consultation and cooperation with the peoples concerned,
Emphasizing that the United Nations has an important and continuing role to play in
promoting and protecting the rights of indigenous peoples,
Believing that this Declaration is a further important step forward for the recognition,
promotion and protection of the rights and freedoms of indigenous peoples and in the
development of relevant activities of the United Nations system in this field,
Recognizing and reaffirming that indigenous individuals are entitled without discrimination
to all human rights recognized in international law, and that indigenous peoples possess collective
rights which are indispensable for their existence, well-being and integral development as peoples,
_______________
21
22

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that the situation of indigenous peoples varies from region to region and from
country to country and that the significance of national and regional particularities and various
historical and cultural backgrounds should be taken into consideration,
Solemnly proclaims the following United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples as a standard of achievement to be pursued in a spirit of partnership and mutual respect:
Article 1
Indigenous peoples have the right to the full enjoyment, as a collective or as individuals, of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms as recognized in the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights23 and international human rights law.
Article 2
Indigenous peoples and individuals are free and equal to all other peoples and individuals
and have the right to be free from any kind of discrimination, in the exercise of their rights, in
particular that based on their indigenous origin or identity.
Article 3
Indigenous peoples have the right to self-determination. By virtue of that right they freely
determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development.
Article 4
Indigenous peoples, in exercising their right to self-determination, have the right to
autonomy or self-government in matters relating to their internal and local affairs, as well as ways
and means for financing their autonomous functions.
Article 5
Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain and strengthen their distinct political, legal,
economic, social and cultural institutions, while retaining their right to participate fully, if they so
choose, in the political, economic, social and cultural life of the State.
Article 6
Every indigenous individual has the right to a nationality.
Article 7
1. Indigenous individuals have the rights to life, physical and mental integrity, liberty and
security of person.
2. Indigenous peoples have the collective right to live in freedom, peace and security as
distinct peoples and shall not be subjected to any act of genocide or any other act of violence,
including forcibly removing children of the group to another group.
Article 8
1. Indigenous peoples and individuals have the right not to be subjected to forced
assimilation or destruction of their culture.
2.

States shall provide effective mechanisms for prevention of, and redress for:

_______________
23

Resolution 217 A (III).

18

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(a) Any action which has the aim or effect of depriving them of their integrity as distinct
peoples, or of their cultural values or ethnic identities;
(b) Any action which has the aim or effect of dispossessing them of their lands, territories
or resources;
(c) Any form of forced population transfer which has the aim or effect of violating or
undermining any of their rights;
(d)

Any form of forced assimilation or integration;

(e) Any form of propaganda designed to promote or incite racial or ethnic discrimination
directed against them.
Article 9
Indigenous peoples and individuals have the right to belong to an indigenous community or
nation, in accordance with the traditions and customs of the community or nation concerned. No
discrimination of any kind may arise from the exercise of such a right.
Article 10
Indigenous peoples shall not be forcibly removed from their lands or territories. No
relocation shall take place without the free, prior and informed consent of the indigenous peoples
concerned and after agreement on just and fair compensation and, where possible, with the option
of return.
Article 11
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to practise and revitalize their cultural traditions and
customs. This includes the right to maintain, protect and develop the past, present and future
manifestations of their cultures, such as archaeological and historical sites, artefacts, designs,
ceremonies, technologies and visual and performing arts and literature.
2. States shall provide redress through effective mechanisms, which may include
restitution, developed in conjunction with indigenous peoples, with respect to their cultural,
intellectual, religious and spiritual property taken without their free, prior and informed consent or
in violation of their laws, traditions and customs.
Article 12
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to manifest, practise, develop and teach their
spiritual and religious traditions, customs and ceremonies; the right to maintain, protect, and have
access in privacy to their religious and cultural sites; the right to the use and control of their
ceremonial objects; and the right to the repatriation of their human remains.
2. States shall seek to enable the access and/or repatriation of ceremonial objects and
human remains in their possession through fair, transparent and effective mechanisms developed
in conjunction with indigenous peoples concerned.
Article 13
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to revitalize, use, develop and transmit to future
generations their histories, languages, oral traditions, philosophies, writing systems and literatures,
and to designate and retain their own names for communities, places and persons.
2. States shall take effective measures to ensure that this right is protected and also to
ensure that indigenous peoples can understand and be understood in political, legal and
administrative proceedings, where necessary through the provision of interpretation or by other
appropriate means.
19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Article 14
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to establish and control their educational systems
and institutions providing education in their own languages, in a manner appropriate to their
cultural methods of teaching and learning.
2. Indigenous individuals, particularly children, have the right to all levels and forms of
education of the State without discrimination.
3. States shall, in conjunction with indigenous peoples, take effective measures, in order
for indigenous individuals, particularly children, including those living outside their communities,
to have access, when possible, to an education in their own culture and provided in their own
language.
Article 15
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to the dignity and diversity of their cultures,
traditions, histories and aspirations which shall be appropriately reflected in education and public
information.
2. States shall take effective measures, in consultation and cooperation with the
indigenous peoples concerned, to combat prejudice and eliminate discrimination and to promote
tolerance, understanding and good relations among indigenous peoples and all other segments of
society.
Article 16
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to establish their own media in their own languages
and to have access to all forms of non-indigenous media without discrimination.
2. States shall take effective measures to ensure that State-owned media duly reflect
indigenous cultural diversity. States, without prejudice to ensuring full freedom of expression,
should encourage privately owned media to adequately reflect indigenous cultural diversity.
Article 17
1. Indigenous individuals and peoples have the right to enjoy fully all rights established
under applicable international and domestic labour law.
2. States shall in consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples take specific
measures to protect indigenous children from economic exploitation and from performing any
work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with the child’s education, or to be harmful to the
child’s health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development, taking into account their
special vulnerability and the importance of education for their empowerment.
3. Indigenous individuals have the right not to be subjected to any discriminatory
conditions of labour and, inter alia, employment or salary.
Article 18
Indigenous peoples have the right to participate in decision-making in matters which would
affect their rights, through representatives chosen by themselves in accordance with their own
procedures, as well as to maintain and develop their own indigenous decision-making institutions.
Article 19
States shall consult and cooperate in good faith with the indigenous peoples concerned
through their own representative institutions in order to obtain their free, prior and informed
consent before adopting and implementing legislative or administrative measures that may affect
them.
20

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Article 20
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain and develop their political, economic
and social systems or institutions, to be secure in the enjoyment of their own means of subsistence
and development, and to engage freely in all their traditional and other economic activities.
2. Indigenous peoples deprived of their means of subsistence and development are
entitled to just and fair redress.
Article 21
1. Indigenous peoples have the right, without discrimination, to the improvement of their
economic and social conditions, including, inter alia, in the areas of education, employment,
vocational training and retraining, housing, sanitation, health and social security.
2. States shall take effective measures and, where appropriate, special measures to ensure
continuing improvement of their economic and social conditions. Particular attention shall be paid
to the rights and special needs of indigenous elders, women, youth, children and persons with
disabilities.
Article 22
1. Particular attention shall be paid to the rights and special needs of indigenous elders,
women, youth, children and persons with disabilities in the implementation of this Declaration.
2. States shall take measures, in conjunction with indigenous peoples, to ensure that
indigenous women and children enjoy the full protection and guarantees against all forms of
violence and discrimination.
Article 23
Indigenous peoples have the right to determine and develop priorities and strategies for
exercising their right to development. In particular, indigenous peoples have the right to be
actively involved in developing and determining health, housing and other economic and social
programmes affecting them and, as far as possible, to administer such programmes through their
own institutions.
Article 24
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to their traditional medicines and to maintain their
health practices, including the conservation of their vital medicinal plants, animals and minerals.
Indigenous individuals also have the right to access, without any discrimination, to all social and
health services.
2. Indigenous individuals have an equal right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health. States shall take the necessary steps with a view to
achieving progressively the full realization of this right.
Article 25
Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain and strengthen their distinctive spiritual
relationship with their traditionally owned or otherwise occupied and used lands, territories, waters
and coastal seas and other resources and to uphold their responsibilities to future generations in
this regard.
Article 26
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to the lands, territories and resources which they
have traditionally owned, occupied or otherwise used or acquired.

21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Indigenous peoples have the right to own, use, develop and control the lands,
territories and resources that they possess by reason of traditional ownership or other traditional
occupation or use, as well as those which they have otherwise acquired.
3. States shall give legal recognition and protection to these lands, territories and
resources. Such recognition shall be conducted with due respect to the customs, traditions and land
tenure systems of the indigenous peoples concerned.
Article 27
States shall establish and implement, in conjunction with indigenous peoples concerned, a
fair, independent, impartial, open and transparent process, giving due recognition to indigenous
peoples’ laws, traditions, customs and land tenure systems, to recognize and adjudicate the rights
of indigenous peoples pertaining to their lands, territories and resources, including those which
were traditionally owned or otherwise occupied or used. Indigenous peoples shall have the right to
participate in this process.
Article 28
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to redress, by means that can include restitution or,
when this is not possible, just, fair and equitable compensation, for the lands, territories and
resources which they have traditionally owned or otherwise occupied or used, and which have
been confiscated, taken, occupied, used or damaged without their free, prior and informed
consent.
2. Unless otherwise freely agreed upon by the peoples concerned, compensation shall
take the form of lands, territories and resources equal in quality, size and legal status or of
monetary compensation or other appropriate redress.
Article 29
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to the conservation and protection of the
environment and the productive capacity of their lands or territories and resources. States shall
establish and implement assistance programmes for indigenous peoples for such conservation and
protection, without discrimination.
2. States shall take effective measures to ensure that no storage or disposal of hazardous
materials shall take place in the lands or territories of indigenous peoples without their free, prior
and informed consent.
3. States shall also take effective measures to ensure, as needed, that programmes for
monitoring, maintaining and restoring the health of indigenous peoples, as developed and
implemented by the peoples affected by such materials, are duly implemented.
Article 30
1. Military activities shall not take place in the lands or territories of indigenous peoples,
unless justified by a relevant public interest or otherwise freely agreed with or requested by the
indigenous peoples concerned.
2. States shall undertake effective consultations with the indigenous peoples concerned,
through appropriate procedures and in particular through their representative institutions, prior to
using their lands or territories for military activities.
Article 31
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their
cultural heritage, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, as well as the
manifestations of their sciences, technologies and cultures, including human and genetic
22

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

resources, seeds, medicines, knowledge of the properties of fauna and flora, oral traditions,
literatures, designs, sports and traditional games and visual and performing arts. They also have
the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their intellectual property over such cultural
heritage, traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions.
2. In conjunction with indigenous peoples, States shall take effective measures to
recognize and protect the exercise of these rights.
Article 32
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to determine and develop priorities and strategies for
the development or use of their lands or territories and other resources.
2. States shall consult and cooperate in good faith with the indigenous peoples concerned
through their own representative institutions in order to obtain their free and informed consent
prior to the approval of any project affecting their lands or territories and other resources,
particularly in connection with the development, utilization or exploitation of mineral, water or
other resources.
3. States shall provide effective mechanisms for just and fair redress for any such
activities, and appropriate measures shall be taken to mitigate adverse environmental, economic,
social, cultural or spiritual impact.
Article 33
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to determine their own identity or membership in
accordance with their customs and traditions. This does not impair the right of indigenous
individuals to obtain citizenship of the States in which they live.
2. Indigenous peoples have the right to determine the structures and to select the
membership of their institutions in accordance with their own procedures.
Article 34
Indigenous peoples have the right to promote, develop and maintain their institutional
structures and their distinctive customs, spirituality, traditions, procedures, practices and, in the
cases where they exist, juridical systems or customs, in accordance with international human
rights standards.
Article 35
Indigenous peoples have the right to determine the responsibilities of individuals to their
communities.
Article 36
1. Indigenous peoples, in particular those divided by international borders, have the right
to maintain and develop contacts, relations and cooperation, including activities for spiritual,
cultural, political, economic and social purposes, with their own members as well as other peoples
across borders.
2. States, in consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples, shall take effective
measures to facilitate the exercise and ensure the implementation of this right.
Article 37
1. Indigenous peoples have the right to the recognition, observance and enforcement of
treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements concluded with States or their successors
and to have States honour and respect such treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements.
2. Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as diminishing or eliminating the rights
of indigenous peoples contained in treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements.
23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Article 38
States in consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples, shall take the appropriate
measures, including legislative measures, to achieve the ends of this Declaration.
Article 39
Indigenous peoples have the right to have access to financial and technical assistance from
States and through international cooperation, for the enjoyment of the rights contained in this
Declaration.
Article 40
Indigenous peoples have the right to access to and prompt decision through just and fair
procedures for the resolution of conflicts and disputes with States or other parties, as well as to
effective remedies for all infringements of their individual and collective rights. Such a decision
shall give due consideration to the customs, traditions, rules and legal systems of the indigenous
peoples concerned and international human rights.
Article 41
The organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations system and other
intergovernmental organizations shall contribute to the full realization of the provisions of this
Declaration through the mobilization, inter alia, of financial cooperation and technical assistance.
Ways and means of ensuring participation of indigenous peoples on issues affecting them shall be
established.
Article 42
The United Nations, its bodies, including the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, and
specialized agencies, including at the country level, and States shall promote respect for and full
application of the provisions of this Declaration and follow up the effectiveness of this
Declaration.
Article 43
The rights recognized herein constitute the minimum standards for the survival, dignity and
well-being of the indigenous peoples of the world.
Article 44
All the rights and freedoms recognized herein are equally guaranteed to male and female
indigenous individuals.
Article 45
Nothing in this Declaration may be construed as diminishing or extinguishing the rights
indigenous peoples have now or may acquire in the future.
Article 46
1. Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any State, people,
group or person any right to engage in any activity or to perform any act contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations or construed as authorizing or encouraging any action which would
dismember or impair, totally or in part, the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and
independent States.
2. In the exercise of the rights enunciated in the present Declaration, human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all shall be respected. The exercise of the rights set forth in this
24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Declaration shall be subject only to such limitations as are determined by law and in accordance
with international human rights obligations. Any such limitations shall be non-discriminatory and
strictly necessary solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and
freedoms of others and for meeting the just and most compelling requirements of a democratic
society.
3. The provisions set forth in this Declaration shall be interpreted in accordance with the
principles of justice, democracy, respect for human rights, equality, non-discrimination, good
governance and good faith.
RESOLUTION 61/296
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/61/L.70
and Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Angola, Austria, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Italy, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Portugal, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Sweden, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe

61/296. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations,24
Recalling the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as its
resolutions 55/218 of 21 December 2000, 56/48 of 7 December 2001, 57/48 of 21 November
2002 and 59/213 of 20 December 2004,
Recalling also the principles enshrined in the Constitutive Act of the African Union adopted
at the meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the African Union, held in Lomé from 10
to 12 July 2000,25
Recalling further the decisions and declarations adopted by the Assembly of the African
Union at all its ordinary and extraordinary sessions, held in Durban, South Africa, on 9 and
10 July 2002,26 in Maputo from 10 to 12 July 2003,27 in Addis Ababa from 6 to 8 July 2004,28 in
Abuja on 30 and 31 January 2005,29 in Sirte, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, on 4 and 5 July 2005,30 in
Khartoum on 23 and 24 January 2006,31 and in Banjul on 1 and 2 July 2006,32
Welcoming the adoption of the African Union Non-Aggression and Common Defence Pact
at the fourth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union,29 as an instrument to reinforce
cooperation among States members of the African Union in the areas of defence and security and
that can in particular contribute to the work of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union and its cooperation with the United Nations,
_______________
24

A/61/256 and Add.1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2158, No. 37733.
26
See A/57/744, annex III.
27
See A/58/626, annex I.
28
See African Union, documents Assembly/AU/Dec.33–54 (III) and Assembly/AU/Decl.12 & 13 (III).
29
See African Union, documents Assembly/AU/Dec.55–72 (IV) and Assembly/AU/Dec.1–2 (IV).
30
See African Union, documents Assembly/AU/Dec.73–90 (V), Assembly/AU/Dec.1–3 (V) and
Assembly/AU/Resolution 1 (V).
31
See African Union, documents Assembly/AU/Dec.91–110 (VI), Assembly/AU/Dec.1–3 (VI) and
Assembly/AU/Recommendations (VI).
32
See African Union, documents Assembly/AU/Dec. 111–132 (VII) and Assembly/AU/Decl.1–4 (VII).
25

25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming also the adoption of the framework for the ten-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union set out in the declaration on enhancing United Nations-African
Union cooperation, signed in Addis Ababa on 16 November 2006 by the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, 33 which highlights the key areas for
cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations, namely institution-building,
human resources development, youth unemployment, financial management, peace and security
issues, political, legal, social, economic, cultural and human development and food security and
environmental protection, as an important step to further enhance the level of cooperation between
the two organizations,
Acknowledging the decision of the African Union Peace and Security Council at its
68th meeting, held on 14 December 2006, on the establishment of a coordination and consultation
mechanism between the African Union Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council, taking note of discussions between the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council held in June 2007, and welcoming the agreement to
hold joint meetings at least once a year,34
Welcoming, while taking into account the role of the General Assembly, the statements by
the President of the Security Council of 19 November 2004 on the institutional relationship with
the African Union35 and of 28 March 2007 on the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union, in the maintenance of international peace
and security, 36
Bearing in mind the United Nations Declaration on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, contained in its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002, and its resolutions 57/7 of
4 November 2002, 58/233 of 23 December 2003, 59/254 of 23 December 2004, 60/222 of
23 December 2005 and 61/229 of 22 December 2006 on the New Partnership,
Stressing the urgent need to address the plight of refugees and internally displaced persons in
Africa,
Stressing also the need for extending the scope of cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union in the area of combating illegal exploitation of natural resources in Africa,
Emphasizing the importance of the effective, coordinated and integrated implementation of
the United Nations Millennium Declaration,37 the Doha Development Agenda,38 the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,39 the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation”)40 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome,41
Welcoming the efforts to enhance cooperation within the framework of a partnership
between the peace and security structures of the United Nations and the African Union in the
realm of conflict prevention and resolution, crisis management, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding in Africa,

_______________
33

A/61/630, annex.
See S/2007/386, annex.
35
S/PRST/2004/44; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2004–31 July 2005.
36
S/PRST/2007/7; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2006–31 July 2007.
37
See resolution 55/2.
38
See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
39
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
40
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
41
See resolution 60/1.
34

26

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Acknowledging the significant contribution of the 1999 Algiers Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, and noting the centrality of international partnership and
cooperation between the African Union, the relevant United Nations organs and the wider
international community in the global fight against terrorism,
Acknowledging also the contribution of the United Nations Liaison Office in strengthening
coordination and cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, as well as the
need to consolidate it so as to enhance its performance,
Convinced that strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union will contribute to the advancement of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
the principles of the Constitutive Act of the African Union and the development of Africa,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;24

2. Stresses the need for closer cooperation and coordination between the United Nations
system and the African Union, in accordance with the Cooperation Agreement as well as other
relevant memorandums of understanding between the two organizations, particularly in the
implementation of the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration37
and the 2005 World Summit Outcome41 and as regards achieving the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, at the national, subregional
and regional levels;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to request all relevant United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes to intensify their efforts to support cooperation with the African Union, including
through the implementation of the protocols to the Constitutive Act of the African Union25 and the
Treaty establishing the African Economic Community,42 and to assist in harmonizing the
programmes of the African Union with those of the African regional economic communities with
a view to enhancing regional economic cooperation and integration;
4. Also invites the Secretary-General to request the United Nations system to enhance its
support for the Commission of the African Union in the implementation of its Strategic Plan
(2004–2007);
5. Requests the United Nations system, while acknowledging its primary role in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and security, to intensify its assistance to the
African Union, as appropriate, in strengthening the institutional and operational capacity of its
Peace and Security Council and in coordinating with other international partners when needed, in
particular in the following areas:
(a) Development of its early warning system, including the Situation Room of the Peace
and Security Directorate;
(b)

Training of civilian and military personnel, including a staff exchange programme;

(c) Regular and continued exchange and coordination of information, including between
the early warning systems and mediation mechanisms of the two organizations;
(d) Peace support missions of the African Union in its various member States, in particular
in the area of communication and other related logistical support;
(e) Capacity-building for peacebuilding before and after the cessation of hostilities on the
continent;
(f) Support for the Peace and Security Council in taking humanitarian action on the
continent in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council;

_______________
42

A/46/651, annex.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(g)

The full establishment of the African standby force and the military staff committee;

(h) Enhancement of the institutional capacity of regional peace support training centres for
States members of the African Union;
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council;
6. Calls upon the United Nations system to support the African Union and its member
States in their efforts to implement the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals;
7. Calls for the implementation of the declaration on enhancing United Nations-African
Union cooperation: framework for the ten-year capacity-building programme for the African
Union,33 and in this regard, requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations Secretariat and to implement its mandate with
respect to meeting the special needs of Africa;
8. Recognizes the need for sustainable and predictable financing and operational and
logistical support for African Union peacekeeping operations and the crucial role the United
Nations has to play with the international community to work towards a solution quickly, and to
that end urges the United Nations to encourage donor countries, in consultation with the African
Union, to contribute to adequate funding, training and logistical support for African countries in
their efforts to enhance their peacekeeping capabilities, with a view to enabling those countries to
participate actively in peacekeeping operations within the framework of the Protocol relating to
the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council and the framework of the United Nations,
and looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General on these issues;
9. Stresses the urgent need for the United Nations and the African Union to develop close
cooperation and concrete programmes aimed at addressing the problems posed by illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and anti-personnel mines, within the framework of the
relevant declarations and resolutions adopted by the two organizations;
10. Calls upon the United Nations system, the African Union and the international
community to intensify their cooperation in the global fight against terrorism through the
implementation of the relevant international and regional treaties and protocols and, in particular,
the African Plan of Action adopted in Algiers on 14 September 2002, as well as their support for
the operation of the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism, inaugurated in Algiers
in October 2004;
11. Calls upon the United Nations system to intensify its efforts, in collaboration with the
African Union, in combating illegal exploitation of natural resources, particularly in conflict areas,
in accordance with relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and the African
Union;
12. Encourages the United Nations system to effectively support the efforts of the African
Union by urging the international community to strive for the successful and timely completion of
the Doha round of trade negotiations, including negotiations aimed at substantial improvements in
areas such as trade-related measures, including market access and regional economic integration,
to promote sustainable growth in Africa;
13. Invites the United Nations system to enhance its support for African countries in their
efforts to implement the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;40
14. Encourages the United Nations to take special measures to address the challenges of
poverty eradication through debt cancellation, enhanced official development assistance, increases
in flows of foreign direct investment and transfers of affordable and appropriate technology;
15. Calls upon the United Nations system to accelerate the implementation of the Plan of
Action contained in the document entitled “A world fit for children”, adopted on 10 May 2002 at

28

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the special session of the General Assembly on children,43 and to provide assistance, as
appropriate, to the African Union and its member States in this regard;
16. Calls upon the United Nations system and the African Union to develop a coherent
and effective strategy, including through joint programmes and activities, for the promotion and
protection of human rights in Africa, within the framework of the implementation of regional and
international treaties, resolutions and plans of action adopted by the two organizations;
17. Urges the United Nations system to increase its support for Africa in the
implementation of the declaration of the extraordinary summit meeting of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity on HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and
other related infectious diseases, held in Abuja in April 2001,44 and the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS45 so as to arrest the spread of these diseases, inter alia, through sound
capacity-building in human resources;
18. Also urges the United Nations system to continue to implement resolution 58/149 of
22 December 2003 on assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa, and
effectively to support African countries in their effort to incorporate the problems of refugees into
national and regional development plans;
19. Requests the United Nations system to cooperate with the African Union and its
member States in the implementation of appropriate policies for the promotion of the culture of
democracy, good governance, respect for human rights and the rule of law, and the strengthening
of democratic institutions which will enhance the popular participation of the peoples of the
continent in these issues, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Constitutive Act of
the African Union and the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;46
20. Urges the Secretary-General to encourage the United Nations system to work towards
ensuring the effective and equitable representation of African men and women at senior and policy
levels at the respective headquarters of its organizations and in their regional fields of operation;
21. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, working in collaboration, to review every two years the progress made in the
cooperation between the two organizations, and requests the Secretary-General to include the
results of the review in his next report;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session on the implementation of the present resolution.

_______________
43

See resolution S-27/2.
Organization of African Unity, document OAU/SPS/ABUJA/3.
45
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
46
A/57/304, annex.
44

29

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
No.

61/267.

Title

Page

Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations ......................................................................................................................................... 32
Resolution A .......................................................................................................................................................... 32
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 32

61/291.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects ...................................... 33

31

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTIONS 61/267 A and B
61/267. Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations
Resolution A
Adopted at the 96th plenary meeting, on 16 May 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/409/Add.1, para. 9)1

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular paragraph 165 of its resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005, and its
resolutions 59/281 of 29 March 2005, 59/300 of 22 June 2005, 60/263 of 6 June 2006 and 60/289
of 8 September 2006,
Reaffirming its resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as its resolutions 59/300 and
60/263, and the need for the United Nations to implement its policy of zero tolerance of sexual
exploitation and abuse in its peacekeeping operations, as recommended by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations,2
Reaffirming also the need for a comprehensive strategy of assistance to victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations staff or related personnel,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to take strong and effective steps in this
regard,
1. Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on its
second resumed session of 2006, held on 18 December 2006;
2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee
contained in paragraphs 1 to 5 of its report.3
Resolution B
Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 24 July 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/409/Add.2, para. 11)4

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular paragraph 165 of its resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005, and its
resolutions 59/281 of 29 March 2005, 59/300 of 22 June 2005, 60/263 of 6 June 2006 and 60/289
of 8 September 2006,
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt,
Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
2
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part one,
chap. III, para. 55.
3
A/61/19 (Part I).
4
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt,
Japan, Nigeria and Poland.

32

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Reaffirming its resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as its resolutions 59/300, 60/263,
and 61/267 A of 16 May 2007, and the need for the United Nations to implement its policy of zero
tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse in its peacekeeping operations, as recommended by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,5
Reaffirming also the need for a comprehensive strategy of assistance to victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations staff or related personnel,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to take strong and effective steps in this
regard,
1. Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on its
2007 resumed session, held on 11 June 2007;6
2. Endorses the recommendation of the Special Committee contained in paragraph 3 of
its report.
RESOLUTION 61/291
Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 24 July 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/409/Add.2, para. 11)7

61/291. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolutions 60/263 of 6 June 2006, 60/289 of 8 September 2006
and 61/267 A of 16 May 2007,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including through its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the
field of peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping
operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations make to
peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations expressed by Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the
effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;8

_______________
5

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part one,
chap. III, para. 55.
6
A/61/19 (Part III). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement
No. 19.
7
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt,
Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
8
A/61/19 (Parts I–III). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session,
Supplement No. 19.

33

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee,
contained in paragraphs 15 to 232 of its report;9
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take
all necessary steps to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special
Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the future in the Special
Committee for three consecutive years as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman
of the Special Committee, become members at the following session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its
efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects and shall review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new
proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this
field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects”.

_______________
9

A/61/19 (Part II), chap. III. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session,
Supplement No. 19.

34

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

*

61/9.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi............................................................................................................37
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................................37

61/233.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors .....................................................38
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................................38

61/247.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire ...................................................................................................40
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................................40

61/248.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea ...........................................................................................42
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................................42

61/249.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste ......................................................................................45
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................................45
Resolution C ................................................................................................................................................................................47

61/250.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.....................................................................................................50
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................................50
Resolution C ................................................................................................................................................................................53

61/258.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council ........................................................................................................................57

61/260.

Programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2007.......................................................................................................58

61/261.

Administration of justice at the United Nations ........................................................................................................................59

61/262.

Conditions of service and compensation for officials other than Secretariat officials: members of the
International Court of Justice and judges and ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda ............................................................................................63

61/263.

Strengthened and unified security management system...........................................................................................................65

61/264.

Liabilities and proposed funding for after-service health insurance benefits ..........................................................................69

61/265.

Audit and investigative reviews of the tsunami relief operations conducted by the United Nations Secretariat,
funds and programmes and the specialized agencies................................................................................................................71

61/273.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007..................................................................72

61/274.

Comprehensive proposal on appropriate incentives to retain staff of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.........................................................................................73

61/275.

Terms of reference for the Independent Audit Advisory Committee and strengthening the Office of Internal
Oversight Services.......................................................................................................................................................................74

61/276.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
cross-cutting issues......................................................................................................................................................................79

_______________
* Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chairman or another officer of the Bureau of the
Committee.

35

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

61/277.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy ...........................................................................................89

61/278.

Consolidation of peacekeeping accounts...................................................................................................................................91

61/279.

Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations.....................................91

61/280.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus ............................................................................................98

61/281.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ...................................101

61/282.

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor .....................................................................................105

61/283.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia.............................................................................................106

61/284.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.............................................................................................109

61/285.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo ......................................................................112

61/286.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia...............................................................................................................114

61/287.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force ........................................................................................117

61/288.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone .....................................................................................................120

61/289.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan ..........................................................................................................121

61/290.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara...............................................................124

36

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 61/9 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/547/Add.2, para. 6)

61/9.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
B1
The General Assembly,

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Burundi 2 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3
Recalling Security Council resolution 1545 (2004) of 21 May 2004, by which the Council
authorized, for an initial period of six months as from 1 June 2004, with the intention to renew it
for further periods, the deployment of a peacekeeping operation called the United Nations
Operation in Burundi, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Operation, the last of which was resolution 1692 (2006) of 30 June 2006, by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 31 December 2006,
Recalling also its resolution 58/312 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/9 A of 31 October 2006,
and its decision 61/554 of 4 April 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Burundi as
at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 18.9 million United
States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only thirty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
_______________
1

Resolution 61/9, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 49
and corrigendum (A/61/49 and A/61/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 61/9 A.
2
A/61/716 and Corr.1.
3
A/61/852/Add.6.

37

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Operation for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;2
9. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be credited their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
income in the total amount of 69,015,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June
2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of
23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
10. Encourages Member States that are owed credits referred to in paragraph 9 above to
apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has outstanding assessed
contributions;
11. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 69,015,000 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 9
above;
12. Also decides that the decrease of 2,304,500 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 69,015,000 dollars referred to in paragraphs 9 and 11 above;
13. Further decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the
item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi”.
RESOLUTION 61/233 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/631/Add.1, para. 6)

61/233. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the
Board of Auditors
B4
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/249 B of 18 June 2004, 59/264 B of 22 June 2005, 60/234 B of
30 June 2006 and 61/233 A of 22 December 2006,

_______________
4

Resolution 61/233, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 49
and corrigendum (A/61/49 and A/61/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 61/233 A.

38

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements for the twelvemonth period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 and the report of the Board of Auditors on the
United Nations peacekeeping operations, 5 the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the report of the Board of Auditors on the accounts of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 20066 and the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended
30 June 2006,7
1. Accepts the audited financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;5
2. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Board of Auditors;8
3. Recalls its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993, in which it decided that the costs
of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for the period beginning 16 June 1993 that
were not covered by voluntary contributions should be treated as expenses of the Organization to
be borne by Member States in accordance with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations;
4. Reiterates that the issue of outstanding assessed contributions is a policy matter of the
General Assembly, and urges all Member States to make every possible effort to ensure the
payment of their assessed contributions in full;
5. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the report of the
Board of Auditors;6
6. Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of its report and the streamlined
format thereof;
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations
for the financial period ended 30 June 2006;7
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the related recommendations of the Advisory
Committee in a prompt and timely manner, subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to indicate an expected time frame for the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors as well as the priorities for their
implementation, including the office-holders to be held accountable;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the next report on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, a full explanation for the delays in the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board for the period ended 30 June 2006 or the prior periods.

_______________
5

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/61/5), vol. II.
A/61/866.
7
A/61/811.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/61/5), vol. II, chap. II.
6

39

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 61/247 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/621/Add.1, para. 6)

61/247. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
B9
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire 10 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11
Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of 27 February 2004, by which the
Council established the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of twelve
months as from 4 April 2004, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was resolution 1739 (2007) of 10 January 2007, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 30 June 2007,
Recalling also its resolution 58/310 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/247 A of 22 December
2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
129.8 million United States dollars, representing some 7 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-four Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
_______________
9

Resolution 61/247, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 49
and corrigendum (A/61/49 and A/61/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 61/247 A.
10
A/61/673 and A/61/773.
11
A/61/852/Add.12.

40

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
11. Decides to revert to the issue of the establishment of international and United Nations
Volunteer support posts after a review of the staffing structure of the Operation is conducted;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Operation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Operation for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;12
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire the amount of 493,698,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008,
inclusive of the amount of 470,856,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation, 19,645,600
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 3,196,700 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 493,698,400 dollars at
a monthly rate of 41,141,500 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution
61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008,
as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
11,381,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 9,165,200 dollars
approved for the Operation, the prorated share of 1,999,700 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 216,900 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
_______________
12

A/61/673.

41

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
52,376,700 dollars for the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
19. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 52,376,700 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18
above;
20. Further decides that the decrease of 737,600 dollars in staff assessment income in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits from the
amount of 52,376,700 dollars referred to in paragraph 18 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Operation, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
RESOLUTION 61/248 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/617/Add.1, para. 6)

61/248. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
B13
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea14 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15
Recalling Security Council resolution 1312 (2000) of 31 July 2000, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1741 (2007) of 30 January 2007,

_______________
13

Resolution 61/248, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 49
and corrigendum (A/61/49 and A/61/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 61/248 A.
14
A/61/720 and A/61/842.
15
A/61/852/Add.9.

42

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling also its resolution 55/237 of 23 December 2000 on the financing of the Mission
and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/248 A of
22 December 2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation any voluntary contributions made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 47.6 million
United States dollars, representing some 3.9 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only twenty-two Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
43

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;16
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea the amount of 118,988,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June
2008, inclusive of 113,483,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 4,734,900 dollars for
the support account for peacekeeping operations and 770,400 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 9,915,725 dollars for
the period from 1 to 31 July 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
16. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
281,225 dollars for the period from 1 to 31 July 2007, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 236,700 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 40,167 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of
4,358 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics
Base;
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 109,072,975 dollars for the
period from 1 August 2007 to 30 June 2008 at a monthly rate of 9,915,725 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in its resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council
to extend the mandate of the Mission;
18. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,093,475 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,603,700 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 441,833 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 47,942 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
35,857,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 35,857,300 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19
above;
_______________
16

A/61/720.

44

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

21. Also decides that the decrease of 966,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 35,857,300 dollars referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
RESOLUTIONS 61/249 B and C
61/249. Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
Resolution B
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 2 April 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/644/Add.1, para. 6)

B17
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste18 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,19
Recalling Security Council resolution 1704 (2006) of 25 August 2006, by which the Council
decided to establish a follow-on mission in Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste, for an initial period of six months, with the intention to renew it for further periods,
and its subsequent resolution 1745 (2007) of 22 February 2007, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 26 February 2008,
Recalling also its resolution 61/249 A of 22 December 2006 on the financing of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,

_______________
17

Resolution 61/249, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 49
and corrigendum (A/61/49 and A/61/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 61/249 A.
18
A/61/759.
19
A/61/802.

45

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste as at 27 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
66.5 million United States dollars, representing some 47 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-six Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Recalls its resolution 60/266, section VI, paragraph 1, and re-emphasizes the
importance of ensuring coordination and collaboration of efforts with the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes and the implementation of a unified workplan, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take action to avoid duplicating functions and structures and to reflect the results of that
action in planning for the staffing and the proposed budget for the Mission for the period from
1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,19 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Decides to approve the establishment of a D-2 post for the Chief of Staff, a D-1 post
for the Chief Political Affairs Officer and a D-1 post for the Deputy Police Commissioner
responsible for administration and development;
12. Urges the Secretary-General, in the context of the proposed budget for the Mission for
the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, to review the staffing requirements of the Mission,
including the posts of the Chief of Staff, the Chief Political Affairs Officer and the Deputy Police
Commissioner responsible for administration and development;
13. Reaffirms its resolution 59/296, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of its relevant provisions and the relevant provisions of its resolution 60/266;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the Mission
is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;

46

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

15. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Budget estimates for the period from 25 August 2006 to 30 June 2007
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste the amount of 184,819,900 dollars for the establishment and maintenance
of the Mission for the period from 25 August 2006 to 30 June 2007, inclusive of the amount of
170,221,100 dollars previously authorized by the General Assembly for the Mission for the period
from 25 August 2006 to 31 March 2007 under the terms of its resolution 61/249 A;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 25 August 2006 to 30 June 2007
17. Also decides, taking into account the amount of 170,221,100 dollars already
apportioned for the Mission for the period from 25 August 2006 to 31 March 2007 under the
terms of its resolution 61/249 A, to apportion among Member States the additional amount of
14,598,800 dollars for the period from 25 August 2006 to 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolutions 58/256 of 23 December 2003 and 61/243 of 22 December 2006,
and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of
23 December 2003, and the scale of assessments for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of
22 December 2006;
18. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 1,402,600 dollars, representing the estimated additional staff assessment income
approved for the Mission for the period from 25 August 2006 to 30 June 2007;
19. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
20. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
21. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
22. Decides to keep under review during its sixty-first session the item entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”.
Resolution C
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/644/Add.2, para. 6)

C
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste20 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21
_______________
20
21

A/61/871 and Corr.1.
A/61/852/Add.17.

47

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1704 (2006) of 25 August 2006, by which the Council
decided to establish a follow-on mission in Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste, for an initial period of six months, with the intention to renew it for further periods,
and its subsequent resolution 1745 (2007) of 22 February 2007, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 26 February 2008,
Recalling also its resolutions 61/249 A of 22 December 2006 and 61/249 B of 2 April 2007
on the financing of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
82.4 million United States dollars, representing some 49 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only nineteen Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular with regard to the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens
owing to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Takes note of the recommendations contained in paragraph 23 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 and decides to retain the
levels of the Chief of Staff and the Deputy Police Commissioner responsible for administration
and development as proposed by the Secretary-General in his report;20
11. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive review of the staffing
structure of the Mission, including the posts of the Chief of Staff and the Deputy Police
48

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Commissioner responsible for administration and development, and to report thereon in his next
budget submission for the Mission;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste the amount of 160,589,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to
30 June 2008, inclusive of 153,159,800 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 6,390,300
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 1,039,800 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 105,675,538 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2007 to 26 February 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
4,456,419 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 3,981,902 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 428,059 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 46,458 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 54,914,362 dollars for the
period from 27 February to 30 June 2008 at a monthly rate of 13,382,492 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale
of assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
19. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,315,781 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,069,198 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 222,441 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 24,142 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;

49

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”.
RESOLUTIONS 61/250 B and C
61/250. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Resolution B
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 2 April 2007, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/61/657/Add.1,
para. 10),22 by a recorded vote of 135 to 3, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia

B23
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 24 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,25
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 1701 (2006)
of 11 August 2006, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force until 31 August 2007
and authorized an increase in the strength of the Force to a maximum of 15,000 troops,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/250 A of 22 December 2006,

_______________
22

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Pakistan (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
23
Resolution 61/250, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 49
and corrigendum (A/61/49 and A/61/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 61/250 A.
24
A/61/766.
25
A/61/803.

50

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997, 52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of
8 June 1999, 54/267 of 15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of 14 June 2001,
56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B of 27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003, 58/307 of
18 June 2004, 59/307 of 22 June 2005, 60/278 of 30 June 2006 and 61/250 A,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon with the task of formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the Force as of 28 February 2007, including
the contributions outstanding in the amount of 340.7 million United States dollars, representing
some 8 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only twelve Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply with General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307,
59/307, 60/278 and 61/250 A;
5. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide by General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307,
59/307, 60/278 and 61/250 A;
6. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
7. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying and
providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in Africa;
8. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
9. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,25 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
12. Recalls Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), and requests the Secretary-General
to continue to measure the accomplishments of the Force, including expected
accomplishment 1.1,24 fully in accordance with the Security Council mandate;
51

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Notes the establishment of a Strategic Military Cell as an ad hoc mechanism to provide
military strategic guidance for the Force, and emphasizes the need to ensure unity of command
and Headquarters coordination in military planning;
14. Stresses the need for equitable treatment for peacekeeping operations with respect to
their needs for adequate military planning capacity and logistical support, and requests the
Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive review of the Strategic Military Cell, including
clarification of its role and functioning, its relationship with the Military Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and lessons learned for the military
planning aspects of large-scale and complex existing and future peacekeeping operations, as well
as proposals for strengthening the capacity of the Military Division, and to submit a report thereon
to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-first session;
15. Reaffirms its resolution 59/296, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of its relevant provisions and the relevant provisions of its resolution 60/266;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the Force is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
18. Notes the significantly increased size and the increased area of operation of the Force,
and requests the Secretary-General to provide an analysis, to the extent possible, of the capacity
required to undertake the Force’s mandated activities in the context of the budget proposals for the
Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
19. Approves the proposed resources for the Strategic Military Cell, as an interim measure,
pending rejustification of resource requirements in the context of the proposed budget for the
Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
20. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure
the full implementation of paragraph 8 of its resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of its resolution 52/237,
paragraph 11 of its resolution 53/227, paragraph 14 of its resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of its
resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of its resolution 55/180 B, paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 A,
paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of its resolution 57/325, paragraph 13 of its
resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of its resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of its resolution 60/278 and
paragraph 21 of its resolution 61/250 A, stresses once again that Israel shall pay the amount of
1,117,005 dollars resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on this matter to the General Assembly at its current session;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
21. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon the amount of 403,089,300 dollars for the expansion of the Force for the period from
1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, inclusive of the amount of 257,340,400 dollars previously authorized
by the General Assembly under the terms of its resolution 61/250 A for the period from 1 July
2006 to 31 March 2007, and in addition to the amount of 97,579,600 dollars already appropriated
under the terms of its resolution 60/278 for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
22. Also decides to authorize the Secretary-General to extend the use of the commitment
authority, as approved in paragraph 23 of its resolution 61/250 A, until 30 June 2007, and requests
the Secretary-General to report actual expenditures in the context of the performance report on the
budget of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2006 to
30 June 2007;
23. Further decides to approve the decrease in the total estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Force under the terms of its resolutions 60/278 and 61/250 A for the period from
1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 from 6,844,200 dollars to 5,631,500 dollars;
52

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation
24. Decides, taking into account the amount of 97,579,600 dollars already apportioned
under the terms of its resolution 60/278 for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 and the
amount of 257,340,400 dollars already apportioned under the terms of its resolution 61/250 A for
the period from 1 July 2006 to 31 March 2007, to apportion among Member States the additional
amount of 145,748,900 dollars for the expansion of the Force for the period from 1 July 2006 to
30 June 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolutions 58/256 of
23 December 2003 and 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003 and the scale of
assessments for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
25. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be added to the apportionment among Member States, as provided
for in paragraph 24 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of
1,212,700 dollars, representing the decrease in the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the Force for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Force;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to keep under review during its sixty-first session, under the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item entitled
“United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
Resolution C
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/61/657/Add.2,
para. 12),26 by a recorded vote of 141 to 2, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia

_______________
26

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Pakistan (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).

53

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

C
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 27 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,28
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution
1701 (2006) of 11 August 2006, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force until
31 August 2007 and authorized an increase in the strength of the Force to a maximum of 15,000
troops,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/250 B of 2 April 2007,
Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997, 52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of
8 June 1999, 54/267 of 15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of 14 June 2001,
56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B of 27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003, 58/307 of
18 June 2004, 59/307 of 22 June 2005, 60/278 of 30 June 2006, 61/250 A of 22 December 2006
and 61/250 B,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon with the task of formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and
61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the Force as of 31 March 2007, including
the contributions outstanding in the amount of 141.6 million United States dollars, representing
some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-one
Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply with General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307,
59/307, 60/278, 61/250 A and 61/250 B;
5. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide by General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307,
59/307, 60/278, 61/250 A and 61/250 B;

_______________
27
28

A/61/829, A/61/870 and Corr.1 and A/61/883.
A/61/852/Add.16.

54

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
7. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
8. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
9. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,28 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
12. Recalls Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), reaffirms paragraph 12 of General
Assembly resolution 61/250 B, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to measure the
expected accomplishments of the Force fully in accordance with the mandate of the Council;
13. Takes note of the preliminary report of the Secretary-General on the Strategic Military
Cell,29 and notes that the creation of the Cell reflects an approach that is different from the
established structure and practices of the Secretariat and from the usual role of the Military
Adviser;
14. Recalls paragraph 14 of its resolution 61/250 B, and requests the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session on the
results of the comprehensive review of the Strategic Military Cell, including its recommended life
cycle, a rationale for its current staffing level, its relationship and modalities of coordination with
the Military Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat, its impact
on the efforts to achieve unity of command and integration in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the cost-effectiveness of its functioning, its interaction with other parts of the
Secretariat and the possibility of applying the approach to other missions, in particular the largescale and complex ones;
15. Emphasizes the importance of close coordination and cooperation between the
Director of the Strategic Military Cell and other senior managers of the Secretariat, in particular
the Military Adviser;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
18. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
19. Approves the proposed resources for the Strategic Military Cell, as an interim measure,
pending its further review, as outlined in paragraph 14 above;

_______________
29

A/61/883.

55

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

20. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure
the full implementation of paragraph 8 of its resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of its resolution
52/237, paragraph 11 of its resolution 53/227, paragraph 14 of its resolution 54/267, paragraph 14
of its resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of its resolution 55/180 B, paragraph 13 of its resolution
56/214 A, paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of its resolution 57/325,
paragraph 13 of its resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of its resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of its
resolution 60/278, paragraph 21 of its resolution 61/250 A and paragraph 20 of its resolution
61/250 B, stresses once again that Israel shall pay the amount of 1,117,005 dollars resulting from
the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996, and requests the Secretary-General to report on this matter
to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
21. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;30
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
22. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon the amount of 748,204,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008,
inclusive of 713,586,800 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 29,773,200 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 4,844,600 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
23. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 124,700,700 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 31 August 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
24. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 23 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 2,538,500 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,978,600
dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 505,100 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 54,800 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
25. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 623,503,900 dollars for the
period from 1 September 2007 to 30 June 2008 at a monthly rate of 62,350,383 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
26. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 25
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 12,692,300 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 9,892,900 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share
of 2,525,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account
and the prorated share of 273,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
27. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 23 above,
_______________
30

A/61/829.

56

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
18,027,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
28. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 18,027,100 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 27 above;
29. Also decides that the decrease of 637,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 18,027,100 dollars referred to in paragraphs 27 and 28 above;
30. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
31. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Force, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
32. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
33. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
RESOLUTION 61/258
Adopted at the 90th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/592/Add.3, para. 6)

61/258. Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/247 A and 60/248 of 23 December 2005, 60/255 of 8 May 2006,
60/281 of 30 June 2006 and 61/252 of 22 December 2006,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council,31 as well as the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,32
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;31

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,32 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.

Decides to approve the following positions for the United Nations Mission in Nepal:

(a) One Monitoring and Outreach Team Leader (P-3) and one Associate Civil Affairs
Officer (P-2) for each of the five regional components of the Civil Affairs Office;
_______________
31
32

A/61/525/Add.6 and 7.
A/61/640/Add.1 and 2.

57

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(b) One Senior Coordination Officer (P-5) for the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General;
(c)

One Gender Affairs Officer (P-3) for the Gender Affairs Section;

(d)

One Child Protection Officer (P-3) for the Child Protection Section;

4. Also decides to approve the following positions for the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi:
(a) One Best Practices Officer (P-4) for the Office of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General;
(b)

One Political Affairs Officer (P-3) for the Political Affairs Office;

5. Requests the Secretary-General, in executing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal, to ensure the timely recruitment of staff, the effective and efficient use of
resources under operational costs for, inter alia, facilities and infrastructure, air transportation and
communication, to improve coordination among United Nations entities operating in the mission
area, and to report thereon in the context of the second performance report on the programme
budget for the biennium 2006–2007;
6. Approves budgets totalling 122,064,900 United States dollars in respect of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (33,080,400 dollars), the United Nations representative to
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board (162,500 dollars) and the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (88,822,000 dollars) for the year 2007;
7. Takes note of the estimated unencumbered balance for the United Nations
representative to the International Advisory and Monitoring Board of 156,800 dollars;
8. Decides to appropriate, taking into account the unencumbered balance of 156,800
dollars, under the procedure provided for in paragraph 11 of annex I to its resolution 41/213 of
19 December 1986, an amount of 121,902,400 dollars under section 3, Political affairs, of the
programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007;
9. Also decides to appropriate an amount of 5,872,200 dollars under section 35, Staff
assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff
assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007.
RESOLUTION 61/260
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/654/Add.1, para. 6)

61/260. Programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2007
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular resolutions
31/192 of 22 December 1976, 50/233 of 7 June 1996, 54/16 of 29 October 1999, 55/230 of
23 December 2000, 56/245 of 24 December 2001, 57/284 A and B of 20 December 2002, 58/286
of 8 April 2004, 59/267 of 23 December 2004, 60/258 of 8 May 2006 and 61/238 of 22 December
2006,
Having considered the programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2007 contained
in paragraphs 59 to 83 of its report,33
_______________
33

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/62/34).

58

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Takes note with appreciation of the programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit
for 2007;33
2. Decides to consider jointly the annual report and programme of work of the Joint
Inspection Unit at the first part of its resumed sessions, starting from the sixty-second session.
RESOLUTION 61/261
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/61/832,
para. 8)

61/261. Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/307 of 15 April 2003, 59/266 of 23 December 2004 and 59/283
of 13 April 2005,
Reiterating that a transparent, impartial, independent and effective system of administration
of justice is a necessary condition for ensuring fair and just treatment of United Nations staff and is
important for the success of human resources reform in the Organization,
Affirming the importance of the United Nations as an exemplary employer,
Stressing the importance of measures to eliminate any conflicts of interest in the system of
administration of justice,
Recognizing that the current system of administration of justice at the United Nations is
slow, cumbersome, ineffective and lacking in professionalism, and that the current system of
administrative review is flawed,
Noting with concern that an overwhelming majority of individuals serving in the system of
administration of justice lack legal training or qualifications,
Noting that legal assistance to the management of the Organization is provided by a cadre of
professional lawyers,
Emphasizing the importance for the United Nations to have an efficient and effective system
of administration of justice so as to ensure that individuals and the Organization are held
accountable for their actions in accordance with relevant resolutions and regulations,
Expressing its appreciation for the consensual outcome of the seventh special session of the
Staff-Management Coordination Committee,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the administration of justice in the
Secretariat: implementation of resolution 59/283,34 the report of the Redesign Panel on the United
Nations system of administration of justice,35 the note by the Secretary-General thereon36 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37 the
reports of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Ombudsman, 38 the reports of the
Secretary-General on the administration of justice in the Secretariat: outcome of the work of the
Joint Appeals Board and statistics on the disposition of cases and the work of the Panel of
Counsel,39 the report of the Secretary-General on the administration of justice in the Secretariat40

_______________
34

A/61/342.
A/61/205.
36
A/61/758.
37
A/61/815.
38
A/60/376 and A/61/524.
39
A/60/72 and Corr.1 and A/61/71.
40
A/59/883.
35

59

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and the related report of the Advisory Committee, 41 the reports of the Secretary-General
concerning his practice in disciplinary matters and in cases of criminal behaviour,42 and the letter
dated 14 October 2005 from the President of the General Assembly to the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee,43
1. Welcomes the report of the Redesign Panel on the United Nations system of
administration of justice35 and the note by the Secretary-General thereon;36
2. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the administration of justice in
the Secretariat: implementation of resolution 59/283,34 the activities of the Ombudsman,38 the
administration of justice in the Secretariat: outcome of the work of the Joint Appeals Board and
statistics on the disposition of cases and the work of the Panel of Counsel,39 the administration of
justice in the Secretariat40 and the practice of the Secretary-General in disciplinary matters and in
cases of criminal behaviour,42 and the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;37,41
3.

Recalls its decision 61/511 B of 28 March 2007;

New system of administration of justice
4. Decides to establish a new, independent, transparent, professionalized, adequately
resourced and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent with the relevant rules
of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to ensure respect for the
rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability of managers and staff members
alike;
5. Recognizes that the introduction of the new system of administration of justice should,
inter alia, have a positive impact on staff-management relations and improve the performance of
both staff and managers;
6. Stresses the importance of increased transparency in decision-making and increased
accountability of managers for the system;
7. Also stresses the importance of the proper implementation of a sound performance
appraisal system as a potential means of avoiding conflict and the need to provide training to
improve the conflict-resolution skills of managers;
8.

Reaffirms staff rule 112.3, which relates to the financial liability of managers;

9. Stresses the need for comprehensive training for all participants in the system of
administration of justice as well as the dissemination of information among staff members about
the system of administration of justice, the remedies available and the rights and obligations of
staff members and managers;
10. Endorses the recommendation of the Redesign Panel to abolish the Panels on
Discrimination and Other Grievances, whose functions relating to the informal system will be
transferred to the Office of the Ombudsman and whose other functions will be transferred to the
formal system of administration of justice;
Informal system
11. Recognizes that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of the system of
administration of justice, and emphasizes that all possible use should be made of the informal
system in order to avoid unnecessary litigation;
_______________
41
A/60/7/Add.1. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
42
A/60/315 and A/61/206.
43
A/C.5/60/10.

60

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Decides to create a single integrated and decentralized Office of the Ombudsman for
the United Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to identify three posts for the Office of the
Ombudsman for Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi;
14. Emphasizes the need for the Ombudsman to encourage staff to seek resolution through
the informal system;
15. Affirms mediation as an important component of an effective and efficient informal
system of administration of justice that should be available to any party to the conflict at any time
before a matter proceeds to final judgement;
16. Decides to formally establish a Mediation Division located at Headquarters within the
Office of the United Nations Ombudsman to provide formal mediation services for the United
Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes;
17. Stresses that once parties have reached an agreement through mediation they are
precluded from litigating claims covered by the agreement and that parties should be able to bring
an action in the formal system to enforce the implementation of that agreement;
18. Emphasizes the role of the Ombudsman to report on broad systemic issues that he or
she identifies, as well as those that are brought to his or her attention;
Formal system
19. Agrees that the formal system of administration of justice should comprise two tiers,
consisting of a first instance, the United Nations Dispute Tribunal, and an appellate instance, the
United Nations Appeals Tribunal, rendering binding decisions and ordering appropriate remedies;
20. Decides that a decentralized United Nations Dispute Tribunal shall replace existing
advisory bodies within the current system of administration of justice, including the Joint Appeals
Boards, Joint Disciplinary Committees and other bodies as appropriate;
21. Emphasizes the importance of efficiency in the work practices of the United Nations
Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal;
22. Stresses that the effectiveness of the formal system will depend largely on the legal and
judicial expertise, experience, independence and other qualifications of the judges;
23. Agrees that legal assistance for staff should continue to be provided, and supports the
strengthening of a professional office of staff legal assistance;
24. Reiterates the invitation to staff representatives to further explore the possibility of
establishing a staff-funded scheme in the Organization that would provide legal advice and
support to the staff; staff representatives may consult with the Secretary-General as they deem
appropriate;
Management evaluation
25. Acknowledges the need to have in place a process for management evaluation that is
efficient, effective and impartial;
26. Reaffirms the importance of the general principle of exhausting administrative
remedies before formal proceedings are instituted;
27. Endorses the measures to ensure managerial accountability contained in paragraph 31
of the note by the Secretary-General;36

61

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Office of the Administration of Justice
28. Agrees to establish the Office of the Administration of Justice, headed by a senior
management-level official, which will have overall responsibility for the coordination of the
United Nations system of administration of justice;
Transitional measures
29. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Joint Appeals Boards, the Joint
Disciplinary Committees, the United Nations Administrative Tribunal and other bodies, as
appropriate, continue to function until the new system is operational with a view to clearing all
cases that are before them;
30. Urges the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure the proper functioning of
the current system of administration of justice prior to the implementation of the new system,
including through the implementation of General Assembly resolution 59/283;
31. Also urges the Secretary-General to continue the efforts needed to comply with the
time limits of the appeals process and to clear the existing backlog of cases at all stages;
Further reports
32. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the following issues regarding the
establishment of the new system of administration of justice:
(a) An in-depth analysis regarding the scope of persons who might be covered by the new
system of administration of justice;
(b) Proposals on the nomination and selection process for the Ombudsmen and judges,
taking into account the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions as set out in paragraphs 30 and 48 of its report;37
(c) Revised terms of reference for the Ombudsman, as appropriate, taking into account the
proposed changes and suggested locations;
(d) Detailed proposals for the strengthening of an office of staff legal assistance, including
information on practices in the governmental and intergovernmental sectors;
(e) Detailed and objective criteria for determining which peacekeeping operations and
special political missions should have elements of the system of administration of justice within
their post structures;
(f) The outcome of the Staff-Management Coordination Committee working group on
disciplinary proceedings, including on the recommendations of the Redesign Panel on
peacekeeping operations;
(g) Arrangements for the members of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal whose
terms of office are affected by the implementation of the new system;
(h)

Proposals for registries for the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and its interim rules;

(i) A proposal for management evaluation, taking into account the recommendations of
the Advisory Committee as set out in paragraphs 32 to 40 of its report;37
(j) Detailed information on the relationship and cost-sharing arrangements with the funds
and programmes and underlying cost parameters, taking into consideration the comments of the
Advisory Committee;
(k) A comparison of the cost of the current Joint Appeals Board/Joint Disciplinary
Committee/United Nations Administrative Tribunal system and the proposed United Nations
Dispute Tribunal/United Nations Appeals Tribunal system;
(l)
62

Resource requirements for the new system of administration of justice;

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

33. Also requests the Secretary-General to consolidate the above-mentioned reports to the
extent possible and to submit them to the General Assembly as a matter of priority no later than
the early part of the main part of its sixty-second session;
34. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly a report on
resources required for the implementation of the present resolution as a matter of priority at the
second part of its resumed sixty-first session;
Other issues
35. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the reports to be submitted
by the Secretary-General without prejudice to the role of the Fifth Committee as the Main
Committee entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters;
36. Decides to continue consideration of this item during its sixty-second session as a
matter of priority with the objective of implementing the new system of administration of justice
no later than January 2009.
RESOLUTION 61/262
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/592/Add.4, para. 17)

61/262. Conditions of service and compensation for officials other than Secretariat officials:
members of the International Court of Justice and judges and ad litem judges
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
The General Assembly,
Recalling section VIII of its resolution 53/214 of 18 December 1998, its resolutions 55/249
of 12 April 2001, 56/285 of 27 June 2002 and 57/289 of 20 December 2002 and section III of its
resolution 59/282 of 13 April 2005,
Recalling also Article 32 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, as well as
relevant General Assembly resolutions that govern the conditions of service and compensation for
the members of the International Court of Justice and the judges of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General 44 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,45
1. Reaffirms the principle that the conditions of service and compensation for nonSecretariat United Nations officials shall be separate and distinct from those for officials of the
Secretariat;
2. Recalls that the International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations;

_______________
44
45

A/61/554.
A/61/612 and Corr.1.

63

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Also recalls section III, paragraph 4, of its resolution 59/282, by which it decided to
increase the annual salary of the members of the International Court of Justice and the judges and
ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda by 6.3 per cent as an interim measure, and further recalls
section III, paragraph 8, of the resolution;
4. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in its report,45 subject to the provisions of the
present resolution;
5. Recalls its resolution 37/240 of 21 December 1982, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to review and update the travel and subsistence regulations for the International Court of
Justice, taking into account the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions in paragraph 15 of its report45 and bearing in mind the relevant
provisions of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly, for its approval, at its sixty-second session;
6. Endorses the proposal of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 80 of his
report44 whereby the annual salaries of the members of the International Court of Justice and the
judges and ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda would comprise an annual base salary with a
corresponding post adjustment per index point equal to one per cent of the net base salary to
which would be applied a post adjustment multiplier, as appropriate, taking into account the
proposals of the Secretary-General contained in paragraphs 83 and 84 of his report;44
7. Decides to set, effective 1 January 2007, the annual net base salary of the members of
the International Court of Justice and the judges and ad litem judges of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda at 133,500 United
States dollars, with a corresponding post adjustment per index point equal to one per cent of the
net base salary, to which would be applied the post adjustment multiplier for the Netherlands or
for the United Republic of Tanzania, as appropriate;
8. Also decides to maintain, as a transitional measure, in line with the provisions of
Article 32, paragraph 5, of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, the level of annual
salary approved in section III of its resolution 59/282 for the current members of the International
Court of Justice and the judges and ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the duration of their current
term of office or until such a time as this amount is overtaken by the application of the revised
annual salary system;
9. Further decides that any decisions with regard to the increase in the salary and other
allowances of the members of the International Court of Justice and the judges and ad litem judges
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda shall not constitute a precedent for any other category of judges working within the
United Nations system and that any decision regarding the service of any other category of judges
shall be taken on a case-by-case basis;
10. Decides to maintain, as an interim measure, the retirement benefits of the members of
the International Court of Justice and the judges of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda at the level resulting from the
annual base salary decided in section III of its resolution 59/282, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to revise article 1, paragraph 2, of the Pension Scheme Regulations accordingly;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixtysecond session on options for designing pension schemes for the members of the International
Court of Justice and the judges of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, including defined-benefit and defined-contribution
schemes, taking into account the possibility of calculating pensions on the basis of the number of
years served rather than the term of office;
64

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Recalls section I of its resolution 61/239 of 22 December 2006, and decides to extend
its decision on the level of education grant for the members of the International Court of Justice
and the judges of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on the additional
expenditures in the context of the second performance report on the programme budget for the
biennium 2006–2007 and the second performance reports on the budgets of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the
biennium 2006–2007.
RESOLUTION 61/263
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/592/Add.4, para. 17)

61/263. Strengthened and unified security management system
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004, by which it established
the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat in order to ensure a strengthened and
unified security management system for the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 56/255 of 24 December 2001, 56/286 of 27 June 2002, 57/305
of 15 April 2003, 58/270 of 23 December 2003 and 58/295 of 18 June 2004,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on a strengthened and unified
security management system for the United Nations;46 measures taken to improve the operational
administration of existing cost-sharing arrangements for safety and security;47 a strengthened and
unified security management system for the United Nations: standardized access control;48 and the
coverage of staff by the malicious acts insurance policy and security spending by organizations of
the United Nations system;49 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services concerning the
utilization and management of funds approved by the General Assembly for strengthening the
safety and security of United Nations premises 50 and the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting his comments thereon;51 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
global audit of field security management;52 and the note by the Secretariat on information and
communication technology security, business continuity and disaster recovery,53
Having also considered the relevant reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,54
Emphasizing the importance of safety and security for all United Nations staff and premises,
Recognizing the important steps taken by the Department of Safety and Security in ensuring
an effective and professional system-wide security management system,
_______________
46

A/61/531.
A/61/223.
48
A/60/695 and A/61/566.
49
A/60/317 and Corr.1.
50
A/60/291.
51
A/60/291/Add.1.
52
A/59/702.
53
A/60/677.
54
A/60/7/Add.9, 33 and 35 (for the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session,
Supplement No. 7A) and A/61/642.
47

65

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Underlining the importance of achieving the highest levels of professionalism and expertise
within the United Nations security management,
Reaffirming the critical importance of cooperation and coordination among all United
Nations entities in the implementation of a unified and integrated system-wide policy for safety
and security,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on a strengthened and unified
security management system for the United Nations;46 measures taken to improve the operational
administration of existing cost-sharing arrangements for safety and security;47 a strengthened and
unified security management system for the United Nations: standardized access control;48 and the
coverage of staff by the malicious acts insurance policy and security spending by organizations of
the United Nations system;49 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services concerning the
utilization and management of funds approved by the General Assembly for strengthening the
safety and security of United Nations premises50 and the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting his comments thereon;51 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
global audit of field security management;52 and the note by the Secretariat on information and
communication technology security, business continuity and disaster recovery;53
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Notes the intention of the Department of Safety and Security to gradually assume a
leading role in crisis response and crisis management for the United Nations system, and, in this
regard, requests the Secretary-General to provide detailed information on the project and its
related costs in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009;
4. Reaffirms the importance of a system-wide policy with regard to the safety and
security of United Nations staff, and the unity of command in this regard;
5. Emphasizes the need for a comprehensive safety and security policy framework at the
United Nations which provides the basis for the threat and risk assessment, cooperation with the
host countries, cost-sharing arrangements and operations of the Department of Safety and
Security, and requests the Secretary-General to present such a framework to the General Assembly
at the first part of its resumed sixty-second session;
6. Stresses that safety is a vital aspect of the mandate of the Department of Safety and
Security, and requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive review of the existing
safety programmes at Headquarters and the duty stations and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at the first part of its resumed sixty-second session;
7. Reiterates the principle that the United Nations Secretariat, organizations, funds and
programmes share a common responsibility for the safety and security of their staff;
8. Underlines the principle that funding for safety and security, based on cost-sharing
arrangements, should be clear, predictable and secure;
9. Recalls paragraphs 50 and 52 of section XI of its resolution 59/276, in which it called
upon all entities participating in the cost-sharing arrangements to provide prompt and secure
funding for such arrangements, and for those in arrears to ensure prompt payment of the
outstanding sums;
10. Notes the process of consultations being undertaken between the Department of Safety
and Security and the specialized agencies, funds and programmes, including on the strategic
directions and operational requirements of security arrangements for the field to encourage
ownership of the process and enhance their participation;
11. Notes with concern the situation outlined in paragraph 11 of the report of the
Secretary-General47 regarding the disagreement leading to the non-participation of the World
Bank in field-related security costs, and emphasizes that this could hinder the coordination of the
security operations in the field;
66

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Requests, in this regard, the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to carry out consultations with
the World Bank with the aim of resolving this issue, as a matter of urgency;
13. Invites the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and with the aim of achieving a workable costsharing arrangement:
(a) To ensure a common interpretation and implementation of all policies related to safety
and security;
(b) To encourage the development of practical methods to ensure the effective
implementation of the arrangements in place for the sharing of costs for safety and security across
the United Nations system;
(c) To continue discussions with the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination to achieve greater transparency in the different sources of security-related costs;
(d) To submit a report on steps taken to implement subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) above as
well as on expenditures related to safety and security as compared to the total expenditures of
specialized agencies, funds and programmes to the General Assembly at the first part of its
resumed sixty-second session;
14. Welcomes the efforts of host countries in undertaking their responsibilities to ensure
the safety and security of United Nations staff and premises;
15. Emphasizes that the primary responsibility for ensuring the safety and security of
United Nations staff and premises rests with the host country, emphasizes also the role of the
relevant host country agreements in defining this responsibility and, in this regard, reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 27 of section XI of its resolution 59/276
to report on the updating and revision of host country agreements as well as on the different
capacities of host countries to provide security to the United Nations;
16. Notes the efforts of the Department of Safety and Security in cooperating with the
national authorities of respective host countries in undertaking security risk assessment and
management, and urges the Department to ensure cooperation with host countries and to ensure
also that they are kept fully informed;
17. Recognizes the expanded training initiatives that have been implemented by the
Department of Safety and Security, and encourages the Department to maintain training as a high
priority and, in this context, to continue the collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, specialized agencies, funds and programmes, as well as the United Nations System
Staff College at Turin, Italy;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services
with a comprehensive management audit, inter alia, focusing on the structure of the Department of
Safety and Security, recruitment procedures and the implementation of section XI of General
Assembly resolution 59/276, and the interaction, cooperation and coordination of the Department
with other Secretariat entities, including but not limited to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and to report thereon to the Assembly at the first part of its resumed sixty-second
session;
19. Reaffirms paragraphs 17, 18 and 20 of section XI of its resolution 59/276;
20. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts of the Secretary-General to achieve as wide
a geographical balance as possible in the Department of Safety and Security, without
compromising the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, and urges the
Secretary-General to continue such efforts, taking into account the proposals to effectively
increase the representation of developing countries in the Secretariat requested of the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 17 of section X of its resolution 61/244 of 22 December 2006;

67

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

21. Recalls paragraph 1 of section XI of its resolution 61/244, in which it reaffirmed the
goal of 50/50 gender distribution in all categories of posts within the United Nations system,
especially at the senior and policymaking levels, with full respect for the principle of equitable
geographical distribution, in conformity with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, and
regrets that progress towards attaining this goal has been slow;
22. Takes note, in this context, of paragraph 42 of the report of the Secretary-General46 and
urges him to continue his efforts to achieve greater gender parity in the Department of Safety and
Security, and invites Member States to assist the Secretary-General in this regard;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to report on steps taken to implement paragraphs 20,
21 and 22 above to the General Assembly at the first part of its resumed sixty-second session;
24. Emphasizes the importance of gaining efficiency and effectiveness in the
implementation of the approved projects through improved streamlining, setting benchmarks,
meeting the timelines for different phases of the projects and administrative and managerial
oversight and strengthening of accountability;
25. Emphasizes also the importance of taking full account of lessons learned and best
practices at all duty stations with a view to facilitating the implementation of the first phase of the
standardized access control system, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon,
including on any possible efficiency gains, to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session;
26. Takes note of the observation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions contained in paragraph 16 of its report,55 and requests the Secretary-General
to develop and implement effective measures to guarantee the highest level of protection of
personal data available in the standardized access control system;
27. Decides that data related to representatives of Member States and officials other than
Secretariat officials and experts on mission, 56 as recorded in the standardized access control
system, shall be subject to the full implementation of the following provisions:
(a) The data shall be recorded for the sole purpose of establishing the presence or absence
of persons on the premises in case of emergency preparedness and recovery operations;
(b) Only staff members of the Department of Safety and Security, formally certified by the
Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security, and duly informed of the provisions of the
present paragraph, shall have access to the above-mentioned data, which shall under no
circumstances be made available to any other party either inside or outside the United Nations
unless so required for the purposes of the emergency preparedness and recovery operations
referred to in subparagraph (a) above;
(c) The data shall be automatically deleted from the standardized access control system
after completion of the read-in/read-out cycle, which will be no later than twenty-four hours for
access data and no later than thirty days for digital video storage data;
(d) Violation of any of the provisions stipulated in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) above
shall constitute serious misconduct under staff regulation 10.2;
28. Takes note of the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions in paragraph 7 of its report,55 and decides to revert to this issue in the context
of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009, also taking into account
paragraph 27 of section XI of its resolution 59/276;
29. Decides to authorize the Secretary-General to enter into commitments up to
20,208,000 United States dollars under the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007,
_______________
55
56

A/61/642.
See ST/SGB/2002/9.

68

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1,500,000 dollars under the budget for the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
1,975,000 dollars under the budget for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda , without
prejudice to the implementation of projects previously approved for the biennium 2006–2007, to
be reported in the context of the respective second performance reports, to implement the first
phase of the standardized access control system;
30. Stresses the importance of fully implementing projects provided for under section 32,
Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, of the programme budget for the
biennium 2006–2007, and requests the Secretary-General, in the event that the implementation of
the first phase referred to in paragraph 29 above will impact previously approved projects, to
report on such impact, for its consideration.
RESOLUTION 61/264
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/592/Add.4, para. 17)

61/264. Liabilities and proposed funding for after-service health insurance benefits
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/249 A of 23 December 2003, section III of its resolution 60/255
of 8 May 2006 and its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on liabilities and proposed funding
for after-service health insurance benefits57 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,58
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;57

2. Takes note also of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;58
3. Recalls section II of its resolution 52/220 of 22 December 1997, and notes with
concern that the preparation of the first report on the accrued liabilities for after-service health
insurance benefits took more than seven years after its endorsement of the initial recommendation
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the matter;
4. Notes, in this regard, that estimated after-service health insurance liabilities, in
particular on the accrual and actuarial basis, increased significantly during the intervening period;
5.

Notes also the growing costs of the after-service health insurance benefits programme;

6. Notes further that the International Public Sector Accounting Standards require that the
accrued after-service health insurance liabilities and future accrued expenses be recognized on the
face of the financial statements and that this requirement is irrespective of funding such liabilities;
7. Recalls section III, paragraph 3, of its resolution 60/255, whereby it recognized the
end-of-service accrued benefit liabilities reported by the Secretary-General;
8. Recognizes that after-service health insurance benefit liabilities have been accrued
from all sources of funding;
9. Recognizes also the need to specifically identify sources of the accrued after-service
health insurance benefit liabilities;

_______________
57
58

A/61/730.
A/61/791.

69

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to validate the accrued liabilities by using current data
and to apply the actuarial methodology prescribed by the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards, and to submit a detailed report, with figures audited by the Board of Auditors, on the
outcome of the validation and status of the liabilities, as well as additional information on
financing options, to the General Assembly no later than the main part of its sixty-third session;
11. Recognizes the complexity of the issue and the significant amount of the liabilities, and
requests the Secretary-General to present long-term strategies taking into account the various
options of financing and to report to it thereon no later than the main part of its sixty-third session;
12. Approves changes to the after-service health insurance provisions for new staff
members recruited on or after 1 July 2007 as follows:
(a) The alignment of after-service health insurance eligibility and subsidy requirements to
ten years’ minimum participation in the United Nations health insurance plans, eliminating the
buy-in provision after five years of participation;
(b) The application of a theoretical pension of a minimum of twenty-five years of service
as the basis of assessing retiree contributions as opposed to using the actual number of years of
service when less than twenty-five;
(c) The introduction of a minimum participation requirement for after-service health
insurance eligibility of dependents of at least five years at the time of retirement of the United
Nations employee, or two years if the spouse has coverage with an outside employer or a national
Government, except where the dependent is newly acquired within this period and is enrolled
within thirty days of the effective date of the dependent relationship;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report on measures aimed at reducing the
Organization’s costs related to health-care plans;
14. Decides to approve the establishment of an independent segregated special account to
record after-service health insurance accrued liabilities and account for related transactions;
15. Requests more comprehensive information and analysis based, inter alia, on the results
of the actuarial valuation of the after-service health insurance plan as at 31 December 2007, on the
following:
(a) The advantages and disadvantages for Member States of the “pay-as-you-go” option
of after-service health insurance liabilities versus the option of funding those liabilities;
(b) The projections regarding the proportion of staff in peacekeeping operations who will
be entitled to after-service health insurance benefits, taking into account, to the extent possible, the
career patterns of staff in peacekeeping missions;
(c) Differentiated levels of charge as a percentage of salary costs to be applied against
different funding sources, including the regular budget, peacekeeping and extrabudgetary funds,
taking into account, to the extent possible, different career patterns of staff financed against those
sources, that would be sufficient to finance after-service health insurance liabilities in a predictable
manner without building up a reserve;
(d)

The option of partial funding of the liability;

(e) The option of full funding over a longer period than envisaged in the report of the
Secretary-General;
(f) The proportion of the current accrued liability which relates to the different categories
of beneficiaries from all funding sources, namely, current retirees, active employees currently
70

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

eligible to retire, and active employees not eligible to retire, as well as multiple options to address
those after-service health insurance liabilities;
(g)

An after-service health insurance reserve fund and its investment strategies;

16. Stresses the importance of addressing this matter further and decides, pending the
validation of the accrued after-service health insurance liabilities and auditing by the Board of
Auditors, to revert to it, as a matter of priority, at its sixty-third session.
RESOLUTION 61/265
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/667/Add.1, para. 8)

61/265. Audit and investigative reviews of the tsunami relief operations conducted by the
United Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December 1999 and 59/272
of 23 December 2004,
Recalling also its resolutions 56/246 of 24 December 2001, 57/287 A and B of 20 December
2002, 58/101 B of 9 December 2003, 59/270 of 23 December 2004 and 60/259 of 8 May 2006,
Reaffirming its resolution 61/245 of 22 December 2006,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit and
investigative reviews of the tsunami relief operations conducted by the United Nations Secretariat,
funds and programmes and specialized agencies,59
1. Notes the efforts of the Office of Internal Oversight Services to coordinate a
consolidated report as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 60/259;
2. Takes note of the oversight activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services with
regard to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Indonesia, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Indonesia and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Sri Lanka, and notes with appreciation that most of
the recommendations made by the Office of Internal Oversight Services regarding the operations
of those offices have been implemented;
3. Recalls paragraph 14 of its resolution 60/259, and, regretting the lack of cooperation
with the Office of Internal Oversight Services in the preparation of the consolidated report on
internal audits and investigative reviews of the tsunami relief operation, as requested in its
resolution 60/259, again stresses the importance of full implementation of legislative decisions;
4. Recalls also paragraph 2 of its resolution 61/245, and decides to consider further the
issue of cooperation and coordination between the United Nations funds and programmes and the
specialized agencies, in particular relating to complex inter-agency programmes being
implemented by a number of entities of the United Nations system;
5. Recalls further that the Board of Auditors conducted a horizontal review of the
activities of the United Nations system in the aftermath of the tsunami, and looks forward to its
consideration thereof at its sixty-second session.
_______________
59

A/61/669.

71

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 61/273
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/592/Add.5, para. 8)

61/273. Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
The General Assembly,
I
Revised estimates resulting from decision S-4/101 adopted by the Human Rights
Council at its fourth special session in 2006 and resolutions adopted
at its fourth session in 2007
Recalling section V of its resolution 61/252 of 22 December 2006,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the revised estimates resulting
from decision S-4/101 adopted by the Human Rights Council at its fourth special session in 2006
and on the revised estimates resulting from resolutions adopted by the Council at its fourth session
in 200760 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,61
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;60

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;61
II
Financial situation of the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women
Recalling its decision 61/555 of 4 April 2007,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financial situation of the
International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women62 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,63
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;62

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,63 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Reaffirms that regular budget resources shall not be used to finance the activities of the
International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, in accordance with
articles VI and VII of its statute;
4. Notes that the Institute has previously requested supplementary funds from the regular
budget on an exceptional basis;
5. Reiterates its appeal to Member States, as a matter of urgency, to contribute voluntary
funds in support of the Institute and to honour existing pledges;

_______________
60

A/61/530/Add.2 and 3.
A/61/917.
62
A/61/897.
63
A/61/924.
61

72

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Calls upon the Institute to formulate its budget in such a way as to align it more
closely with the volume of voluntary resources available to it;
7. Calls upon the Secretary-General, in his report on the Institute to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session, to offer solutions for placing the financial situation of the
Institute on a more stable basis without recourse to regular budget funding, in line with the statute
of the Institute;
8. Decides, on an exceptional basis, to authorize the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments in an amount up to 367,800 United States dollars under section 9, Economic and
social affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007, subject to full
reimbursement, pending receipt of voluntary contributions;
III
Review of logical frameworks for special political missions for the period
from 1 January to 31 December 2007
Recalling section VII, paragraph 7, of its resolution 61/252,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the review of logical frameworks
for special political missions for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2007,64 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,65
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General64 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;65
2.

Endorses the proposal of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 7 of his report.
RESOLUTION 61/274

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/967, para. 6)

61/274. Comprehensive proposal on appropriate incentives to retain staff of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General 66 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,67
Recalling its resolutions 61/241 and 61/242 of 22 December 2006 on the financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 and the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991,
Recalling also section I.E of its resolution 61/239 of 22 December 2006,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;66

2. Underlines the importance it attaches to the Tribunals being able to function
effectively throughout their completion phases;
_______________
64

A/61/890.
A/61/919.
66
A/61/824.
67
A/61/923.
65

73

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3.

Emphasizes the specialized nature of the Tribunals;

4. Acknowledges that the retention of personnel in key positions of the Tribunals is
critical to enable the Tribunals to fulfil the completion strategy;
5. Notes with concern that there may be difficulties in retaining and recruiting key staff as
the Tribunals complete their mandates, as noted in the reports of the Secretary-General66 and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;67
6. Notes that a retention incentive could address possible difficulties in retaining
personnel in key positions, while other instruments should be explored;
7. Also notes that any measures aimed at retaining staff should clearly outline the
difficulties experienced by the Tribunals in retaining personnel in key positions during the
completion phases of the Tribunals;
8. Recognizes that the payment of a retention incentive is not provided for by the United
Nations common system and could have implications for the common system, and therefore
requests the International Civil Service Commission to advise it on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral contained in his report no later than the main part of its sixty-second session;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, without prejudging any decision on the
implementation of measures for staff retention, to submit a report to it no later than the first part of
its resumed sixty-second session, which would include cost implications and, inter alia:
(a) Updated human resources data, including on current and projected staff turnover, also
taking into account the expiration of contracts, the number of staff departures and the
identification of key positions where the problem of retention could arise;
(b) Drawdown plans for each Tribunal, which would show clearly the anticipated post
reductions for each year until the Tribunals complete their mandates;
(c) Non-monetary incentives and measures, including those that would take advantage of
the foreseen downsizing of staff at the Tribunals, such as outplacement, enhanced system-wide
coordination in the areas of career development, mobility and secondment, that are within the
United Nations common system and staff regulations and rules;
(d)

Clear justification for the possible payment of a retention incentive;

(e)

All legal aspects related to the implementation of a staff retention scheme;

(f) Alternative approaches to the calculation of the amount of a retention incentive,
including focusing the proposals on core positions, required years of service, possible cap
mechanisms and the timing of their payment, as well as the conditions attached to such retention
schemes.
RESOLUTION 61/275
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/980, para. 6)

61/275. Terms of reference for the Independent Audit Advisory Committee
and strengthening the Office of Internal Oversight Services
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December 1999, 59/272
of 23 December 2004 and 59/287 of 13 April 2005,
Recalling its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 45/248 B of 21 December 1990, 60/1
of 16 September 2005, 60/248 of 23 December 2005 and 61/245 and 61/246 of 22 December
2006,
74

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the updated terms of reference for
the Independent Audit Advisory Committee,68 the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69 the reports of the Secretary-General on strengthening
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services,70 the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions71 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on proposals for strengthening the Office,72
Reaffirming the separate and distinct roles of the internal and external oversight
mechanisms,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the updated terms of reference
for the Independent Audit Advisory Committee68 and on strengthening of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services;70
2. Reaffirms its oversight role, as well as the role of the Fifth Committee in administrative
and budgetary matters;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the updated terms of
reference for the Independent Audit Advisory Committee69 and on strengthening the Office of
Internal Oversight Services,71 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
4. Emphasizes the importance of establishing real, effective and efficient mechanisms for
responsibility and accountability in the United Nations;
5. Recalls its resolution 48/218 B, in particular paragraph 5 (c) of that resolution, as well
as paragraph 15 of its resolution 59/272, and in that regard emphasizes the role of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee in ensuring the operational independence of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services;
6. Emphasizes that the approval, change and discontinuation of legislative mandates are
the exclusive prerogative of intergovernmental legislative bodies;
7. Stresses that the Office of Internal Oversight Services shall not propose to the General
Assembly any change in the legislative decisions and mandates approved by intergovernmental
legislative bodies;
8. Emphasizes that the recruitment and promotion of staff of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Staff
Regulations and Rules of the Organization, taking into account Article 101, paragraph 3, of the
Charter;
I
Establishment of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee
1. Approves the terms of reference for the Independent Audit Advisory Committee, as
well as the criteria for its membership, as contained in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Decides to review the terms of reference of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee at its sixty-fifth session;

_______________
68

A/61/812.
A/61/825.
70
A/61/610 and A/61/810.
71
A/61/880.
72
A/60/901.
69

75

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Also decides to appropriate 282,800 United States dollars under section 1, Overall
policymaking, direction and coordination, 45,000 dollars under section 28D, Office of Central
Support Services, and 6,700 dollars under section 35, Staff assessment, to be offset by a
corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the programme
budget for the biennium 2006–2007;
II
Revised estimates relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
for the Office of Internal Oversight Services
1. Endorses the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions contained in paragraph 17 of its report71 to convert to established posts nine
posts for the Audit Division of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and sixteen posts for the
Investigations Division, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly in
the context of the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009 on the functions, structure and
work processes of the Investigations Division with a view to strengthening the investigation
function;
2. Approves the transfer of management consulting posts, and notes that the incumbents
carrying out the functions should not be disadvantaged by virtue of the transfer;
3. Decides to appropriate 601,400 dollars under section 28A, Office of the UnderSecretary-General for Management, to be offset by a corresponding reduction under section 29,
Internal oversight, of the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007;
III
Funding arrangements for the Office of Internal Oversight Services
1. Notes that the level of resources needed to strengthen the Office of Internal Oversight
Services is related to the strength of the internal controls of the Organization;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a robust and effective internal control
framework, including a mechanism of enterprise risk management, and to include in his report on
enterprise risk management and the internal control framework proposals to strengthen the Office
of Internal Oversight Services, in close cooperation with the Office;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, therefore, to submit to the General Assembly at
its sixty-second session revised funding arrangements for the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, bearing in mind the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions in paragraphs 31 to 40 of its report;71
4. Urges the governing bodies of the United Nations funds and programmes receiving
services from the Office of Internal Oversight Services to address the issue of the funding
arrangements of the Office in the light of the views of the Office and the funds and programmes.
Annex
Terms of reference for and criteria for membership in the
Independent Audit Advisory Committee
I.

Terms of reference

Role
1. The Independent Audit Advisory Committee, as a subsidiary body of the General Assembly,
serves in an expert advisory capacity and assists the Assembly in fulfilling its oversight
responsibilities.

76

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Responsibilities
2.

The responsibilities of the Committee are:

General
(a) To advise the General Assembly on the scope, results and effectiveness of audit as well
as other oversight functions;
(b) To advise the Assembly on measures to ensure the compliance of management with
audit and other oversight recommendations;
Internal oversight
(c) To examine the workplan of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, taking into
account the workplans of the other oversight bodies, with the Under-Secretary-General for
Internal Oversight Services and to advise the Assembly thereon;
(d) To review the budget proposal of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, taking into
account its workplan, and to make recommendations to the Assembly through the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; the formal report of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee should be made available to the Assembly and to the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions prior to their consideration of the budget;
(e) To advise the Assembly on the effectiveness, efficiency and impact of the audit
activities and other oversight functions of the Office of Internal Oversight Services;
Management of risk and internal controls
(f) To advise the Assembly on the quality and overall effectiveness of risk management
procedures;
(g)
Nations;

To advise the Assembly on deficiencies in the internal control framework of the United

Financial reporting
(h) To advise the Assembly on the operational implications for the United Nations of the
issues and trends apparent in the financial statements of the Organization and the reports of the
Board of Auditors;
(i) To advise the Assembly on the appropriateness of accounting policies and disclosure
practices and to assess changes and risks in those policies;
Other
(j) To advise the Assembly on steps to increase and facilitate cooperation among United
Nations oversight bodies.
Membership
3. The Committee shall comprise five members, no two of whom shall be nationals of the
same State, appointed by the General Assembly on the basis of equitable geographical
representation, personal qualifications and experience.
Meetings and reporting
4. The Committee may adopt its own rules of procedure, which shall be communicated to the
General Assembly. The Committee shall meet up to four times a year, in coordination with the
relevant activities of the United Nations and the Assembly and in accordance with Assembly
resolutions on the pattern of conferences. The Committee shall work on the basis of consensus.
Any three members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.
77

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. The Committee shall submit an annual report to the General Assembly containing its advice.
The Committee shall also report key findings and matters of importance to the Assembly at any
time. The Chairperson of the Committee shall attend hearings to respond to questions on the
activities and findings of the Committee.
Conditions of service
6. The members of the Committee shall receive a per diem and shall be reimbursed for travel
expenses incurred to attend the sessions of the Committee.
7. The members of the Committee shall be appointed and shall serve for three years, and can
be reappointed for a second and final term of three years, with the exception of two of the initial
five members of the Committee, who shall be appointed by drawing of lots to serve for four years.
Review of the terms of reference
8. The terms of reference and mandate of the Committee shall be subject to review by the
General Assembly.
Secretariat support
9. The Committee shall be supported by a dedicated secretariat that will operate with
autonomy similar to that of the secretariats of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and the International Civil Service Commission.
II.

Criteria for membership

Experience, qualifications and independence
10. All members of the Committee shall reflect the highest level of integrity and shall serve in
their personal capacity, and they shall not seek or receive instructions from any Government in
performing their duties. They shall be independent of the Board of Auditors, the Joint Inspection
Unit and the Secretariat and shall not hold any position or engage in any activity that could impair
their independence from the Secretariat or from companies that maintain a business relationship
with the United Nations, in fact or perception.
11. All members of the Committee must have recent and relevant senior-level financial, audit
and/or other oversight-related experience. Such experience should reflect, to the extent possible:
(a) Experience in preparing, auditing, analysing or evaluating financial statements that
present a breadth and level of complexity of accounting issues that are generally comparable to the
breadth and complexity of issues faced by the United Nations, including an understanding of
relevant accepted accounting principles;
(b) An understanding of and, if possible, relevant experience in the inspection, monitoring
and evaluation and investigative processes;
(c) An understanding of internal control, risk management and procedures for financial
reporting;
(d)
Nations.

A general understanding of the organization, structure and functioning of the United

12. Former senior United Nations Secretariat officials shall not be eligible for appointment to
the Committee for five years following their separation from service. The members of the
Committee shall not be eligible for appointment in the Secretariat for five years following the
expiry of their terms.

78

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Identification and selection
13. Members of the Committee shall be nominated by Member States and shall be appointed by
the General Assembly, preferably from a compendium of at least ten suitably qualified candidates,
with due regard being paid to equitable geographic representation. Before nominating candidates,
Member States are recommended to evaluate their candidates and attest to their qualifications on
the basis of paragraph 11 above on the criteria for membership in the Committee through
consultation with an international organization with relevant expertise in the functions performed
by audit and oversight organizations, such as the International Organization of Supreme Audit
Institutions, and to make this information available to Member States.
RESOLUTION 61/276
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/968, para. 20)

61/276. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations: cross-cutting issues
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, 49/233 B of 31 March 1995,
51/218 E of 17 June 1997, 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 58/315 of 1 July 2004, 59/296 of 22 June
2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations73 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,74 the annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on peacekeeping operations75 and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his
comments thereon,76 the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the evaluation of results-based
budgeting in peacekeeping operations77 and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his
comments thereon,78 the report of the Secretary-General on the improvement of internal controls
in the management, accounting and reporting of assets of all United Nations field missions,79 the
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the investigation conducted by the
Investigations Task Force into fraud and corruption allegations at Pristina Airport80 and the note
by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon,81 the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the audit of the standard costs applied to Headquarters overhead,82 the
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the global review of discipline in field
missions led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat,83 the report of the
Secretary-General on procedures for the purchase and utilization of vehicles and other equipment
by United Nations field missions,84 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the

_______________
73

A/60/696 and A/61/786.
A/61/852.
75
A/61/264 (Part II).
76
A/61/264 (Part II)/Add.1.
77
See A/60/709.
78
A/60/709/Add.1.
79
A/60/843.
80
A/60/720 and Corr.1.
81
A/60/720/Add.1.
82
A/60/682.
83
A/60/713.
84
A/60/842.
74

79

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

horizontal audit of fuel management in peacekeeping missions,85 the report of the SecretaryGeneral on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse,86 the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, including
policy development, implementation and full justification of proposed capacity on personnel
conduct issues,87 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,88 the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on its investigation into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in
the Ituri region (Bunia) in the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, 89 and the report of the Secretary-General on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration90 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,91
I
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 57/290 B, 59/296 and 60/266, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the full implementation of their relevant provisions;
2.

Appreciates the efforts of all peacekeeping personnel in the field and at Headquarters;

3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the general report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,74 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
4. Emphasizes that the submission of budget proposals by missions to Headquarters
should constitute part of the leadership and accountability functions of the Head of
Mission/Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
5. Takes note of the management initiatives proposed in sections III.B and III.C of the
report of the Secretary-General;92
6. Recalls section B, paragraphs 24 and 25, of its resolution 52/214 of 22 December
1997, and requests the Secretary-General to present his report in full conformity with the
provisions of those paragraphs;
7. Notes with concern that a number of reports requested in resolution 60/266 have not
been introduced during the current session, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
outstanding reports are submitted to it at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the possible application of the
relevant provisions of the present resolution to other field operations administered by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including special political missions, where applicable,
under the agenda item entitled “Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009”;
II
Budgeting and budget presentation
1.

Reaffirms the provisions of section II of its resolution 60/266;

2. Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting future budget proposals and
performance reports, to include information on the most significant management decisions relating to
the mission’s budget and its implementation, including those related to operational costs;
_______________
85

A/61/760 and Corr.1.
A/60/861.
87
A/60/862.
88
A/61/886.
89
A/61/841.
90
A/60/705.
91
A/60/929.
92
A/61/786.
86

80

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Notes with concern the late submission of the budgets of some peacekeeping
operations, which puts considerable strain on the work of the General Assembly and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and, while recognizing the challenges
faced in preparing budget proposals and related reports on peacekeeping and the special factors
affecting some missions, requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to improve the
quality and timely issuance of peacekeeping documents;
4. Reaffirms that budget submissions should reflect management improvements and
efficiency gains to be achieved and present future strategies in that regard;
5. Recognizes that mandate and operational changes may lead to variances in budget
implementation, and requests the Secretary-General to take further steps towards improving
budget assumptions and forecasts and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the second part
of its resumed sixty-second session;
6. Notes with concern the significant increase in the cancellation of prior-period
obligations in several missions, and requests the Secretary-General to improve control over
obligations;
7. Takes note of the observations contained in paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;74
III
Results-based budgeting
1. Reaffirms its resolution 55/231 of 23 December 2000, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to prepare the budgets for peacekeeping operations in full compliance with that
resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to integrate operational, logistical and financial aspects
fully in the planning phase of peacekeeping operations by linking results-based budgeting to the
mandate implementation plans of peacekeeping operations;
IV
Planning and staffing structure
1. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring that the work undertaken during the planning
phase preceding the deployment of missions is as effective and accurate as possible, and
emphasizes also the importance of drawing on lessons learned;
2. Notes the benchmarking analysis referred to in paragraph 26 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,74 and requests the SecretaryGeneral, when undertaking the analysis, also to take into account the complexities, mandate and
specificities of each mission;
V
Best practices
1. Recognizes the importance of incorporating lessons learned and best practices in the
planning and conduct of ongoing and future peacekeeping missions;
2. Notes that the policy on capturing best practices is still evolving, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on this issue to the General Assembly at the
second part of its resumed sixty-second session, including on how information on best practices is
being utilized in mission planning, as well as efficiency gains and improvements in effectiveness
being made as a result of those efforts;

81

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

VI
Use of consultants
Reaffirms section III of its resolution 60/266, and requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly on this subject at its sixty-second session;
VII
Staffing, recruitment and vacancy rates
1. Reaffirms that locally recruited mission staff may be recruited as international staff
only through the normal recruitment process in which they compete for international posts in
another mission along with other external candidates;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to review the standards for the recruitment of National
Professional Officers and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session for
its consideration and action;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, cognizant of the continuously high international
staff vacancy rates in many missions, to consider, when formulating budget submissions, greater
utilization of national staff, as appropriate, commensurate with the requirements of the mission
and its mandate;
4. Reaffirms its request contained in section I, paragraph 6, of its resolution 55/238 of
23 December 2000, and reiterates its concern over high vacancy and turnover rates for civilian staff
in some peacekeeping operations and, while recognizing efforts made to improve the vacancy rates,
reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
5. Takes note of paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,74 and requests the Secretary-General to review the staffing structure of
missions on an ongoing basis, bearing in mind, in particular, the mission’s mandate and concept of
operations, and to reflect this in his budget proposals, including full justification of any additional
posts proposed;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any delegation of authority to mission
officials with regard to recruitment is accompanied by appropriate steps to ensure accountability;
7. Takes note of paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,74 and recalls section II, paragraph 17, of its resolution 61/244 of
22 December 2006, in which it acknowledges that the interaction of United Nations personnel
with the local population is necessary and that language skills constitute an important element of
the selection and training processes, and therefore affirms that a good command of the official
language(s) spoken in the country of residence should be taken into account as an additional asset
during those processes;
VIII
Use of 300-series and 100-series appointments
1.

Recalls section XIV of its resolution 60/266;

2. Decides to continue to suspend the application of the four-year maximum limit for
appointments of limited duration until 31 December 2007;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in mind paragraph 2 above, to reappoint,
under the 100 series of the Staff Rules, those mission staff whose service under 300-series
contracts has reached the four-year limit by 31 December 2007, provided that their functions have
been reviewed and found necessary and their performance has been confirmed as fully
satisfactory, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the practice of using 300-series contracts
as the primary instrument for the appointment of new staff;
82

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

IX
Training
1. Emphasizes the importance of further steps to make training programmes more
relevant and cost-effective through, inter alia, the training of trainers and the use of
videoconferencing and e-learning where feasible;
2. Notes the increasing role of national staff in peacekeeping operations and the need to
build national capacities and provide professional development opportunities for national staff,
and emphasizes that national staff should be fully included in all relevant training programmes;
X
Death and disability claims
1. Emphasizes the importance of the expeditious settlement of all death and disability
claims as a measure of relief to the beneficiaries and of removing all bureaucratic impediments
delaying payments to the beneficiaries;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 52/177 of 18 December 1997, in which it authorized the
Secretary-General to implement without delay the administrative and payment arrangements and
procedures contained in section II of his report93 for the payment of awards in cases of death and
disability sustained by troops for incidents occurring after 30 June 1997;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure strict implementation of the procedures
approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 52/177 whereby, inter alia, in the case of
injury or illness resulting in permanent disfigurement or the permanent loss of a member or
function there shall be paid to the injured party a lump sum, the amount of which shall be
determined by the Secretary-General on the basis of the schedule set out in paragraph (b) of
annex V to the report of the Secretary-General93 and in accordance with the principles of
assessment set out in paragraph (c) of that annex, and applying, where necessary, proportionate
and corresponding amounts in cases of permanent disfigurement or loss of a member or function
not specifically referred to in the schedule;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the payment of awards in cases of
disability sustained by members of peacekeeping contingents and formed police units, civilian
police officers and military observers in incidents occurring after 30 June 1997 with a view to
ensuring that for those cases of permanent disfigurement or loss of a member or function
specifically referred to in the schedule of awards set out in annex V to the report of the SecretaryGeneral93 and appendix D to the Staff Rules, the amount of compensation paid by the United
Nations has not been less than the award levels set out in the schedule, and to report on the results
to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session;
5. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to settle death and disability claims as
soon as possible, but not later than three months from the date of submission of a claim;
6. Expresses deep concern about delays in the settlement of claims in respect of death
and disability, and requests the Secretary-General to take urgent measures to eliminate the existing
backlog of death and disability claims pending for more than three months and to report on the
progress made to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to officially inform Member States of incidents
involving their nationals in United Nations peacekeeping missions that may result in death or
disability claims, as well as of the procedures governing the submission of such claims, no later
than seventy-two hours from the time of the incident;

_______________
93

A/52/369.

83

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Stresses the importance of board of inquiry reports on incidents resulting in death and
disability being completed and submitted to United Nations Headquarters and to the Member
State concerned within the shortest possible period of time so as to ensure that the time limit
referred to in paragraph 5 above is respected;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive review of the
administrative and payment arrangements and procedures for the payment of compensation in
cases of death and disability sustained by members of peacekeeping contingents and formed
police units, civilian police officers and military observers with a view to simplifying, streamlining
and harmonizing the current process, and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at
the second part of its resumed sixty-second session addressing, inter alia, the following issues:
(a) Options to ensure the equal treatment of members of peacekeeping contingents and
formed police units, civilian police officers and military observers;
(b) The possible establishment of a deadline for the completion and submission of board
of inquiry reports and measures to ensure its observance;
(c) Clear delineation of responsibilities of the United Nations and the Member States in
the submission of documentation in support of death and disability claims;
(d) Full lists of documents to be submitted in support of death and disability claims by the
Member States and, where applicable, beneficiaries;
(e) Possible limits in the number of requests for documents besides those specified in the
lists referred to in subparagraph (d) above;
(f) The principle that in cases of doubt, death and disability claims are given sympathetic
consideration;
(g) Possible procedures for a simplified settlement of death and disability claims
whenever the Secretary-General is unable to complete the administrative procedures for
processing such claims within the established time limit;
10. Reaffirms the principles enunciated in section III, paragraph 1, of its resolution
49/233 A and in paragraph 1 of its resolution 50/223 of 11 April 1996;
XI
Military
1. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring the provision of good quality rations in
concluding the global contract on rations;
2. Decides to authorize the payment, as necessary, of mission subsistence allowance to
staff officers during in-mission official travel in cases where accommodation and/or food cannot
be provided by the mission and to review this issue in the context of the analysis requested in
paragraph 56 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;74
3. Endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General in paragraph 94 of his
overview report92 and the recommendations thereon of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, as set out in paragraph 35 of its report,74 and decides
that the support arrangements for staff officers should be revised accordingly;
4. Recognizes the importance of rapid deployment of military resources to the field, as
referred to in paragraphs 91 to 93 of the overview report of the Secretary-General,92 and requests
the Secretary-General to provide updated information on this matter in the context of his next
overview report;

84

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

XII
Internal controls and conflict of interest
1. Affirms that an effective internal control framework, accountability mechanisms, a
commitment to strong control and ethics are important components of internal control;
2. Stresses that the secretariat management structure for peacekeeping operations must
ensure that operational and management processes are fully integrated with a strong internal
control framework and supported by effective accountability mechanisms;
3. Reiterates paragraph 9 of section V of its resolution 60/266 and paragraph 9 of its
resolution 61/246 of 22 December 2006;
XIII
Air operations
1.

Reaffirms paragraph 2 of section XI of its resolution 60/266;

2. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue efforts to explore possibilities for
economies and efficiencies in air operations, and stresses that these should not undermine the
safety and operational requirements and rotation and troop deployment cycles;
3. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, contained in paragraph 3 of
section XIX of its resolution 59/296, to improve the formulation of resource requirements for air
operations in budget submissions to make them more reflective of actual operations, bearing in
mind the overbudgeting of air transportation requirements in some peacekeeping operations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that missions, when reviewing their
transportation requirements, take into account means that are efficient, cost-effective and
responsive to their operational needs and that ensure the safety of their personnel and take fully
into account the unique mandate, complexities, specificities and operational conditions of each
mission;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen coordination with relevant
United Nations entities in the area of air operations and to report on progress made in his next
overview report;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to conduct aviation quality
inspections and aviation assessments to confirm that established standards are being fully
complied with;
XIV
Ground transportation and utilization of vehicles and spare parts
1. Requests the Secretary-General to include information on progress made towards
global management of spare parts in his next overview report;
2.

Notes with concern the uneven implementation of the vehicle rotation policy;

3. Notes that the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions did
not make recommendations on the proposal of the Secretary-General on spare parts;
4. Emphasizes the importance of full implementation of the car log security system and
the fuel log system;
5. Notes the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to develop, within
Galileo, its assets management system, a comprehensive fleet management system on spare parts
management, and requests the Secretary-General to report at the second part of its resumed sixtysecond session on the results achieved regarding the completion of that project;

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Requests the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to plan the acquisition of spare
parts with due regard to realistic estimates of consumption and to dispose of unserviceable and
obsolete items in a timely manner;
XV
Fuel management
1. Notes that fuel is a major item of expenditure and that its management is vulnerable to
serious risk of fraud and abuse;
2. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to prepare a fuel management manual
and standard operating procedures and to include in his report thereon information on the review
of the current business model for the provision of fuel, measures taken to improve fuel
management, including information on experience with mission electronic fuel accounting system
and fuel log system projects, and plans to introduce alternative systems designed to support global
fuel management;
3. Notes the high vacancy rates in fuel management-related posts and the difficulties in
recruiting appropriately qualified staff in this area, and encourages the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts in this regard;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure annual certification and, where necessary,
updating of fuel contingency plans at its field missions;
XVI
Conduct and discipline
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 59/296,
Reaffirming its resolution 59/300 of 22 June 2005,
1. Underlines the great importance it attaches to the elimination of misconduct, including
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, and calls for full implementation of the United Nations zerotolerance policy;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse;87
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse;86
4. Notes with concern the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on its
investigation into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in the Ituri region (Bunia) in the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;89
5. Requests the Secretary-General to examine ways to strengthen cooperation and
coordination of conduct and discipline teams, the Office of Internal Oversight Services and other
entities of the United Nations system, both at Headquarters and in the field, and to report in this
regard at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session in the context of the overview report;
6. Stresses the importance of having a dedicated capacity in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations at Headquarters and, as appropriate, in its field missions to address
conduct and discipline issues, decides to convert seven temporary positions at Headquarters and
forty-one temporary positions in the field into posts and to authorize that the remaining positions
in the field be funded from general temporary assistance, and requests that a comprehensive report
on the issue of conduct and discipline, including full justification of all posts, with staffing levels,
functions and their impact on conduct and discipline, be submitted to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session;

86

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

XVII
Disarmament, demobilization (including reinsertion) and reintegration
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,90 and endorses the observations
contained in the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;91
2. Reaffirms the provisions of its resolution 59/296 on disarmament, demobilization
(including reinsertion) and reintegration;
XVIII
Quick-impact projects
1. Affirms that quick-impact projects play a critical role in strengthening the link between
missions and local populations and in accomplishing their objectives, and that their
implementation should take into account the situation and needs on the ground;
2. Welcomes the inclusion of quick-impact projects in the budgets of peacekeeping
operations, and recognizes the important contribution that they make towards the successful
implementation of the mandates of peacekeeping operations;
3. Stresses that quick-impact projects are an integral part of mission planning and
development and of the implementation of comprehensive strategies to meet the challenges facing
complex peacekeeping operations;
4. Recognizes that, in accordance with the purpose of such projects, that is, that they be
used by United Nations peacekeeping operations to establish and build confidence in individual
missions, their mandates and the peace process, thereby improving the environment for effective
mandate implementation, they should be executed by the missions to the extent possible and that,
in instances when they are implemented by partners, steps should be taken to ensure that the
missions are given due recognition;
5. Emphasizes that quick-impact projects should be implemented with minimal or no
overhead charges in order to ensure that the maximum amount is spent for the direct benefit of the
local population;
6. Recognizes that funding for quick-impact projects for the third year of a mission and
beyond may be requested if there is a requirement for confidence-building activities, in which case
a needs assessment should be conducted;
7. Emphasizes the importance of coordination with humanitarian and development
partners in order to avoid duplication and overlap of activities between missions and humanitarian
and development partners in the field;
8. Stresses that mission budgets allocated for quick-impact projects should not be used to
finance humanitarian and development activities already being carried out by United Nations
agencies or other international organizations;
XIX
Procurement
1. Reaffirms its resolution 61/246, and regrets that the Secretary-General did not present
the reports requested by the General Assembly in that resolution;
2. Reaffirms also section VII of its resolution 60/266, and reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General that he increase efforts to improve procurement opportunities for vendors from
developing countries and countries with economies in transition and report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session;

87

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Recognizes that procurement reform is an ongoing process that should focus, inter alia,
on ensuring the efficiency, transparency and cost-effectiveness of United Nations procurement,
strengthened internal controls, greater accountability to Member States and the full
implementation of General Assembly resolutions on procurement reform;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to identify obstacles preventing the participation of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition in United Nations procurement
contracts;
5. Recognizes the efforts by the Procurement Division of the Department of Management
of the Secretariat to increase the number of business seminars in developing countries, and
requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, to encourage the organizations of the United Nations system
to facilitate, in cooperation with Member States, the organization of business seminars in
developing countries and countries with economies in transition;
XX
Regional coordination
Reaffirming section IX of its resolution 60/266,
1.

Acknowledges progress made in regional cooperation;

2. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General that regional coordination plans aligned
to the objectives of missions be developed and implemented, keeping in mind the specific
mandate of each mission, and that he report thereon to the General Assembly in the context of his
next overview report;
3. Welcomes efforts to enhance regional and inter-mission cooperation, where feasible,
with a view to achieving greater synergies in the use of the resources of the Organization and the
implementation of the mandates of the missions, while bearing in mind that individual missions
are responsible for the preparation and implementation of their own budgets and for controlling
their own assets and logistical operations;
XXI
Partnerships, country team coordination and integrated missions
1. Stresses the importance of close collaboration with partners, both inside and outside
the United Nations system, including partnerships with regional organizations, and notes the
efforts of the Secretary-General to strengthen such partnerships;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the context of the budget submissions of
complex integrated peacekeeping missions, a clear description of the role and responsibility of
missions vis-à-vis integrated mission partners as well as the strategies of the missions for
enhancing coordination and collaboration with United Nations country teams in order to achieve
better results under relevant components;
XXII
Liabilities and reimbursements
Notes with concern the status of liabilities and reimbursements to troop- and formed policecontributing countries for their troops, formed police units, contingent-owned equipment and selfsustainment, emphasizes the importance of the full settlement of those liabilities, and, in this
regard, urges all Member States to pay their assessed contributions on time, in full and without
conditions.
88

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 61/277
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/968, para. 20)

61/277. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which
was resolution 60/267 of 30 June 2006,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002 concerning the establishment of the
strategic deployment stocks and its subsequent resolutions on the status of implementation of the
strategic deployment stocks, the latest of which was resolution 60/267,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base and implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including the
award of contracts for procurement,94 the report of the Secretary-General on implementation of
the strategic deployment stocks, including the functioning of the existing mechanisms for rapid
deployment95 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,96
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by the Government of Italy to the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on implementation of the strategic
deployment stocks, including the functioning of the existing mechanisms for rapid deployment;95
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,96 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of
29 June 2007, as well as other relevant resolutions;
5. Recalls paragraph 7 of its resolution 60/267, requests the Secretary-General to provide
a preliminary assessment of the pilot project for the regional aviation safety centre at the United
Nations Logistics Base in the next budget submission, and notes that, if the concept is applicable,
it will consider proposals to establish regional aviation safety offices for other peacekeeping
missions;
6. Decides to create the following posts in the Strategic Air Operations Centre: one Chief,
Strategic Air Operations Centre (P-4), two Aviation Operations Officers (P-3) and two temporary
positions established under general temporary assistance;
7. Also decides to approve the creation of a post of Chief, Administrative Services, at the
P-5 level;
_______________
94

A/61/679 and A/61/752.
A/61/795.
96
A/61/852/Add.14.
95

89

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Further decides to approve the establishment of the following posts as temporary
positions to be funded from general temporary assistance: one Chief, Engineering Design Unit
(P-4), one Design Engineer (P-3) and two national General Service positions within the
Engineering Design Unit;
9. Decides to approve the creation of the post of Chief, Geographic Information System
Centre, at the P-4 level, and the establishment of the following temporary positions to be funded
from general temporary assistance: one Geographic Information System Officer (P-3), one
Geographic Information System Administrator (Field Service) and five national General Service
positions within the Geographic Information System Centre;
10. Takes note of paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;96
11. Decides to establish the general temporary assistance positions under the pilot project
of an off-site recruitment and outreach unit and revert to the issue in the context of the budget
proposal for 2008/09, pending the outcome of the human resources management reform;
12. Emphasizes that the assessment requested in paragraph 6 of resolution 60/267 was not
carried out, and requests, as a matter of priority, the Secretary-General to report thereon in the
context of the budget proposal for 2009/10;
13. Reiterates the need to implement, as a matter of priority, an effective inventory
management process, especially in respect of peacekeeping operations involving high inventory
value;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the budget proposal for 2009/10,
pursuant to paragraph 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, to report on the longer-term perspective on the role and future development
of the United Nations Logistics Base, addressing, inter alia, the basis for placing certain functions
at the Base, taking into account the support provided by the host country;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 and
implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including the award of contracts for
procurement;97
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
16. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations Logistics Base amounting to
40,379,600 United States dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
Financing of the budget estimates
17. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period
from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 6,365,800 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 to be applied against the resources required
for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
(b) The balance of 34,013,800 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
_______________
97

A/61/679.

90

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(c) The net estimated staff assessment income of 2,308,400 dollars, comprising the
amount of 2,692,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 and the decrease of
384,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, to be set off against the
balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the individual
active peacekeeping operations;
18. Also decides to consider at its sixty-second session the question of the financing of the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.
RESOLUTION 61/278
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/968, para. 20)

61/278. Consolidation of peacekeeping accounts
The General Assembly,
Recalling section VII of its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006,
Having considered the detailed reports of the Secretary-General on financial management
practices98 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,99
1. Takes note of the detailed reports of the Secretary-General on financial management
practices98 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;99
2. Decides to revert to the consideration of this question at the first part of its resumed
sixty-second session, and requests the Secretary-General to provide an updated comprehensive
report on consolidation of peacekeeping accounts, including a simulation of the options proposed,
taking into account the views expressed, questions raised and information requested by Member
States at its sixty-first session.
RESOLUTION 61/279
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/968, para. 20)

61/279. Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain
peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling Article 2, paragraph 1, and Articles 17, 18, 97 and 100 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992,
48/226 A of 23 December 1993, 55/238 of 23 December 2000, 56/241 of 24 December 2001,
56/293 of 27 June 2002, 57/318 of 18 June 2003, 58/298 of 18 June 2004, 59/301 of 22 June
2005, 60/268 of 30 June 2006, 61/245 and 61/246 of 22 December 2006 and 61/256 of 15 March
2007, its decisions 48/489 of 8 July 1994, 49/469 of 23 December 1994 and 50/473 of
23 December 1995 and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,

_______________
98
99

A/60/846/Add.3, paras. 112 (b)–(l), and A/61/865.
A/60/870, paras. 47 and 64, and A/61/920.

91

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling further its resolutions 55/258 of 14 June 2001, 57/305 and 57/307 of 15 April
2003, 58/296 of 18 June 2004, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005, 60/238 of
23 December 2005 and 61/244 of 22 December 2006, as well as its other relevant resolutions and
decisions on human resources management and administration of justice,
Recalling its resolutions 54/14 of 29 October 1999, 54/256 of 7 April 2000, 55/232 of
23 December 2000, 55/247 of 12 April 2001, 57/279 of 20 December 2002, 58/276 and 58/277 of
23 December 2003, 59/288 and 59/289 of 13 April 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/246, as
well as its other relevant resolutions on procurement and outsourcing practices,
Having considered the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the
capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peace operations100 and his reports on the
financing of the support account for peacekeeping operations,101 the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the management structures of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations102 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,103
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations being able to respond and deploy rapidly
to a peacekeeping operation upon the adoption of a relevant Security Council resolution, within
thirty days for traditional peacekeeping operations and within ninety days for complex
peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all phases of peacekeeping
operations, including the liquidation and termination phases,
Reaffirming the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
Recalling the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme
Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation104 and
the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,105
Stressing the intergovernmental, multilateral and international character of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the role of the General Assembly and its relevant intergovernmental and expert
bodies, within their respective mandates, in planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and
evaluation,
Recognizing the ongoing efforts to reform human resources management, the system of
administration of justice, the information and communication technology system and the
procurement system of the United Nations, in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly,
Attaching great importance to the provision of adequate resources for peacekeeping
operations and their backstopping as well as for all priority activities of the Organization, in
particular activities in the area of development, and underlining the need for a genuine and
meaningful partnership between the Security Council, the troop-contributing Governments and
other Member States, and the Secretariat,
Recognizing the need to strengthen the capacity of the Organization at Headquarters to
mount and sustain peacekeeping operations in the light of the surge in demand and the complex
and multidimensional peacekeeping operations,
_______________
100

A/61/858 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and Add.2.
A/61/733 and Add.1 and A/61/858/Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1.
102
A/61/743.
103
A/61/937.
104
ST/SGB/2000/8.
105
ST/SGB/2003/7.
101

92

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful that the level of the support account should broadly correspond to the mandate,
number, size and complexity of peacekeeping missions,
1. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General
Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters;
2.

Also reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

3. Further reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human
and financial resources and policies with a view to ensuring the full, effective and efficient
implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of policies in
this regard;
4. Reaffirms its role with regard to the structure of the Secretariat, and stresses that
proposals that amend the overall departmental structure, as well as the format of the budgets of the
Organization and the biennial programme plan, are subject to review and approval by the General
Assembly;
5. Emphasizes that ongoing management reforms must be fully taken into account when
presenting additional proposals for reform;
6. Reaffirms that support account funds shall be used for the sole purpose of financing
human resources and non-human resources requirements for backstopping and supporting
peacekeeping operations at Headquarters, and that any changes in this limitation require the prior
approval of the General Assembly;
7. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the backstopping of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the need for justification for that funding in support account budget
submissions;
8. Recalls the role of the Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Organization, in accordance with the provisions of Article 97 of the Charter of the United Nations;
9. Reiterates that the delegation of authority on the part of the Secretary-General should
be in order to facilitate the better management of the Organization, but stresses that the overall
responsibility for management of the Organization rests with the Secretary-General as the Chief
Administrative Officer;
10. Decides to establish the Department of Field Support;
11. Affirms the need for the Secretary-General to ensure that the delegation of authority to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support and field missions
is in strict compliance with relevant resolutions and decisions, as well as relevant rules and
procedures of the General Assembly on this matter;
12. Reiterates the importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and of
ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for the
effective and efficient implementation of legislative mandates and the use of human and financial
resources;
13. Recalls its request to the Secretary-General to specifically define accountability as well
as clear accountability mechanisms, including to the General Assembly, and to propose clear
parameters for its application and the instruments for its rigorous enforcement, without exception,
at all levels, to ensure effective and efficient operations and management of resources in the
Organization;
14. Emphasizes the importance of preserving unity of command in missions at all levels as
well as coherence in policy and strategy and clear command structures in the field and up to and
including at Headquarters;
15. Also emphasizes the importance of interaction and coordination with troopcontributing countries;
93

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Further emphasizes the need to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure a clear chain of command, accountability,
coordination and maintenance of an adequate system of checks and balances;
18. Urges the Secretary-General, within the framework established in its resolutions
52/12 B of 19 December 1997 and 52/220 of 22 December 1997, to define explicitly the role and
duties of the Deputy Secretary-General in the reform set out in the present resolution, including in
relation to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Management;
19. Recalls section I, paragraph 6, of its resolution 55/238 and paragraph 11 of its
resolution 56/241, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the proper representation of troopcontributing countries in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, taking into account their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping;
20. Reiterates that the Secretary-General, in employing staff, shall ensure the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity as the paramount consideration, with due regard
for the principle of equitable geographical distribution, in accordance with Article 101,
paragraph 3, of the Charter and relevant General Assembly resolutions;
21. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services;102
22. Recalls paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,103 and notes that the organizational structure of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support may present some major
management challenges;
23. Reaffirms paragraph 6 of its resolution 56/241;
24. Recalls paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,103 and requests the Secretary-General to clarify the responsibilities and
financial authority of all heads of mission;
25. Stresses that heads of departments report to and are accountable to the SecretaryGeneral;
26. Notes the unique nature of the reporting line from the head of the Department of Field
Support to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and decides that having one
head of department (Department of Field Support) report to and take direction from another head
of department (Department of Peacekeeping Operations) shall not set a precedent in the
Secretariat;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to address systemic issues that hamper good
management of the Organization, including improvement of work processes and procedures, and
in that context stresses that structural change is no substitute for managerial improvement;
28. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,103 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
29. Takes note of paragraph 63 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;103
Support account for peacekeeping operations
30. Also takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the support
account for peacekeeping operations;101
31. Reaffirms the need for effective and efficient administration and financial management
of peacekeeping operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to identify measures to
increase the productivity and efficiency of the support account;
94

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

32. Recalls paragraph 13 of its resolution 60/268, and reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General to submit the findings of a comprehensive analysis of the evolution of the
support account;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
34. Decides to maintain, for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, the funding
mechanism for the support account used in the current period, from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007,
as approved in paragraph 3 of its resolution 50/221 B of 7 June 1996;
35. Decides also to approve one D-1, thirteen P-5 and twelve P-4 posts for the integrated
operational teams, to be located in their functional areas;
36. Decides further to locate the Partnerships Section in the Office of the Director for
Policy, Evaluation and Training in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
37. Decides to approve two Evaluation Officer posts (one P-5 and one P-4) and one
Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) in the Peacekeeping Best Practices
Section of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
38. Decides also not to establish one P-4 post or a Legal Service in the Office of the
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support;
39. Decides further not to establish a P-5 post for a Senior Legal Officer in the Office of
the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs;
40. Decides to establish one P-4 post in the Europe and Latin America Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
41. Decides also to establish one P-4 post in lieu of using general temporary assistance in
the Field Budget and Finance Division of the Department of Field Support;
42. Decides further to establish one P-5, two P-4, one P-3 and one General Service post in
the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, referred to in paragraphs 205 to 211, of the report of the
Secretary-General;106
43. Decides to retain the sixty-three posts referred to in paragraphs 158 (a) and (b) of the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,103 under general
temporary assistance, and requests the Secretary-General to review the level of resources of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services for providing backstopping to peacekeeping operations, as
well as its functions and interaction with peacekeeping operations and troop-contributing
countries, and to report thereon in the context of the budget for the support account at its sixtysecond session;
44. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a comprehensive report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session on the results of the ongoing examination and rationalization
of the investigation caseload and the overall review of the capacity of the Investigations Division
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services;
45. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure effective monitoring, within the Office of
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, of the work of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, as well as the Department of Field Support, with respect to: (a) the resultsbased budgeting framework and performance evaluation of subprogrammes; (b) enterprise risk
management; (c) the information management strategy; (d) the reform initiatives and
implementation of the related processes; (e) policy dissemination and communication with partners
in peace operations; and (f) the implementation of the recommendations of oversight bodies;
_______________
106

A/61/858/Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1.

95

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

46. Recalls paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,103 and requests the Secretary-General to further explore possible synergies
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support on the
one hand and other departments of the Secretariat, specialized agencies and funds and
programmes on the other;
47. Emphasizes the need for effective coordination between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support and the importance of the post of
Chief of Staff in this respect, taking fully into consideration paragraph 23 of the report of the
Secretary-General;107
48. Acknowledges the concept of integrated operational teams as a means of ensuring
horizontal coordination and integration of processes throughout the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, and requests the Secretary-General, in this
regard, to ensure effective coordination with the Office of Military Affairs of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, taking into account the recommendations of the relevant
intergovernmental bodies with respect to the assessment of the functions of the ad hoc organ
identified in the report of the Secretary-General on the comprehensive review of the Strategic
Military Cell;108
49. Emphasizes that disarmament, demobilization (including reinsertion) and reintegration
programmes are a critical part of peace processes and integrated peacekeeping operations, as
mandated by the Security Council, and supports strengthening the coordination of those
programmes using an integrated approach;
50. Stresses that the Police Adviser should form part of the senior management team;
51. Also stresses the need for strengthening gender awareness in all training programmes;
52. Reiterates its support for the development and implementation of a ten-year plan for
capacity-building with the African Union, looks forward to considering at its sixty-second session
the report requested in its resolution 60/268 on the efforts made in support of African Union
capacity-building, and stresses the need for an adequately resourced African Union peace support
team;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
53. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;109
54. Decides not to transfer the amount of 13,790,000 United States dollars included in the
amount of 15,804,000 dollars previously authorized in its resolution 60/268, representing the
excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund utilized to finance the
requirements of the support account for peacekeeping operations in respect of the financial period
from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, and to revert to this issue in the context of its consideration of
the financial performance report for the financial period ended 30 June 2007;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
55. Approves the support account requirements in the amount of 230,509,900 dollars for
the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, including 819 continuing and 284 new temporary
posts and their related post and non-post requirements;
_______________
107

A/61/858 and Corr.1.
A/61/883.
109
A/61/733 and Add.1.
108

96

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the budget estimates
56. Decides that the requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for
the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance of 10,947,000 dollars and other income of 3,430,300
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, to be applied to the resources
required for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
(b) The amount of 7,097,000 dollars in excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping
Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, to be applied to the resources
required for the financial period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
(c) The balance of 209,035,600 dollars, to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
(d) The net estimated staff assessment income of 21,277,600 dollars, comprising the
amount of 23,430,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 and the decrease of
2,153,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, to be set off against the
balance referred to in subparagraph (c) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the individual
active peacekeeping operations;
Programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
57. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the revised estimates relating to
the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007 and the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2008–2009 under sections 5, Peacekeeping operations, 28D, Office of Central Support
Services, and 35, Staff assessment;110
58. Decides to establish the post of Under-Secretary-General for Field Support until
30 June 2008, under the assumption of its continuation, subject to a preliminary review at the
second part of its resumed sixty-second session and a comprehensive review at the second part of
its resumed sixty-third session, and the reviews will address, inter alia, the continuation of the post
and its level, functions, interaction with other heads of department, relevance, operational
efficiency and effectiveness and, taking into account the functions of the Department of Field
Support, the necessity to ensure the unity of command, integration of efforts and strengthening of
operational capacity at Headquarters and in the field;
59. Decides also to establish the following posts:
Section 5, Peacekeeping operations
(a) Assistant Secretary-General to head the newly established Office of Military Affairs of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
(b) Assistant Secretary-General to head the newly established Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
Section 28D, Office of Central Support Services
(c) Chief of the Procurement Service (D-1) in the Procurement Division of the Office of
Central Support Services;
60. Decides further to approve the redeployment of the following posts:
(a) A post at the P-5 level from the Military Division to the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions to perform the functions of Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary-General;
(b) An existing Military Adviser post at the D-2 level from the Military Division to the
Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions to head the Police Division;
_______________
110

A/61/858/Add.2.

97

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

61. Decides to approve the abolition, effective 1 July 2007, of seven posts (four P-4, two
P-3 and one General Service (Other level)) under section 5, Peacekeeping operations, of the
programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007;
62. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the actual expenditures incurred in connection
with the abolition and establishment of the posts referred to in paragraphs 58 to 61 above in the context
of the second performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007, and takes
note that the continuing requirements would be incorporated in the initial appropriation at the time of
the adoption of the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009, in December 2007;
Reporting
63. Recalls paragraphs 3, 12, 17 and 43 of its resolution 61/246, and decides to revert to
the proposals regarding procurement following the submission of the report of the SecretaryGeneral requested in that resolution, taking into account the recommendations of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services as contained in its report;102
64. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly a comprehensive
analysis of the Office of Military Affairs, taking into account the results of the upcoming report on
the Strategic Military Cell and the lessons learned from the first period of the expansion of the Office
of Military Affairs, including its interactions with the integrated operational teams and other offices
of the Secretariat, so that it may review and further strengthen the functions of the Office, and to submit
the results of that analysis to the Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session;
65. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services
with reviewing and analysing the structure of the Secretariat for managing and sustaining
peacekeeping operations, as established in the present resolution, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-third session;
66. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a preliminary report on the status of
the implementation of the present resolution, bearing in mind the recommendations of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services as contained in its report,102 at the second part of its resumed sixtysecond session;
67. Recalls paragraph 6 of its resolution 61/256, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a comprehensive report, inter alia, on the efficiency and effectiveness of the new structure
in the implementation of mission mandates, as well as on programme delivery, improvements in
the administrative and management processes, the functions of the integrated operational teams,
measures to ensure coordination and integration between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support and the efficiencies and improvements resulting
from past reforms of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, at the second part of its
resumed sixty-third session, bearing in mind the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services as contained in its report,102 in particular recommendations 2, 7 and 13.
RESOLUTION 61/280
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/969, para. 6)

61/280. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus111 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,112
_______________
111
112

98

A/61/724 and A/61/774.
A/61/852/Add.4.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the subsequent resolutions
by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution
1728 (2006) of 15 December 2006, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force until
15 June 2007,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the
latest of which was resolution 60/270 of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force by
certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to cover all the costs of the Force,
including those incurred by troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and regretting
the absence of an adequate response to appeals for voluntary contributions, including that
contained in the letter dated 17 May 1994 from the Secretary-General to all Member States,113
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 17.9 million
United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only thirty-two Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
_______________
113

S/1994/647.

99

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,112 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue negotiations with the host
Government on issues regarding the accommodation of military contingent personnel as well as
other personnel of the Force, in accordance with the provisions of the March 1964 Agreement
between the United Nations and the Government of Cyprus, and to report on any developments in
this regard to the General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that safety and the operational needs of the
Force are not affected while military contingent personnel are being rotated;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;114
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus the amount of 48,847,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008,
inclusive of 46,587,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 1,943,800 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 316,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
17. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net appropriation, equivalent to
15,543,266 dollars, will be funded through voluntary contributions from the Government of
Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars from the Government of Greece;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 26,804,234 dollars at a
monthly rate of 2,233,686 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007
and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
19. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
2,217,700 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,998,300 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 197,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 21,500 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 18 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 1,169,516
_______________
114

A/61/724.

100

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

dollars for the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 1,169,516 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20 above;
22. Also decides that the decrease in the estimated staff assessment income of 111,100
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 1,169,516 dollars referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Further decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period
ended 30 June 2006, that one third of the net unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 679,433 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be returned
to the Government of Cyprus;
24. Decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended
30 June 2006, that the prorated share of the net unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 300,451 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be returned
to the Government of Greece;
25. Also decides to continue to maintain as separate the account established for the Force
for the period prior to 16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to that
account, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in appealing for voluntary
contributions to the account;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Force, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTION 61/281
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/970, para. 6)

61/281. Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo115 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,116
_______________
115
116

A/61/672 and A/61/767 and Corr.1.
A/61/852/Add.11.

101

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolutions 1258 (1999) of 6 August 1999 and 1279 (1999) of
30 November 1999 regarding, respectively, the deployment to the region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of military liaison personnel and the establishment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1756 (2007) of 15 May 2007, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until
31 December 2007,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/121 B of 30 June 2006,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions
outstanding in the amount of 243.4 million United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of
the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-six Member States have paid
their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Acknowledges with appreciation that the use of the logistics hub in Entebbe, Uganda,
has been cost-effective and has resulted in savings for the United Nations, and welcomes the
expansion of the logistics hub to provide logistical support to peacekeeping operations in the
region and to further contribute to their enhanced efficiency and responsiveness;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;

102

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,116 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Decides to establish the following posts: Fire Chief (Field Service) in the Security and
Safety Section; Human Resources Officer (P-3) in the Human Resources Section; Human
Resources Officer (Field Service) in the Aviation Section; and Warehouse Supervisor (Field
Service) in the Property Management Section;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Recalls paragraph 13 of its resolution 60/121 B and, in view of the importance of
ensuring coordination and collaboration of efforts with the United Nations agencies and
programmes, reiterates its request that the Secretary-General report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session, in the context of his budget submission, on the progress made in the
development of a collaboration framework and efforts towards developing an integrated
workplan;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the provision of material support for
joint operations with the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is duly reflected in the budget proposals;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;117
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
18. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the amount of 1,166,721,000 dollars for the
period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, inclusive of 1,112,739,500 dollars for the maintenance
of the Mission, 46,427,000 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
7,554,500 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
19. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 583,360,500 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
20. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
_______________
117

A/61/672.

103

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 13,113,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
10,494,550 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,362,900 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of
256,350 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
21. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 583,360,500 dollars for the
period from 1 January to 30 June 2008 at a monthly rate of 97,226,750 dollars, in accordance with
the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
22. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 13,113,800 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 10,494,550 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 2,362,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 256,350 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 19 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in
the total amount of 137,022,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December
2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution
58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
24. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 137,022,500 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 23
above;
25. Decides also that the decrease of 4,215,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 137,022,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 23 and 24 above;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”.

104

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 61/282
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/971, para. 6)

61/282. Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor118 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,119
Recalling Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of 25 October 1999 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Transitional Administration, the last
of which was resolution 1392 (2002) of 31 January 2002, by which the mandate was extended
until 20 May 2002,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1410 (2002) of 17 May 2002, by which the
Council established the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as of 20 May 2002 for
an initial period of twelve months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission, the last of which was resolution 1573 (2004) of 16 November 2004,
by which the mandate was extended for a final period of six months until 20 May 2005,
Recalling further its resolution 54/246 A of 23 December 1999 on the financing of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and its subsequent resolutions on the
financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor, the latest of which was
resolution 60/271 of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission and to
the Trust Fund for the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as at
31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 25.4 million United
States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only one hundred and twenty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Transitional Administration and the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
_______________
118
119

A/61/670.
A/61/852/Add.2.

105

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,119 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;118
9. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
income in the amount of 31,835,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006,
in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December
2003;
10. Encourages Member States that are owed credits referred to in paragraph 9 above to
apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has outstanding assessed
contributions;
11. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 31,835,900 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 9 above;
12. Also decides that the increase of 4,800 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be added to the credits from the amount
of 31,835,900 dollars referred to in paragraphs 9 and 11 above;
13. Further decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the
item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor”.
RESOLUTION 61/283
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/972, para. 6)

61/283. Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia120 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,121
Recalling Security Council resolution 854 (1993) of 6 August 1993, by which the Council
approved the deployment of an advance team of up to ten United Nations military observers for a
period of three months and the incorporation of the advance team into a United Nations observer
mission if such a mission was formally established by the Council,
_______________
120
121

A/61/700 and A/61/764 and Corr.1.
A/61/852/Add.10.

106

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling also Security Council resolution 858 (1993) of 24 August 1993, by which the
Council established the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Observer Mission, the latest of
which was resolution 1752 (2007) of 13 April 2007,
Recalling further its decision 48/475 A of 23 December 1993 on the financing of the
Observer Mission and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was
resolution 60/273 of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Observer Mission with the necessary
financial resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 11 million
United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only twenty-six Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observer Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying and
providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Observer Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,121 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Observer Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Observer Mission against
General Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
107

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Observer Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;122
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
13. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia the amount of 36,708,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June
2008, inclusive of 35,009,800 dollars for the maintenance of the Observer Mission, 1,460,700
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 237,700 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 10,706,600 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 15 October 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
15. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
740,200 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 692,100 dollars approved
for the Observer Mission, the prorated share of 43,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 4,700 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
16. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 26,001,600 dollars for the
period from 16 October 2007 to 30 June 2008 at a monthly rate of 3,059,017 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Observer Mission;
17. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,797,500 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 1,680,800 dollars approved for the Observer Mission, the
prorated share of 105,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 11,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Observer Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 14 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 4,787,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance
with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December
2003;
19. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Observer Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share
of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 4,787,400 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18
above;
_______________
122

A/61/700.

108

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

20. Also decides that the decrease of 62,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 4,787,400 dollars referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Observer Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution
1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Observer Mission in cash and in the form of
services and supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”.
RESOLUTION 61/284
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/973, para. 6)

61/284. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti123 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,124
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of 29 February 2004, by which the
Council declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support
continuation of a peaceful and constitutional political process and the maintenance of a secure and
stable environment in Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of 30 April 2004, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial period
of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1743 (2007) of 15 February 2007,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/18 B of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
_______________
123
124

A/61/741 and A/61/869 and Corr.1.
A/61/852/Add.15.

109

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 203.1 million
United States dollars, representing some 16 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only thirty Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,124 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Takes note of paragraph 24 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,124 and decides to establish the post of Coordinator of the Working
Group on the Rule of Law as proposed by the Secretary-General in his report;125
11. Decides to establish two posts for Security Officers (one P-4 and one P-2) under the
Security Section, as proposed by the Secretary-General;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive review of the staffing
structure of the Mission, taking fully into account the observations and recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in paragraphs 20 and 21 of its
_______________
125

A/61/869 and Corr.1.

110

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

report,124 and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session in his next
budget submission for the Mission;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the administrative staff supporting
national interpreters in the context of the next budget submission for the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;126
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
18. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti the amount of 561,344,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June
2008, inclusive of 535,372,800 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 22,337,400 dollars for
the support account for peacekeeping operations and 3,634,700 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
19. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 163,725,600 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 15 October 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
20. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
4,272,200 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 3,537,000 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 663,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 72,000 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 397,619,300 dollars for the
period from 16 October 2007 to 30 June 2008 at a monthly rate of 46,778,742 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
22. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,375,100 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,589,900 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 1,610,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 174,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 19
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
51,357,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;

_______________
126

A/61/741.

111

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 51,357,900 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 23 above;
25. Also decides that the decrease of 1,570,500 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 51,357,900 dollars referred to in paragraphs 23 and 24 above;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 61/285
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/974, para. 7)

61/285. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo127 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,128
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/275 of 30 June 2006,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
_______________
127
128

A/61/675 and A/61/776.
A/61/852/Add.8.

112

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
92.8 million United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only thirty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,128 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Affirms that measures aimed at retaining staff should comply with the United Nations
common system of salaries and conditions of service and existing staff regulations and rules and
that any such measures involving financial implications should be presented to the General
Assembly for consideration;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;129
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo the amount of 220,897,200 dollars for the period from 1 July
2007 to 30 June 2008, inclusive of 210,676,800 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission,
8,790,100 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 1,430,300 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
_______________
129

A/61/675.

113

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 220,897,200 dollars,
in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December
2006 and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its
resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
17. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 18,219,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 17,227,200
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 894,700 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 97,100 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
12,620,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
19. Decides also that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 12,620,800 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
20. Decides further that the decrease of 732,800 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 12,620,800 dollars referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.
RESOLUTION 61/286
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/975, para. 6)

61/286. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia130 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,131
_______________
130
131

A/61/715 and A/61/783.
A/61/852/Add.7.

114

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003, by which the Council
declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the transitional
government and to assist in the implementation of a comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of 19 September 2003, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of twelve months,
and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the
latest of which was resolution 1750 (2007) of 30 March 2007, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission until 30 September 2007,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December 2003 on the financing of the Mission and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/276 of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Liberia as at
31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 70.9 million United
States dollars, representing some 3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only twenty-seven Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,131 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
115

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Recalls paragraph 13 of its resolution 60/121 B of 30 June 2006, and reiterates, in
view of the importance of ensuring coordination and collaboration of efforts with the United
Nations agencies and programmes, its request to the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly on the progress made in the development of a collaboration framework and the efforts
towards developing an integrated workplan in the context of his budget submission at the sixtysecond session of the Assembly;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;132
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in
Liberia the amount of 721,723,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008,
inclusive of 688,330,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 28,719,300 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 4,673,100 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 180,430,753 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 30 September 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
17. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
3,740,025 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,929,900 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 730,825 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 79,300 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 541,292,247 dollars for the
period from 1 October 2007 to 30 June 2008, at a monthly rate of 60,143,583 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243 and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
19. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 11,220,075 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,789,700 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 2,192,475 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
_______________
132

A/61/715.

116

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

account and the prorated share of 237,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
63,137,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 63,137,100 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20
above;
22. Decides also that the decrease of 338,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 63,137,100 dollars referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia”.
RESOLUTION 61/287
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/976, para. 6)

61/287. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force133 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,134
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was
resolution 1729 (2006) of 15 December 2006,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the
United Nations Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/277 of 30 June 2006,
_______________
133
134

A/61/662 and A/61/671 and Corr.1.
A/61/852/Add.1.

117

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
20.8 million United States dollars, representing some 1.3 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-five Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure the
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,134 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Decides to maintain a dedicated capacity in the Force for the Geographic Information
System mapping project, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon in the performance
report for the period 2007/08;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
118

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;135
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force the amount of 41,586,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008,
inclusive of 39,662,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 1,654,800 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 269,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 41,586,600 dollars at a
monthly rate of 3,465,550 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007
and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
17. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,297,300 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,110,600 dollars
approved for the Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, the prorated share of
168,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the
prorated share of 18,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 5,600,500
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
19. Decides also that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 5,600,500 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18
above;
20. Decides further that the decrease of 16,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 5,600,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Force, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
_______________
135

A/61/662.

119

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”.
RESOLUTION 61/288
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/977, para. 6)

61/288. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone 136 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,137
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1270 (1999) of 22 October 1999, by which the
Council established the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, and the subsequent resolutions
by which the Council revised and extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1610 (2005) of 30 June 2005, by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission for a final period of six months until 31 December 2005,
Recalling its resolution 53/29 of 20 November 1998 on the financing of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone and subsequent resolutions on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the latest of which was resolution 60/279 of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone as at 31 March 2007, including the
credits in the amount of 43.5 million United States dollars;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,137 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;136
4. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
income in the amount of 141,519,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June
2006, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of
23 December 2003;
5. Decides also that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Mission, their share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
_______________
136
137

A/61/682.
A/61/852/Add.5.

120

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

141,519,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against
their outstanding obligations in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 4 above;
6. Decides further that the decrease of 378,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 141,519,600 dollars referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 above;
Disposition of assets of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
7. Takes note of the progress report of the Secretary-General on the disposition of the
assets of the Mission;138
8. Encourages Member States that are owed credits for the closed peacekeeping mission
accounts to apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has
outstanding assessed contributions;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”.
RESOLUTION 61/289
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/978, para. 6)

61/289. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan 139 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,140
Recalling Security Council resolution 1590 (2005) of 24 March 2005, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in the Sudan for an initial period of six months as from
24 March 2005, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1755 (2007) of 30 April 2007, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 31 October 2007,
Recalling also its resolution 59/292 of 21 April 2005 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/122 B of 30 June 2006,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of
11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the trust fund in
support of the peace process in the Sudan,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
_______________
138

A/61/819.
A/61/689 and A/61/745 and Corr.1.
140
A/61/852/Add.13.
139

121

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan as
at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 56.5 million United
States dollars, representing some 2.7 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only sixty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,140 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Regrets the slow progress in providing peacekeeping contingents and other personnel
with hard-walled accommodation, and requests the Secretary-General to take urgent measures to
resolve this issue;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a revised budget for the Mission to reflect
the financial resource requirements for the heavy support package to the African Union Mission in
the Sudan at the main part of its sixty-second session, as stated in paragraph 23 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;140
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to review and reflect the progress of the
implementation of the Mission’s activities relating to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the context of the Mission’s revised budget for the period from 1 July 2007 to
30 June 2008, and reaffirms in this regard section VI of its resolution 59/296;
122

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;141
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan the amount of 887,332,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008,
inclusive of 846,277,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 35,309,300 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 5,745,500 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
17. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 295,777,333 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
18. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
7,344,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 6,016,800 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,198,033 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 129,967 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 591,554,667 dollars for the
period from 1 November 2007 to 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008,
as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Mission;
20. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 19
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 14,689,600 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 12,033,600 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 2,396,067 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 259,933 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 17
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
195,157,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
22. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 195,157,800 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 21
above;

_______________
141

A/61/689.

123

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Decides also that the decrease of 1,693,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 195,157,800 dollars referred to in paragraphs 21 and 22 above;
24. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
26. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan”.
RESOLUTION 61/290
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/979, para. 6)

61/290. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara142 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,143
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1754 (2007) of 30 April 2007,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/280 of 30 June
2006,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the
task of formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General
Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June
2007, as well as other relevant resolutions;

_______________
142
143

A/61/683 and A/61/744.
A/61/852/Add.3.

124

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara as at 31 March 2007, including the contributions outstanding in
the amount of 49.2 million United States dollars, representing some 7.8 per cent of the total
assessed contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-four Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to
ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,143 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;144
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara the amount of 46,471,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2007
to 30 June 2008, inclusive of 44,321,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 1,849,200
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 300,900 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;

_______________
144

A/61/683.

125

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation
15. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 15,490,567 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 31 October 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution
61/243 of 22 December 2006 and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as set out
in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
16. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
769,667 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 700,133 dollars approved
for the Mission, the prorated share of 62,734 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 6,800 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 30,981,133 dollars for the
period from 1 November 2007 to 30 June 2008, at a monthly rate of 3,872,642 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
18. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,539,333 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 1,400,267 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 125,466 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 13,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
4,466,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 4,466,000 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19
above;
21. Decides also that the decrease of 316,500 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 4,466,000 referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.
126

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

61/259.

Title

Page

Observer status for the Islamic Development Bank Group in the General Assembly ................................................. 128

127

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 61/259
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 28 March 2007, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/61/462/Add.1, para. 6)1

61/259. Observer status for the Islamic Development Bank Group in the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the Islamic Development
Bank Group,
1. Decides to invite the Islamic Development Bank Group to participate in the sessions
and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present
resolution.

_______________
1
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon,
Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan and Yemen.

128

V. Decisions
Contents
Decision
No.

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
61/405.

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions........................... 131
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 131

61/406.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions ................................................................................. 131
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 131

61/415.

Election of fourteen members of the Human Rights Council ................................................................................... 132

61/416.

Election by the General Assembly of two members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission......................................................................................................................................................... 132

61/417.

Election of thirty members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law....................................... 133

61/418.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session ........................................................... 133

61/419.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session ..................... 134

61/420.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session .................................................. 134

61/421.

Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit............................................................................................. 134
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

61/502.

Organization of the sixty-first session..................................................................................................................... 135
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 135

61/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items ........................................................................................... 135
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 135

61/556.

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS.......... 136

61/558.

Report of the Peacebuilding Commission............................................................................................................... 136

61/559.

Report of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse ............................................................................................................................................................ 136

61/560.

Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund .................................................................................... 136

61/561.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters................................................................................................................................................................. 137

61/562.

Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit ............................................................................................. 137

61/563.

Role of the United Nations in promoting a new global human order......................................................................... 138

61/564.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan ............................................................................................. 138

61/565.

Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development ........ 138

61/566.

Improving the financial situation of the United Nations........................................................................................... 138

61/567.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor........................................................................................... 138

61/568.

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme ...................................................................... 138
129

V. Decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Page

2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
61/551.

Questions deferred for future consideration ............................................................................................................ 138
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 138
Decision C ........................................................................................................................................................... 139

61/554.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi............................................................................................ 140

61/555.

Financing of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women................................. 141

61/557.

Closed peacekeeping missions............................................................................................................................... 141
3. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

61/511.

Administration of justice at the United Nations....................................................................................................... 142
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 142

61/553.

130

Revised provisional programme of work of the Sixth Committee for the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly............................................................................................................................................................. 142

V. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
61/405. Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
B1
At its 106th plenary meeting, on 2 August 2007, the General Assembly appointed
Ms. Misako Kaji as a member of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for a term of office beginning on 2 August 2007 and expiring on 31 December 2007, as
a result of the resignation of Mr. Jun Yamazaki.2
As a result, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions is
composed as follows: Mr. Andrzej T. ABRASZEWSKI (Poland),*** Mr. Ronald ELKHUIZEN
(Netherlands),* Mr. Jorge FLORES CALLEJAS (Honduras),* Ms. Misako KAJI (Japan),*
Mr. Collen V. KELAPILE (Botswana),*** Mr. Guillermo KENDALL (Argentina),** Mr. Igor V.
KHALEVINSKY (Russian Federation),** Mr. Jerry KRAMER (Canada),* Ms. Susan M. MCLURG
(United States of America),** Mr. Tommo MONTHE (Cameroon),** Mr. Stafford NEIL
(Jamaica),*** Mr. Rajat SAHA (India),* Ms. SUN Minqin (China),* Mr. Mohammad Mustafa
TAL (Jordan),*** Ms. Nonye UDO (Nigeria)*** and Ms. Christina VASAK (France).**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2007.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2008.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.

61/406. Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
B3
At its 96th plenary meeting, on 16 May 2007, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,4 appointed Mr. Thomas Tomma as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a term of office beginning on 16 May 2007 and ending on
31 December 2008, as a result of the resignation of Ms. Sujata Ghorai.
As a result, the Committee on Contributions is composed as follows: Mr. Kenshiro
AKIMOTO (Japan),*** Mr. Meshal AL-MANSOUR (Kuwait),*** Mr. Petru DUMITRIU
(Romania),*** Mr. Gordon ECKERSLEY (Australia),* Mr. Paul EKORONG À DONG (Cameroon),*
Mr. Bernardo GREIVER (Uruguay),* Mr. Hassan Mohammed HASSAN (Nigeria),* Mr. Ihor V.
HUMENNY (Ukraine),*** Mr. Eduardo IGLESIAS (Argentina),* Mr. Vyacheslav A. LOGUTOV
(Russian Federation),** Ms. Gobona Susan MAPITSE (Botswana),*** Mr. Richard MOON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland),** Mr. Hae-yun PARK (Republic of
Korea),** Mr. Eduardo Manuel da Fonseca Fernandes RAMOS (Portugal),* Mr. Henrique da
Silveira SARDINHA PINTO (Brazil),** Ms. Lisa P. SPRATT (United States of America),***
Mr. Thomas TOMMA (Germany)** and Mr. WU Gang (China).**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2007.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2008.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.

_______________
1
Decision 61/405, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 49
(A/61/49), vol. II, becomes decision 61/405 A.
2
See A/61/101/Add.1.
3
Decision 61/406, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 49
(A/61/49), vol. II, becomes decision 61/406 A.
4
A/61/562/Add.1, para. 4.

131

V. Decisions

61/415. Election of fourteen members of the Human Rights Council
At its 97th plenary meeting, on 17 May 2007, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, elected as members of the Human Rights Council, for a
three-year term of office beginning on 19 June 2007 and ending on 18 June 2010, ANGOLA,
BOLIVIA, BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA, EGYPT, INDIA, INDONESIA, ITALY, MADAGASCAR, the
NETHERLANDS, NICARAGUA, the PHILIPPINES, QATAR, SLOVENIA and SOUTH AFRICA to fill the
vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of ALGERIA, ARGENTINA, BAHRAIN,
the CZECH REPUBLIC, ECUADOR, FINLAND, INDIA, INDONESIA, MOROCCO, the NETHERLANDS, the
PHILIPPINES, POLAND, SOUTH AFRICA and TUNISIA.
As a result, the Human Rights Council is composed of the following forty-seven Member
States: ANGOLA,*** AZERBAIJAN,** BANGLADESH,** BOLIVIA,*** BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA,*** BRAZIL,* CAMEROON,** CANADA,** CHINA,** CUBA,** DJIBOUTI,**
EGYPT,*** FRANCE,* GABON,* GERMANY,** GHANA,* GUATEMALA,* INDIA,*** INDONESIA,***
ITALY,*** JAPAN,* JORDAN,** MADAGASCAR,*** MALAYSIA,** MALI,* MAURITIUS,**
MEXICO,** NETHERLANDS,*** NICARAGUA,*** NIGERIA,** PAKISTAN,* PERU,* PHILIPPINES,***
QATAR,*** REPUBLIC OF KOREA,* ROMANIA,* RUSSIAN FEDERATION,** SAUDI ARABIA,**
SENEGAL,** SLOVENIA,*** SOUTH AFRICA,*** SRI LANKA,* SWITZERLAND,** UKRAINE,* UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,* URUGUAY** and ZAMBIA.*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 18 June 2008.

**

Term of office expires on 18 June 2009.

***

Term of office expires on 18 June 2010.

61/416. Election by the General Assembly of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 22 May 2007, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolutions 60/180 of 20 December 2005, paragraph 4 (e), and 60/261 of 8 May 2006, elected
GEORGIA and JAMAICA as members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office beginning on 23 June 2007 and ending on 22 June 2009,
on the expiration of the terms of office of CROATIA and JAMAICA.
The Security Council, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 60/180, paragraph 4 (a),
selected PANAMA and SOUTH AFRICA as members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for a one-year term of office beginning on 1 January and ending on
31 December 2007, on the expiration of the terms of office of DENMARK and the UNITED
REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA. 5
The Economic and Social Council, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 60/180,
paragraph 4 (b), on the expiration of the terms of office of BELGIUM, INDONESIA and POLAND,
elected the CZECH REPUBLIC and INDONESIA as members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for a term of office beginning on 1 January 2007 and ending on
22 June 2008. It also elected LUXEMBOURG for a term of office beginning on 6 February 2007 and
ending on 22 June 2008. 6
As a result, the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission is composed of
the following thirty-one Member States: ANGOLA,*** BANGLADESH,*** BRAZIL,*** BURUNDI,***
CHILE,*** CHINA,* CZECH REPUBLIC,*** EGYPT,*** EL SALVADOR,*** FIJI,*** FRANCE,*
GEORGIA,**** GERMANY,*** GHANA,*** GUINEA-BISSAU,*** INDIA,*** INDONESIA,***
ITALY,*** JAMAICA,**** JAPAN,*** LUXEMBOURG,*** NETHERLANDS,*** NIGERIA,***
_______________
5
6

See S/2007/16.
See Economic and Social Council decisions 2006/201 E and 2007/201 A.

132

V. Decisions

NORWAY,*** PAKISTAN,*** PANAMA,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,* SOUTH AFRICA,** SRI LANKA,***
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND* and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.*
___________________
*

Permanent members of the Security Council.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2007.

***

Term of office expires on 22 June 2008.

**** Term of office expires on 22 June 2009.

61/417. Election of thirty members of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 22 May 2007, the General Assembly, in accordance with
section II, paragraphs 1 to 3, of its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, as amended by
paragraph 8 of its resolution 3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 and paragraph 10 (b) of its
resolution 31/99 of 15 December 1976, as well as its resolution 57/20 of 19 November 2002,
elected ARMENIA, BAHRAIN, BENIN, BOLIVIA, BULGARIA, CAMEROON, CANADA, CHILE, CHINA,
EGYPT, EL SALVADOR, FRANCE, GERMANY, GREECE, HONDURAS, JAPAN, LATVIA, MALAYSIA,
MALTA, MEXICO, MOROCCO, NAMIBIA, NORWAY, the REPUBLIC OF KOREA, the RUSSIAN
FEDERATION, SENEGAL, SINGAPORE, SOUTH AFRICA, SRI LANKA and the UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND as members of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for a six-year term of office beginning on 25 June 2007, to fill the
vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of ARGENTINA, BELGIUM, BENIN,
BRAZIL, CAMEROON, CANADA, CHILE, CHINA, CROATIA, FRANCE, GERMANY, JAPAN, JORDAN,
LITHUANIA, MEXICO, MOROCCO, QATAR, the REPUBLIC OF KOREA, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION,
RWANDA, SIERRA LEONE, SINGAPORE, SOUTH AFRICA, SRI LANKA, SWEDEN, the FORMER
YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA, TUNISIA, TURKEY, the UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and URUGUAY.
As a result, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law is composed of the
following sixty Member States: ALGERIA,* ARMENIA,** AUSTRALIA,* AUSTRIA,* BAHRAIN,**
BELARUS,* BENIN,** BOLIVIA,** BULGARIA,** CAMEROON,** CANADA,** CHILE,** CHINA,**
COLOMBIA,* CZECH REPUBLIC,* ECUADOR,* EGYPT,** EL SALVADOR,** FIJI,* FRANCE,**
GABON,* GERMANY,** GREECE,** GUATEMALA,* HONDURAS,** INDIA,* IRAN (ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF),* ISRAEL,* ITALY,* JAPAN,** KENYA,* LATVIA,** LEBANON,* MADAGASCAR,*
MALAYSIA,** MALTA,** MEXICO,** MONGOLIA,* MOROCCO,** NAMIBIA,** NIGERIA,*
NORWAY,** PAKISTAN,* PARAGUAY,* POLAND,* REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,**
SENEGAL,** SERBIA,* SINGAPORE,** SOUTH AFRICA,** SPAIN,* SRI LANKA,** SWITZERLAND,*
THAILAND,* UGANDA,* UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,** UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA,* VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF)* and ZIMBABWE.*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on the last day prior to the beginning of the forty-third session of the Commission in 2010.

**

Term of office expires on the last day prior to the beginning of the forty-sixth session of the Commission in 2013.

61/418. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session7
At its 101st plenary meeting, on 24 May 2007, the General Assembly, in accordance with
Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations and rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the
Assembly elected by acclamation, Mr. Srgjan KERIM of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia as President of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session.
_______________
7

In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of
the President of the Assembly, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the six Main Committees.

133

V. Decisions

61/419. Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session7
On 24 May 2007, the six Main Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in
accordance with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the purpose of
electing their Chairmen.
At the 105th plenary meeting, on 24 July 2007, the President of the General Assembly
announced that the following persons had been elected as Chairmen of the six Main Committees
of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session:
First Committee:

Mr. Paul BADJI (Senegal)

Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):
Mr. Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem MOHAMAD (Sudan)
Second Committee:

Ms. Kirsti LINTONEN (Finland)

Third Committee:

Mr. Raymond WOLFE (Jamaica)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. Hamidon ALI (Malaysia)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Alexei TULBURE (Moldova)

61/420. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session7
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 24 July 2007, the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978 and rule 30 of the
rules of procedure of the Assembly elected by acclamation the following twenty-one Member
States as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session: BAHAMAS, BENIN,
BOTSWANA, CHINA, CYPRUS, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, EGYPT, FRANCE, GAMBIA,
HONDURAS, ICELAND, IRAQ, MAURITIUS, PALAU, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SRI LANKA, TURKEY,
TURKMENISTAN, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA and URUGUAY.
61/421. Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 24 July 2007, the General Assembly, pursuant to article 3,
paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, contained in the annex to resolution 31/192
of 22 December 1976, appointed Mr. Nikolay V. Chulkov, Mr. Even Francisco Fontaine Ortiz,
Mr. Mohamed Mounir-Zahran, Ms. Deborah Wynes and Mr. Zhang Yishan as members of the
Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2008 and expiring on
31 December 2012, to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of
Mr. Even Francisco Fontaine Ortiz, Mr. Tang Guangting, Mr. Victor Vislykh, Ms. Deborah Wynes
and Mr. Muhammad Yussuf.8
As a result, the Joint Inspection Unit is composed as follows: Mr. Gérard BIRAUD (France),**
Mr. Nikolay V. CHULKOV (Russian Federation),*** Mr. Papa Louis FALL (Senegal),** Mr. Even
Francisco FONTAINE ORTIZ (Cuba),*** Mr. Tadanori INOMATA (Japan),* Mr. Mohamed MOUNIRZAHRAN (Egypt),*** Mr. István POSTA (Hungary),** Mr. Cihan TERZI (Turkey),** Ms. Deborah
WYNES (United States of America)*** and Mr. ZHANG Yishan (China).***
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2010.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2012.

_______________
8

See A/61/962.

134

V. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

61/502. Organization of the sixty-first session
B9
At its 89th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President, 10 decided, without setting a precedent, to invite Mr. Rex Nettleford, Professor and
Vice-Chancellor Emeritus of the University of the West Indies, Jamaica, to make a statement at
the plenary meeting commemorating the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade.
61/503. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
B11
At its 96th plenary meeting, on 16 May 2007, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 106, entitled “Appointment of members of the
Committee on Contributions”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters),
in order to consider expeditiously a report of the Fifth Committee.12 The Assembly further agreed
to proceed immediately to the consideration of the sub-item.
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 63, entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the special
session on children”, under heading D (Promotion of human rights), and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting in order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.13 The Assembly further
agreed to proceed immediately to its consideration.
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 24 July 2007, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the General Committee as set forth in its fifth report,14 decided not to include
in the agenda of its sixty-first session an additional item entitled “Contemporary forms of
xenophobia”.
At its 106th plenary meeting, on 2 August 2007, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 106, entitled “Appointment of members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions”, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in plenary meeting in
order to consider expeditiously a note by the Secretary-General.15 The Assembly further agreed to
proceed immediately to the consideration of the sub-item.

_______________
9

Decision 61/502, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/61/49), vol. II, becomes decision 61/502 A.
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Plenary Meetings, 89th meeting (A/61/PV.89),
and corrigendum.
11
Decision 61/503, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/61/49), vol. II, becomes decision 61/503 A.
12
A/61/562/Add.1.
13
A/61/L.63.
14
See A/61/250/Add.4.
15
A/61/101/Add.1.

135

V. Decisions

61/556. Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 22 May 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President,16 guided by the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS,17 in which it decided, inter
alia, to devote sufficient time and at least one full day of its annual session to review and debate a
report of the Secretary-General, and by the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS,18 decided:
(a) To welcome the report of the Secretary-General on progress towards implementation
of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS,19
and the recommendations contained therein;
(b) To request the Secretary-General to take into consideration, inter alia, the discussions
during the sixty-first session in preparing his annual report to the General Assembly at its sixtysecond session on progress achieved and challenges remaining in realizing the commitments set
out in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS;
(c) To include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session an item entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration
on HIV/AIDS”.
61/558. Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
At its 107th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of the Acting Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,20 decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Report of the Peacebuilding Commission” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
sixty-second session.
61/559. Report of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Assistance and Support to
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
At its 107th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2007, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Assistance and Support to
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,21 recalling its resolutions 59/300 of 22 June 2005,
60/263 of 6 June 2006 and 61/291 of 24 July 2007:
(a) Decided to defer the convening of the substantive session of the Working Group until
the sixty-second session of the Assembly;
(b) Requested the Working Group to meet from 3 to 7 December 2007 and to submit a
report on its work to the Assembly at its sixty-second session.
61/560. Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund
At its 107th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of the Secretary-General,22 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund” and to include it in the draft agenda of the sixtysecond session.

_______________
16

A/61/L.58.
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
18
Resolution 60/262, annex.
19
A/61/816.
20
A/61/1035.
21
A/61/1044, para.14.
22
A/61/1042.
17

136

V. Decisions

61/561. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and related matters
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, the General Assembly, recalling its
previous relevant resolutions and decisions, having considered the report of the Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership
of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security Council, which was established
pursuant to its resolution 48/26 of 3 December 1993, on its deliberations during the sixty-first
session of the Assembly, 23 bearing in mind the United Nations Millennium Declaration of
8 September 2000, adopted by Heads of State and Government,24 in which they resolved to
intensify their efforts to achieve a comprehensive reform of the Security Council in all its aspects,
and recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome of 16 September 2005,25 in which Heads of State
and Government expressed support for early reform of the Council and recommended that the
Council continue to adapt its working methods:
(a) Took note of the report of the Working Group on its work during the sixty-first session
of the General Assembly;23
(b) Noted with appreciation the Chairperson’s initiative to stimulate an active discussion
relating to the comprehensive reform of the Security Council by the Working Group;
(c) Urged the Working Group to exert efforts during the sixty-second session, aimed at
achieving general agreement among Member States in the consideration of all issues relevant to
the question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Council;
(d) Decided that the question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Council should be considered
during the sixty-second session of the General Assembly so that further concrete results may be
achieved, including through intergovernmental negotiations, building on the progress achieved so
far, particularly at the sixty-first session, as well as the positions of and proposals made by
Member States;
(e) Also decided that the Working Group should continue its work, taking into account the
progress achieved during the forty-eighth to sixty-first sessions of the General Assembly and
drawing on the experience of the sixty-first session, as well as the views to be expressed during the
sixty-second session, and also taking into consideration the discussion on the process of
implementation of the 2005 World Summit Outcome;25
(f) Further decided that the Working Group should submit a report to the General
Assembly before the end of its sixty-second session, including any agreed recommendations.
61/562. Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of its President,26 decided to continue consultations on the system-wide coherence at its sixtysecond session.
The General Assembly further decided to continue at its sixty-second session consultations
on mandate review and how to move forward on the issue.

_______________
23

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/61/47).
See resolution 55/2.
25
See resolution 60/1.
26
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Plenary Meetings, 109th meeting (A/61/PV.109),
and corrigendum.
24

137

V. Decisions

61/563. Role of the United Nations in promoting a new global human order
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
Guyana,27 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “The role of the United Nations in
promoting a new global human order” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second session.
61/564. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of Azerbaijan,26 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second session.
61/565. Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international
peace, security and development
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of Azerbaijan,26 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “Protracted conflicts in the
GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second session.
61/566. Improving the financial situation of the United Nations
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Improving the financial situation of the United Nations” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second session.
61/567. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second session.
61/568. Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management and
internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the United Nations
Oil-for-Food Programme
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2007, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of Costa Rica,26 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “Follow-up to the
recommendations on administrative management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme” and to include it in the draft
agenda of its sixty-second session.

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

61/551. Questions deferred for future consideration
B28
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee,29 decided to defer until the second part of its resumed sixty-first session
consideration of the following agenda items and related documents:
(a)

Item 116
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the
United Nations

_______________
27

A/61/L.71.
Decision 61/551, in section B.6 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/61/49), vol. II, becomes decision 61/551 A.
29
A/61/667/Add.1, para. 9.
28

138

V. Decisions

Item 117
Programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
Item 123
Human resources management
Item 132
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations
Report of the Secretary-General on investing in information and communications
technology30
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions31
(b)

Item 127
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006 and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his
comments thereon32
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the inspection of the
programme and administrative management of the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia and the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting his comments thereon33
C

At its 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee, 34 decided to defer until its sixty-second session
consideration of the following agenda items and related documents:
(a)

Item 116
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the
United Nations
Item 117
Programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
Item 123
Human resources management
Item 132
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations
Report of the Secretary-General on investing in information and communications
technology30
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions31

_______________
30

A/61/765.
A/61/804.
32
A/61/264 (Part I) and Add.1 and 2.
33
A/61/61 and Add.1.
34
A/61/667/Add.2, para. 5.
31

139

V. Decisions

(b)

Item 123
Human resources management
Report of the Secretary-General on investing in people35
Report of the Secretary-General on reforming the Field Service category:
investing in meeting the human resources requirements of United Nations peace
operations in the twenty-first century36

(c)

Item 127
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006 and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his
comments thereon32
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the inspection of the
programme and administrative management of the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia and the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting his comments thereon33

(d)

Item 132
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed
peacekeeping missions as at 30 June 200537
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions38
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed
peacekeeping missions as at 30 June 200639
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions40

61/554. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee,41 having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing
of the United Nations Operation in Burundi42 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions:43
(a) Endorsed the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee and requested the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
(b) Approved the donation of the assets of the Operation, with a total inventory value of
2,799,400 United States dollars and corresponding residual value of 1,726,300 dollars, to the
Government of Burundi;
(c) Decided to keep under review during its sixty-first session the item entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Operation in Burundi”.
_______________
35

A/61/255.
A/61/255/Add.1 and Corr.1.
37
A/60/437.
38
A/60/551.
39
A/61/867.
40
A/61/920.
41
A/61/547/Add.1, para. 6.
42
A/61/771.
43
A/61/790.
36

140

V. Decisions

61/555. Financing of the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 4 April 2007, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee,44 having considered the note verbale from the Office of the President of
the General Assembly, 45 the statement by the Secretariat 46 and the views of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions:46
(a) Recalled the decision47 on the programme budget implications of the draft resolution
on the future operation of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women;48
(b) Reaffirmed section VI of its resolution 45/248 B of 21 December 1990 as well as
rules 153 and 157 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
(c) Reaffirmed also articles VI and VII of the statute of the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
(d) Reaffirmed further that, in accordance with articles VI and VII of the statute of the
Institute, regular budget resources would not be used to finance its activities;
(e) Urged the Institute, in accordance with its statute, to redouble its efforts to mobilize
voluntary funding to support its activities;
(f) Appealed to Member States, as a matter of urgency, to contribute voluntary funds in
support of the Institute and to honour existing pledges;
(g) Decided, notwithstanding subparagraphs (c) and (d) above and on an exceptional basis,
to authorize the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount of up to 190,000
United States dollars under section 9, Economic and social affairs, of the programme budget for
the biennium 2006–2007, subject to full reimbursement pending receipt of voluntary contributions;
(h) Decided also to request the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the
second part of its resumed sixty-first session on the financial situation of the Institute for 2007.
61/557. Closed peacekeeping missions
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2007, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,49 having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at 30 June 2006,39 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions:40
(a) Decided to return two thirds of the credits available in the account of the United
Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission to the Government of Kuwait in the amount of
3,701,300 United States dollars;
(b) Also decided to consider the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping
missions during its sixty-second session.

_______________
44

A/61/592/Add.4, para. 18.
A/C.5/61/20.
46
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Fifth Committee, 45th meeting
(A/C.5/61/SR.45), and corrigendum.
47
See A/60/619.
48
A/C.3/60/L.15/Rev.1; subsequently adopted by the General Assembly as resolution 60/229.
49
A/61/968, para. 21.
45

141

V. Decisions

3.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

61/511. Administration of justice at the United Nations
B50
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 28 March 2007, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Sixth Committee,51 decided to continue at its sixty-second session, in the Sixth Committee, its
consideration, under the agenda item entitled “Administration of justice at the United Nations”, of
the legal aspects, both institutional and procedural, of the report of the Redesign Panel on the United
Nations system of administration of justice52 and the comments of the Secretary-General on the
recommendations contained in the report of the Redesign Panel,53 taking into account the outcome of
the deliberations of the Fifth Committee at the resumed sixty-first session of the Assembly, and the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,54 and requested the
Secretary-General, in accordance with any further decisions that may be taken by the Assembly on
the recommendation of the Fifth Committee on this item during its sixty-first session, to provide
more details on a proposal to strengthen the functions of the Office of the Ombudsman, including
mediation, and draft elements of statute(s) of the first instance and the appellate instance, taking into
account the points set out in appendix I to the letter from the Vice-Chairman of the Sixth Committee
to the President of the General Assembly.55
61/553. Revised provisional programme of work of the Sixth Committee for the sixtysecond session of the General Assembly56
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 28 March 2007, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Sixth Committee,57 took note of the decision of the Committee to adopt
the following revised provisional programme of work for the sixty-second session of the
Assembly, as proposed by the Bureau:
Revised provisional programme of work
8 October

Organization of work of the Sixth Committee

8 and 24 October

Administration of justice at the United Nations

10, 11 and 26 October

Measures to eliminate international terrorism

15 and 26 October

Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on
mission

16 and 17 October

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization

18 October

Diplomatic protection

22 October

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fortieth session

_______________
50

Decision 61/511, in section B.7 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement
No.49 (A/61/49), vol. II, becomes decision 61/511 A.
51
A/61/460/Add.1, para. 8.
52
A/61/205.
53
A/61/758.
54
A/61/815.
55
A/C.5/61/21, annex.
56
Subject to the decision of the General Assembly on the allocation of the items to the Sixth Committee.
57
A/61/458/Add.1, para. 5.

142

V. Decisions

23 October

Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous
activities and allocation of loss in the case of such harm

24 October

Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts

25 and 26 October

The rule of law at the national and international levels

29 October–8 November

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fiftyninth session

15 November

Programme of assistance in the teaching, study, dissemination and
wider appreciation of international law
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
Adoption of the provisional programme of work for the sixty-third
session

9 and 19 October and
9 and 12 November

Reserved

143

Annex I
Allocation of agenda items1
1

1. The following item, which had been allocated to the Third Committee, was also considered
directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-first session, under heading D (Promotion of
human rights):2
63. Promotion and protection of the rights of children:
(b)

Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children.

2. The following item, which had been allocated to the Fifth Committee, was also considered
directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-first session, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters):2
106. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a)

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;

(b)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions.

_______________
1
Further to resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, agenda items are organized under headings corresponding to the
priorities of the Organization.
2
See decision 61/503 B in section V.B of the present volume.

145

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolutions
Resolution
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

133

104th

29 June 2007

37

115

104th

29 June 2007

38

134

104th

29 June 2007

40

139

104th

29 June 2007

42

Resolution B

151

92nd

2 April 2007

45

Resolution C

151

104th

29 June 2007

47

Resolution B

144 (b)

92nd

2 April 2007

50

Resolution C

144 (b)

104th

29 June 2007

53

61/255.

Holocaust denial

44

85th

26 January 2007

2

61/256.

Strengthening of the capacity of the Organization in
peacekeeping operations

112

88th

15 March 2007

2

61/257.

Strengthening of the capacity of the Organization to
advance the disarmament agenda

112

88th

15 March 2007

3

61/258.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good
offices and other political initiatives authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council

117

90th

26 March 2007

57

61/259.

Observer status for the Islamic Development Bank
Group in the General Assembly

153

91st

28 March 2007

128

61/260.

Programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit
for 2007

124

93rd

4 April 2007

58

61/261.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

128

93rd

4 April 2007

59

61/9.

Title

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
Resolution B

61/233.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors
Resolution B

61/247.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire
Resolution B

61/248.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea
Resolution B

61/249.

61/250.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon

147

Annex II - Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

61/262.

Conditions of service and compensation for officials
other than Secretariat officials: members of the
International Court of Justice and judges and ad litem
judges of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda

117

93rd

4 April 2007

63

61/263.

Strengthened and unified security management system

117

93rd

4 April 2007

65

61/264.

Liabilities and proposed funding for after-service health
insurance benefits

117

93rd

4 April 2007

69

61/265.

Audit and investigative reviews of the tsunami relief
operations conducted by the United Nations Secretariat,
funds and programmes and the specialized agencies

116

93rd

4 April 2007

71

61/266.

Multilingualism

114

96th

16 May 2007

4

61/267.

Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate future
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations
Resolution A

33

96th

16 May 2007

32

Resolution B

33

105th

24 July 2007

32

61/268.

United Nations Population Award

42

102nd

25 May 2007

8

61/269.

High-level Dialogue on Interreligious and Intercultural
Understanding and Cooperation for Peace

44

102nd

25 May 2007

8

61/270.

The Ethiopian Millennium

44

103rd

15 June 2007

9

61/271.

International Day of Non-Violence

44

103rd

15 June 2007

10

61/272.

Commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to
the follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children

63 (b)

104th

29 June 2007

11

61/273.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for
the biennium 2006-2007

117

104th

29 June 2007

72

61/274.

Comprehensive proposal on appropriate incentives to
retain staff of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia

129 and 130

104th

29 June 2007

73

61/275.

Terms of reference for the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee and strengthening the Office of Internal
Oversight Services

116, 117, 127
and 132

104th

29 June 2007

74

61/276.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
cross-cutting issues

132

104th

29 June 2007

79

61/277.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy

132

104th

29 June 2007

89

61/278.

Consolidation of peacekeeping accounts

132

104th

29 June 2007

91

148

Annex II - Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

61/279.

Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to
manage and sustain peacekeeping operations

132

104th

29 June 2007

91

61/280.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus

135

104th

29 June 2007

98

61/281.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

136

104th

29 June 2007

101

61/282.

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor

138

104th

29 June 2007

105

61/283.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia

140

104th

29 June 2007

106

61/284.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti

141

104th

29 June 2007

109

61/285.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo

142

104th

29 June 2007

112

61/286.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

143

104th

29 June 2007

114

61/287.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force

144 (a)

104th

29 June 2007

117

61/288.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone

145

104th

29 June 2007

120

61/289.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan

146

104th

29 June 2007

121

61/290.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara

147

104th

29 June 2007

124

61/291.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects

33

105th

24 July 2007

33

61/292.

Revitalizing the role and authority of the General
Assembly and strengthening its performance

110

106th

2 August 2007

13

61/293.

Prevention of armed conflict

11

107th

13 September 2007

14

61/294.

Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic

15

107th

13 September 2007

14

61/295.

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples

68

107th

13 September 2007

15

61/296.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union

108 (a)

109th

17 September 2007

25

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

106 (a)

106th

2 August 2007

131

106 (b)

96th

16 May 2007

131

Decisions
Decision
No.

61/405.

Title

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Decision B

61/406.

Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Decision B

149

Annex II - Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

61/415.

Election of fourteen members of the Human Rights
Council

105 (e)

97th

17 May 2007

132

61/416.

Election by the General Assembly of two members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission

105 (d)

100th

22 May 2007

132

61/417.

Election of thirty members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

105 (b)

100th

22 May 2007

133

61/418.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-second session

4

101st

24 May 2007

133

61/419.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of
the General Assembly at its sixty-second session

5

105th

24 July 2007

134

61/420.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session

6

105th

24 July 2007

134

61/421.

Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit

106 (h)

105th

24 July 2007

134

61/502.

Organization of the sixty-first session
7

89th

26 March 2007

135

7

96th
104th
105th
106th

16 May 2007
29 June 2007
24 July 2007
2 August 2007

135

128

91st

28 March 2007

142

Decision B

116

93rd

4 April 2007

138

Decision C

116

104th

29 June 2007

139

61/553.

Revised provisional programme of work of the Sixth
Committee for the sixty-second session of the
General Assembly

110

91st

28 March 2007

142

61/554.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi

133

93rd

4 April 2007

140

61/555.

Financing of the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women

117

93rd

4 April 2007

141

61/556.

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS

46

100th

22 May 2007

136

61/557.

Closed peacekeeping missions

132

104th

29 June 2007

141

61/558.

Report of the Peacebuilding Commission

26

107th

13 September 2007

136

61/559.

Report of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group
on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse

33

107th

13 September 2007

136

Decision B
61/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
Decision B

61/511.

Administration of justice at the United Nations
Decision B

61/551.

150

Questions deferred for future consideration

Annex II - Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

61/560.

Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding
Fund

152

107th

13 September 2007

136

61/561.

Question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters

111

109th

17 September 2007

137

61/562.

Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

113

109th

17 September 2007

137

61/563.

Role of the United Nations in promoting a new global
human order

45

109th

17 September 2007

138

61/564.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan

17

109th

17 September 2007

138

61/565.

Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development

27

109th

17 September 2007

138

61/566.

Improving the financial situation of the
United Nations

119

109th

17 September 2007

138

61/567.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor

137

109th

17 September 2007

138

61/568.

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the
Independent Inquiry Committee into the United
Nations Oil-for-Food Programme

154

109th

17 September 2007

138

151
