S/2013/455

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 July 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 31 July 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to resolution 827 (1993), by which the Security
Council established the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (the “International Tribunal”).
In a letter dated 12 June 2013 (S/2013/349), I was informed of the decision by
the members of the Security Council that one permanent judge of the International
Tribunal should be elected under article 13 bis, paragraph 1, of the statute of the
International Tribunal, to be immediately assigned and redeployed to the Appeals
Chamber.
Article 13 and article 13 bis of the Statute of the International Tribunal, as
amended, read:
Article 13
Qualifications of judges
The permanent and ad litem judges shall be persons of high moral
character, impartiality and integrity who possess the qualifications required in
their respective countries for appointment to the highest judicial offices. In the
overall composition of the Chambers and sections of the Trial Chambers, due
account shall be taken of the experience of the judges in criminal law,
international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights
law.
Article 13 bis
Election of permanent judges
1.
Fourteen of the permanent judges of the International Tribunal shall be
elected by the General Assembly from a list submitted by the Security Council,
in the following manner:
(a) The Secretary-General shall invite nominations for judges of the
International Tribunal from States Members of the United Nations and
non-member States maintaining permanent observer missions at United
Nations Headquarters;
(b) Within sixty days of the date of the invitation of the Secretary-General,
each State may nominate up to two candidates meeting the qualifications set
13-41415 (E) 010813

*1341415*

S/2013/455

out in article 13 of the Statute, no two of whom shall be of the same
nationality and neither of whom shall be of the same nationality as any judge
who is a member of the Appeals Chamber and who was elected or appointed a
permanent judge of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States, between 1 January 1994
and 31 December 1994 (hereinafter referred to as “The International Tribunal
for Rwanda”) in accordance with article 12 bis of the Statute of that Tribunal;
(c) The Secretary-General shall forward the nominations received to the
Security Council. From the nominations received the Security Council shall
establish a list of not less than twenty-eight and not more than forty-two
candidates, taking due account of the adequate representation of the principal
legal systems of the world;
(d) The President of the Security Council shall transmit the list of candidates
to the President of the General Assembly. From that list the General Assembly
shall elect fourteen permanent judges of the International Tribunal. The
candidates who receive an absolute majority of the votes of the States
Members of the United Nations and of the non-member States maintaining
permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters, shall be
declared elected. Should two candidates of the same nationality obtain the
required majority vote, the one who received the higher number of votes shall
be considered elected.
2.
In the event of a vacancy in the Chambers amongst the permanent judges
elected or appointed in accordance with this article, after consultation with the
Presidents of the Security Council and of the General Assembly, the SecretaryGeneral shall appoint a person meeting the qualifications of article 13 of the
Statute, for the remainder of the term of office concerned.
3.
The permanent judges elected in accordance with this article shall be
elected for a term of four years. The terms and conditions of service shall be
those of the judges of the International Court of Justice. They shall be eligible
for re-election.
As stated in the letter dated 12 June 2013, the Security Council requested that I
invite States to submit nominations within a period of 30 days. The Council also
decided that, from the nominations received, it would establish a list of three
candidates or, should there be only two nominations, a list of two candidates, taking
into account the adequate representation of the principal legal systems of the world
and the nationalities of the current permanent judges of the International Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Pursuant to paragraph 1 (a) of article 13 bis of the Statute of the International
Tribunal, and the letter of 12 June 2013 from the President of the Security Council,
States Members of the United Nations and non-member States maintaining
permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters were invited, by
means of a letter dated 17 June 2013, to submit nominations for one permanent
judge of the International Tribunal and were informed that, within 30 days of the

2

13-41415

S/2013/455

date of that letter, they might nominate up to two candidates meeting the
qualifications set out in article 13 of the statute.
Pursuant to paragraph 1 (c) of article 13 bis of the statute of the International
Tribunal, I have the honour herewith to forward to the Security Council the six
nominations that I have received from Member States within the 30-day period
specified in the letter dated 12 June 2013. The list of candidates, in alphabetical
order, together with the curricula vitae, have been provided to me in connection with
their nominations.*
I should take this opportunity to note that, pursuant to paragraph 3 of article
13 bis of the statute of the International Tribunal, as amended, the permanent judges
of the International Tribunal elected in accordance with that article are to serve on a
full-time basis and so may not engage in any other occupation of a professional
nature during their term of office. Once elected to the International Tribunal, they
are expected to take up residence at its seat in The Hague. Further, in accordance
with the letter dated 12 June 2013 from the President of the Security Council, the
term of office of the judge elected will be the same as the term of office of the
judges of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia currently serving in
the Appeals Chamber.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

* The information is on file with the Secretariat and is available for consultation.

13-41415

3
