A/69/981–S/2015/500

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
13 July 2015
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda items 13 and 115

Security Council
Seventieth year

Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

A vital and enduring commitment: implementing the
responsibility to protect
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report takes stock of 10 years of efforts to advance the
responsibility to protect. It reaffirms the enduring relevance of the principle, both as
an expression of political commitment and as a guide for action to prevent and halt
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. It also outlines
the consensus that has developed on the three-pillar framework for implementation
established in 2009 (see A/63/677) and elaborated through annual dialogues in the
General Assembly.
The report assesses the range and impact of implementation efforts under each
of the three pillars of the principle, including actions by States to ratify relevant legal
instruments and build national resilience to atrocity crimes; international initiatives
to assist States in fulfilling their primary responsibility to protect; and efforts by the
international community to respond to protection crises, using a variety of tools. A
following section identifies key changes in the international landscape since 2005
that will affect future actions to advance the responsibility to protect.

15-11846 (E)

230715

*1511846*

A/69/981
S/2015/500

The report concludes with six core priorities for the responsibility to protect
over the next decade, namely, (1) signalling political commitment at the national,
regional and global levels to protect populations from atrocity crimes; (2) elevating
prevention as a core aspect of the responsibility to protect; (3) clarifying and
expanding options for timely and decisive response; (4) add ressing the risk of
recurrence; (5) enhancing regional action to prevent and respond to atrocity crimes;
and (6) strengthening international networks dedicated to genocide prevention and
the responsibility to protect.

2/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

I. Introduction
1.
In spite of proclamations of “never again” following abject failures to prevent
atrocity crimes 1 during the twentieth century, far too many of today’s crises feature
forms of violence that shock the global conscience and challenge our common
humanity. Acts that may constitute genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity are occurring in several countries, including the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Iraq, Libya, Nigeria, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Yemen. A host of other situations feature serious violations of human
rights or international humanitarian law that entail significant risk of further
escalation, or are marked by violent extremism that poses a particular threat to
religious and ethnic minorities.
2.
These situations are generating protection challenges of immense proportions.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, for example, more than 220,000 people have been
killed and over one million have been injured since the outbreak of conflict;
7.6 million are internally displaced and almost 4 million have become refugees. 2 In
South Sudan, more than 2 million people are currently displaced and nearly 118,000
have sought shelter inside “protection of civilian” sites of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. 3 The staggering scale of this suffering should compel the
international community to frankly assess its failures and redouble its commitment
to protect vulnerable populations from the most egregious international crimes.
3.
Member States recognized the imperative to prevent and halt atrocity crimes
when they adopted the principle of the responsibility to protect at the 2005 World
Summit. Heads of State and Government affirmed their primary responsibi lity to
protect their own populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity and accepted a collective responsibility to assist each other
in fulfilling this responsibility. They also declared their preparedness to take tim ely
and decisive action, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and in
cooperation with relevant regional organizations as appropriate, when national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations.
4.
The time has come to take stock of efforts to uphold this commitment. This
report assesses the advancement of the responsibility to protect over the past 10
years, identifies outstanding challenges to the implementation of the principle and
articulates six core priorities to guide atrocity crime prevention and response in the
decade ahead.
5.
The importance of the responsibility to protect has been reiterated many times
since the 2005 World Summit. The Security Council has adopted 30 resolutions and
six presidential statements that refer to the responsibility to protect, and support for
the principle and the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and the
__________________
1 The present report uses the term “atrocity crimes” to refer to the four acts specified in paragraph

138 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome. Genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity are
defined in international criminal law; ethnic cleansing, while not established as a distinct crime,
includes acts that will regularly amount to one of the crimes, in particular genocide and crimes
against humanity.
2 United Nations, press release, 12 March 2015; available from www.un.org/press/en/2015/
sgsm16588.doc.htm.
3 Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2015/296), para. 20.

15-11846

3/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

Responsibility to Protect has been expressed in stronger terms and with increasing
frequency in recent years. 4 In several resolutions authorizing United Nations peace
operations the Council has emphasized the need to support national authorities in
upholding their responsibility to protect. 5 The General Assembly has continued
consideration of the principle, held a formal debate, and convened six annual
informal interactive dialogues. The Human Rights Council has adopted
13 resolutions that feature the responsibility to protect, including three on the
prevention of genocide and nine relating to country-specific situations. At a regional
level, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights has adopted a
resolution on strengthening the responsibility to protect in Africa 6 and the European
Parliament has recommended full implementation of the principle by the European
Union. 7
6.
My annual reports on the responsibility to protect have elaborated a
framework for implementation based on three equal and mutually reinforcing
pillars. 8 Pillar I addresses how States can fulfil their primary responsibility to
protect their populations. 9 Pillar II outlines the collective responsibility of the
international community to encourage and help States to meet their responsibility to
protect. 10 Pillar III elaborates options for timely and decisive response. 11 I have also
provided guidance on early warning and assessment of atrocity crimes 12 and the
role of regional and subregional arrangements. 13 As a result, consensus has
developed on core aspects of this framework, including the need to prioritize
prevention, to utilize a full range of diplomatic, poli tical and humanitarian
measures, to consider military force only as a last resort, and to ensure that
implementation of the responsibility to protect is in accordance with the Charter and
other established principles of international law.
7.
This consensus spans all regions. The past decade demonstrates that arguments
about specific national circumstances do not supersede universal obligations to
safeguard populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. There is no longer any question that the protection of populations
from atrocity crimes is both a national and an international responsibility.
8.
Over the past 10 years, the international community has responded to
situations that presented elevated risks or the ongoing o ccurrence of atrocity crimes.
This has produced some notable successes. Concerted international engagement in
Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Kenya and Kyrgyzstan helped to avert the recurrence of
__________________
4 See, in particular, Security Council resolutions 2150 (2014) and 2171 (2014).
5 See, for example, Security Council resolutions 1975 (2011), 1996 (2011), 2085 (2012) and 2121

(2013).
6 ACHPR/Res.117 (XXXXII) 07.
7 Recommendation of the European Parliament of 18 April 2013 (P7_TA(2013)0180).
8 See the report of the Secretary-General on implementing the responsibility to protect ( A/63/677).
9 See the report of the Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect: State responsibility and

prevention (A/67/929-S/2013/399).
10 See the report of the Secretary-General on fulfilling our collective responsibility: international

assistance and the responsibility to protect (A/68/947-S/2014/449).
11 See the report of the Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect: timely and decisive

response (A/66/874-S/2012/578).
12 See the report of the Secretary-General on early warning, assessment and the responsibility to

protect (A/64/864).
13 See the report of the Secretary-General on the role of regional and subregional arrangements in

implementing the responsibility to protect (A/65/877-S/2011/393).

4/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

atrocity crimes. In other cases, however, international efforts fail ed to deliver
adequate protection. The outbreaks of intercommunal violence in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan represent significant failures to prevent atrocity
crimes, even if the United Nations and regional organizations have tried to mitiga te
the scale of the crises by providing protection to vulnerable populations.
International action has not proved effective in addressing the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, notwithstanding the conclusions of the
commission of inquiry that systematic, widespread and gross violations of human
rights are being committed that in many instances entail crimes against humanity. 14
In Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and other violent extremist groups has resulted in an increase in
atrocity crimes and the deliberate targeting of religious minorities. 15 The conflicts
in Yemen and the Occupied Palestinian Territory of the Gaza Strip have generated
high numbers of civilian casualties, raising concern about the indiscriminate use of
force by all parties and the possible commission of war crimes.
9.
Implementation of the responsibility to protect has also raised important
practical questions, particularly with respect to timely and decisiv e response. The
intervention in Libya authorized by the Security Council in resolution 1973 (2011)
has generated debates about when and how force should be resorted to for the
purposes of protection and raised concerns among some Member States about the
misuse of the principle. It has also reminded actors of the vital need to consider
what kind of sustained support may be required after the use of force. In addition,
the international community’s inability to respond effectively to the continuing
crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic has led some to question the principle’s utility in
generating action in the hardest cases. These two crises have also contributed to
wider misperceptions that the responsibility to protect is primarily concerned with
coercive measures.
10. This record should not shake our resolve to live up to the responsibilities
Member States committed themselves to in 2005. In fact, the evolution of the
responsibility to protect demonstrates why it remains such a critical resource for
preventing and halting genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.
11. First, the principle’s narrow scope, as set out in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, limits the responsibility to protect to only the most serious international
crimes. The primary purpose of the responsibility to protect is to close the gap
between State obligations under legal instruments, such as the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, and the continuing subjection of populations to the violence and terror of
atrocity crimes.
12. Second, the responsibility to protect is a welcome clarification of standards
and responsibilities for protection that both focuses on vulnerable populations and
reinforces State sovereignty. It is based on the conviction that State sovereignty is
__________________
14 Report of the commission of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of

Korea (A/HRC/25/63), para. 24.
15 Statement by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, the

Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect, the Special Rapporteur
on Minority Issues and the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief, on the situation
in Syria (12 June 2015); available from www.ohchr.org.

15-11846

5/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

enhanced through more effective protection of populations from atrocity crimes.
The responsibility to protect and State sovereignty are thus allies, not adversaries.
13. Third, paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World Summit Outcome (see General
Assembly resolution 60/1) establish important constraints on unilateral action. Ten
years ago, Heads of State and Government emphasized that the commission of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity could no longer
be deemed solely matters of domestic concern. At the same time, they wanted to
forestall the potential for abuse of the principle. The carefully crafted consensus
underpinning the responsibility to protect addresses those concerns by creating a
partnership for protection among States and international actors. It provides a
framework of action for protecting populations that reinforces existing State
responsibilities, is governed by the collective security provisions in Chapters VI,
VII and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and restricts the use of coercive
measures to actions authorized by the Security Council. The responsibility to protect
thus remains a vital principle for encouraging national and internationa l action to
prevent and respond to atrocity crimes in accordance with international law.

II. The implementation imperative
14. The responsibility to protect is at a turning point. I welcome refinements over
the past decade that have greatly diminished points of conceptual debate on the
principle and redirected attention to issues associated with effective implementation.
This new focus is urgently needed. A shift in the conversation from the conceptual
to the practical will help to ensure that the resp onsibility to protect retains its
aspirational quality. The principle was not designed to make Member States and
other international actors comfortable. Its purpose, and value, is to push all of us to
do more and to do better. Heads of State and Government endorsed the 2005 World
Summit Outcome because they believed that the status quo was unacceptable. As we
move into the next decade, the desire to answer every potential criticism must not
divert us from our core purpose.
15. The case for accelerating implementation could not be stronger. Genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity are a deep affront to humanity,
to the very dignity of human beings. Atrocity crimes exacerbate wider protection
needs, turn existing crises into more severe humanitarian emergencies and create
conditions particularly harmful to vulnerable groups such as women and children.
These acts can also represent a serious threat to international peace and security, as
situations involving atrocity crimes can generate lasting instability, both within and
across borders. Such crimes often amplify sources of conflict, limit the scope for
peaceful resolution of crises, produce significant refugee flows and internal
displacement, and destabilize neighbouring countries.
16. Atrocity crimes have wide-ranging costs and long-lasting effects. Painful
experience over the past decades illustrates how the perpetration of violence based
on the victims’ identity destroys the fabric of societies, with consequences that pass
from one generation to the next. It erodes processes of governance, dramatically
reverses economic development, creates new demands for international assistance,
and leaves lasting scars that impede efforts to rebuild peace. At a time when
international capacity to respond to current crises is strained, it is imperative that
Member States and other international actors devote more energy and resources to

6/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

effective prevention and accelerate efforts to put an end to the ongoing perpetration
of such crimes.

III. Operationalizing the three pillars
17. In preparing this report, the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect
has assembled a compendium of practice, based on inputs received from Member
States, regional organizations and civil society, which serves as a public resource on
the implementation of the responsibility to protect to date. 16 The overall picture
shows that efforts are advancing on multiple fronts. There has been considerable
improvement in the capacity of actors to identify risk factors for at rocity crimes and
to develop preventive and responsive strategies. At the same time, there is an acute
need for more sustained and targeted action that addresses key sources of risk and
builds more effective mechanisms for protecting populations.

A.

Pillar I: the protection responsibilities of the State
18. The intergovernmental consensus reached in 2005 underlines the primary
responsibility of each State to protect its populations. Pillar I of the responsibility to
protect thus builds on, but also seeks to strengthen compliance with, existing State
obligations under international human rights, humanitarian, criminal and refugee
law. It is also an acknowledgement that the main sources of resilience to atrocity
crimes lie within States and societies themselves.
Advancing participation in key legal instruments
19. The first encouraging aspect of implementation is the move by several States
to become parties to the relevant legal instruments pertaining to genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. 17 Some have implemented
these legal obligations at the national level through revisions of criminal law or
have developed practical measures for these legal instruments to be implemented
more effectively. Of particular importance are national measures to en sure that no
one is above the law, such as removing obstacles to the prosecution of State officials
accused of serious crimes and reinforcing the legal obligations incumbent on
security and police forces.
20. Progress on participation in treaties, however, is uneven and lags unacceptably
in some cases. I am concerned that 48 Member States have not become parties to the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Twenty eight Member States have yet to become parties to one or both o f Additional
Protocols I and II to the Geneva Conventions, a critical shortcoming in the current
context given the crucial provisions they contain for extending protection

__________________
16 The compendium of practice is available from www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/.
17 These instruments include the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of

Genocide; the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Additional Protocols thereto; the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; the Convention relating to
the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol thereto; the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court; the Arms Trade Treaty; and the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention) .

15-11846

7/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

obligations to situations of international and non -international armed conflict. Gaps
are also visible with respect to international criminal justice. Seventy -two Member
States are still not parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
and some parties to the Statute have not always fulfilled their obligations. In othe r
cases, differences linger between how some domestic jurisdictions and international
jurisdictions investigate and sanction atrocity crimes. Ending impunity is neither
optional nor negotiable. Accountability not only contributes to preventing the
recurrence of atrocity crimes but also makes national institutions stronger and more
legitimate.
Building national resilience to prevent atrocity crimes
21. Effective, legitimate and accountable State structures advance atrocity crime
prevention, especially by resolving sources of tension at the earliest stage. Of
particular importance are constitutional and other legal measures that
institutionalize respect for diversity, effective and responsive judicial systems,
public policies that address persistent patterns of inequality, and the capacity to
counter incitement to hostility and violence. The overwhelming majority of victims
of atrocity crimes have endured deprivation and discrimination, whether based on
race or ethnicity, religion or belief, political or ot her opinion, gender, sexual
orientation, caste or class.
22. While Member States today acknowledge their primary responsibility to
protect, many have not prioritized policies designed to build national resilience to
atrocity crimes. 18 This may require new initiatives. A case in point is the Regional
Committee of the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region on the
Prevention and Punishment of Genocide, War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and
All Forms of Discrimination — a regional effort to strengthen national capacity to
assess atrocity crime risk and mobilize early response. In other instances, it entails
strengthening mechanisms for intercommunal dialogue in ways that bring together
State and non-State actors, including by providing a prominent r ole for community
and religious leaders and women’s organizations. In most cases, however,
prioritizing prevention means ensuring that existing programmes explicitly address
atrocity crime risks by promoting inclusiveness, counteracting exclusionary
ideologies and acting swiftly and decisively to sanction violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law.
23. Finally, it is alarming to witness the retreat in some national contexts from the
protection of human rights and respect for international humanitarian and refugee
law. Governments point to exceptional circumstances, such as terrorist threats,
protest and rebellion, or the pressures of migration, to justify abrogating their legal
obligations. But the responsibility to protect encompasses all populations in all
circumstances and at all times. It is especially important that national actors fulfil
their existing legal obligations during periods of crisis. In several contemporary
situations of armed conflict, warring parties have failed to prote ct civilians from the
impact of hostilities, deliberately targeted civilians, or created serious obstacles to
the delivery of humanitarian relief. Member States must strongly condemn these
failures to uphold the most basic principles of international human itarian law. They
should also emphasize that the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access, and
depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival, including by wilfully
__________________
18 A/67/929-S/2013/399, paras. 35-48.

8/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

impeding relief supply
humanitarian law.

and

access,

constitute

violations

of

international

Expanding and supporting national focal points
24. The establishment of Member State focal points to integrate an atrocity crime
perspective into national policy is a particularly promising development of the past
decade. These national “homes” for the responsibility to protect — which now
encompass a quarter of the United Nations membership — not only help to increase
awareness of the principle and coordinate policy within government, but also
provide a launching pad for discussions among Member States. Networks foster a
“community of commitment” and serve as vital repositories of expertise.
25. Focal point networks need to become truly global in their membership in order
to enable a richer sharing of lessons learned between regions. Foc al points themselves
need to be empowered with the resources and institutional authority necessary to
ensure that atrocity crime prevention and response is embraced broadly — not only by
various government departments and agencies, but also by a wider arra y of societal
actors. This process will help to build long-lasting infrastructure for prevention and
protection, thus ensuring greater consistency and sustainability in how States fulfil
their responsibility to protect.

B.

Pillar II: international assistance and capacity-building
26. Member States now have a greater understanding of the risk factors for
atrocity crimes and how to assist one another in mitigating them. There are also
encouraging efforts under way to adjust existing forms of interna tional support to
better address atrocity crime risks. Civil society advocacy and technical advice have
supported these advances, including through the development of early warning
mechanisms and the delivery of targeted training programmes. However, this
agenda has not yet been consistently or widely adopted.
27. The integration of an atrocity crime perspective into conflict prevention,
development cooperation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding requires four main shifts
in emphasis. The first is an appreciation of the various contexts in which genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity are committed. While
atrocity crimes most frequently occur within an armed conflict, whether
international or civil, some can also be committed outside t hat context or as part of
a pre-conflict phase. The second shift is towards risk analyses that focus both on
threats to particular populations — often based on their identity — and on the
motives, opportunities and means of potential perpetrators for commi tting
systematic violence. The third is an ability to adjust and prioritize particular kinds
of support — for example, efforts directed at intercommunal dialogue — when there
is evidence of increased risk of violence against particular populations. More
broadly, assistance must be designed to ensure that it does not exacerbate existing
discrimination or reinforce persistent patterns of inequality. Finally, atrocity crime
prevention demands that ongoing conflicts be constantly monitored for changes in
dynamics that might lead protagonists on either side of an armed struggle to engage
in atrocity crimes.

15-11846

9/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

Encouragement
28. Despite considerable evidence that dialogue and preventive diplomacy play an
important role in encouraging States to fulfil their respon sibility to protect, the
international community systematically continues to underinvest in these tools. As
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations has recommended, Member
States must provide more consistent backing — both political and financial — for
resources that can advance the prevention of violence, including special envoys,
mediators, peace operations and regional offices. 19 Early engagement is more likely
to be persuasive than appeals for restraint that come after actors are already
committed to a more confrontational and deadly path.
29. The intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations can also play a more
proactive role in encouraging States to protect their populations. In keeping with the
commitment expressed in resolution 2171 (2014), the Security Council could use its
existing working methods to consider atrocity crime risks at the earliest possible
stage, including by requesting briefings from the Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect, supporting United Nations preventive
deployments and undertaking its own field missions. The Peacebuilding
Commission can also encourage Member States to incorporate atrocity crime risk
analysis and response in peacebuilding strategies, provide support for relevant
capacity-building and technical assistance, develop closer cooperation with the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect,
and use its advisory capacity to warn the Security Council of the potential
occurrence of atrocity crimes.
30. International human rights bodies provide another important form of
encouragement and can help to reduce the political sensitivities that often preclude
early prevention. The Human Rights Council, special procedures mandate -holders
and commissions of inquiry have all referenced the responsibility to protect in
recent years. However, there are opportunities to more systematically include
atrocity crime risk factors and national efforts to address them in the universal
periodic review process, in human rights reporting and in the proceedings of the
human rights treaty bodies. Expanding this form of encouragement will also better
connect deliberations in New York and Geneva, thereby ensuring a more
comprehensive and consistent approach across various United Nations bodies.
Regional human rights mechanisms should also consider including atrocity crime
prevention in their mechanisms for peer review and assessment.
Capacity-building
31. I have identified seven particular capacities that play a significant role in
mitigating the risk of atrocity crimes. 20 The compendium of practice highlights
promising examples of international support for each of these inhibitors, including
efforts to strengthen national electoral commissions and human rights institutions,
__________________
19 Report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations on uniting our strengths for

peace: politics, partnership and people (see A/70/95-S/2015/446), paras. 65-79.
20 The seven inhibitors include a professional and accountable security sector; impartial institutions

for overseeing political transitions; independent judicial and human rights institutions; the
capacity to assess risk and mobilize early response; local capacity to resolve conflicts; media
capacity to counteract prejudice and hate speech; and capacity for effective and legitimate
transitional justice (see A/68/947-S/2014/449, paras. 43-58).

10/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

to reinforce human rights protection and respect for international humanitarian law
in security sector reform, and to foster independent media and other mechanisms for
countering incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence. At t he community
level, capacity-building efforts have focused on leveraging the role of religious and
community leaders in dialogue and incorporating local voices, particularly women,
into early warning systems.
32. There is still wide scope for Member States and international organizations to
evaluate and strengthen their current capacity to provide pillar II assistance. Some
Member States have already adjusted their support to focus on the inhibitors of
atrocity crimes, to target legacies of violence or syst ematic discrimination, to assess
how past efforts may have negatively reinforced existing patterns of inequality and
to train officials to develop and manage such programmes. These steps should be
reinforced and expanded, thereby ensuring that internationa l assistance specifically
addresses atrocity crime risks and is provided in a flexible manner that respects
national ownership and builds mutual commitment.
Protection assistance
33. United Nations peace operations are often a front-line resource for assisting
States under stress to uphold their responsibility to protect. Currently 10 out of 16
United Nations peacekeeping missions are mandated by the Security Council to
support host States in protecting their civilian populations. Increasingly, these
operations confront situations characterized by widespread and systematic violence,
the specific targeting of groups based on identity and the indiscriminate use of
force. Peacekeepers are also being deployed with greater frequency into complex
and hostile environments where there is no peace to keep. I call on peacekeeping
missions to be guided by more strategic and forward -looking assessments of threats
to populations that incorporate the perspective and the protection strategies of local
actors, particularly women and children. This will require enhancing the intelligence
capabilities of missions. Such missions must also be provided with the rapidly
deployable capabilities and resources, both military and civilian, necessary to
respond to the changing scale and nature of the threats they encounter.
34. The protection of civilians strategies guiding peace operations would benefit
from a more focused approach to identifying and tracking atrocity crime risks, as
part of integrated threat analysis and as outlined by the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes developed by the Office on Genocide Prevention and the
Responsibility to Protect. More regular and systematic casualty recording would
also support efforts to monitor evolving patterns of violence against particular
groups. The lessons learned from the practical challenges faced in recent crises
featuring atrocity crimes must also be included in relevant human rights and
protection of civilians predeployment training for military and civilian personnel,
particularly those in leadership positions. The recent anniversaries of the genocides
in Rwanda and Srebrenica remind us that, for United Nations peacekeeping to be
effective, missions must be fully committed, equipped and mandated to ensure
civilian protection. On their part, Member States must work harder to ensure that
parties to conflict know that there will be serious consequences for the commission
of international crimes.
35. Finally, it is crucial to remember that the perpetration of atrocity crimes
requires access to military, financial and technical means. In this respect, I welcome

15-11846

11/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

the Security Council’s commitment in resolutions 2117 (2013) and 2220 (2015) to
stem the flow of small arms and light weapons, assist Member States in the safe and
effective management of outstanding stocks, support disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes, and employ arms embargoes and targeted sanctions
where appropriate. Member States must continue to expand cooperation to restrict
access to small arms and light weapons and to combat vigorously illicit financing
and other forms of illegal trafficking, especially by strengthening cross -border
customs cooperation and pursuing full and timely implementation of the Arms Trade
Treaty.

C.

Pillar III: timely and decisive response
36. While prevention is the preferred approach to implementing the responsibility
to protect, it does not always succeed. Experience in the past decade demonstrates
that timely and decisive response remains essential to protecting p opulations and
that a collective response can dampen the determination of potential perpetrators to
commit atrocity crimes. However, the record also shows a lack in both the political
will and cohesion of the international community, which has compromised the
pursuit of a consistent and timely response to protecting populations.
37. In paragraph 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome, Heads of State and
Government emphasized the full range of tools at the disposal of the international
community — non-military as well as military — to respond to the imminent risk or
commission of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Over the past decade, Member States have utilized various non -military measures in
efforts to respond to or prevent the escalation of atrocity crimes, including
mediation, monitoring and observer missions, fact-finding missions and
commissions of inquiry, and public advocacy by international officials. Acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter, the international community has also employed more
robust tools, including sanctions designed to discourage the targeting of civilians,
the establishment of peacekeeping missions and the authorization of military action
with the express purpose of protecting civilians.
38. Notwithstanding this range of options, the third pillar of the responsibility to
protect is still commonly perceived as being solely concerned with the use of force.
This perception needs to be countered. First, the choice is not between inaction and
the use of force. Non-military tools have made a tangible difference in responding
to the commission of atrocity crimes and preventing their escalation. Second, even
in intractable situations characterized by continuing violence, international actors
have attempted to fulfil their responsibility to protect through political, diplomatic
and humanitarian means. These efforts may at times have fallen short of delivering a
long-term protective environment, but they have succeeded in saving lives. Finally,
in some circumstances it may not be judged possible to employ force for protection
purposes without potentially causing more harm than good.
39. Looking ahead to the next decade, I continue to favour an early and flexible
approach to acting on pillar III responsibilities that focuses on non-coercive means,
but that takes into consideration from the outset all the mechanisms available under
the Charter. There are five prerequisites for the success of this approach.
40. First, the choice of tools employed by the international community needs to be
better shaped by timely and accurate knowledge of the circumstances on the ground

12/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

and well-informed judgement about the consequences of employing different
measures. Member States have an obligation to seek the best and most impartial
information about vulnerable populations, the intentions of potential perpetrators,
and political and other dynamics which could lead to atrocity crimes. It is also their
responsibility to anticipate, as far as possible, any harmful effects of their policy
responses and to mitigate those potential consequences in their plans for collective
action. These factors need to be fully considered in the decision -making of relevant
international and regional bodies, including the Security Council.
41. Second, Governments and other actors need to better understand the
conditions under which tools are likely to be effective. Sanctions, for example, work
best when coupled with a larger conflict management strategy, have clear objectives
and meet international human rights standards, and can be calibrated to identify
clearly the kind of behaviour or actions that they seek to modify. Mediation is more
likely to succeed when there is a single process fully supported by the international
community and a peace agreement is more likely to endure when it has political
commitment from the parties to the conflict, and buy-in from the population,
addresses the root causes of the conflict and can withstand the stresses of
implementation.
42. Third, the use of measures under pillar III needs to be informed by more
comprehensive strategies, aimed squarely at preventing the further commission of
atrocity crimes. Too often, actors have adopted one tool without full consideration
of how it relates to other mechanisms. The example of the 2 010 presidential
elections in Guinea illustrates how Member States and other regional and
international actors can coordinate a range of measures designed to prevent the
escalation of atrocity crimes, including high-level preventive diplomacy, an arms
embargo, travel bans on key individuals, and the prospect of prosecution by the
International Criminal Court. That case also highlights the need for coherent
international engagement that reflects the respective roles played by international,
regional and bilateral actors.
43. Fourth, when the Security Council concludes that military means are
necessary, mandates must be clear in their goals, expected duration, and procedures
for reviewing progress. Collective military action must also be calibrated and
proportionate, with rules of engagement that are both consistent with the protective
aim of the operation and fully compliant with international law. Consideration must
also be given at the earliest possible stage to the support required for post -crisis
peacebuilding. These efforts to improve decision-making, monitor implementation
and honour civilian protection standards will all contribute to achieving the goal of
responsible protection. 21
44. Finally, while the 2005 World Summit Outcome called upon the Security
Council to address atrocity crimes on a case-by-case basis, the Council’s
inconsistent response to situations featuring genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity continues to affect the standing of the responsibility to
protect. The Security Council has too often failed to live up to its global
responsibility, allowing narrower strategic interests to impede consensus and
preclude a robust collective response. Similarly, leaders of neighbouring countries
and regional organizations must clearly support the messages and measures
__________________
21 See the letter dated 9 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United

Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (A/66/551-S/2011/701).

15-11846

13/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

emanating from the Security Council so that the international community speaks
with one voice.

IV. New challenges in protection
45. Atrocity crimes are now being committed in a wider range of situations, in the
context of new conflict dynamics and by different types of perpetrators. In some
circumstances, the international community is also struggling to manage the
consequences of declining State control over its territory. Within this broader
context, two challenges are likely to be particularly significant: responding to
non-State armed groups that engage in atrocity crimes and adjusting to the impact of
new technologies.
Non-State armed groups
46. The scale, brutality and global impact of the acts committed by non-State
armed groups like ISIL, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab represent a powerful new
threat to established international norms. Although the commission of atrocity
crimes by non-State armed groups is not a new phenomenon, the brazen manner in
which certain non-State armed groups seem to have embraced the use of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity as a strategy for
advancing their objectives is unprecedented. Confronting the challenges posed by
those groups will require the international community to modify the ways in which
it anticipates, prevents and responds to the commission of atrocity crimes.
47. First, early warning mechanisms will need to be updated to reflect the different
objectives, ideologies and tactics of non-State armed groups and the conditions
under which they are likely to commit atrocity crimes.
48. Second, given that violent extremism and terrorism are occurring in contexts
where the risk of atrocity crimes is also present, there is scope for enh anced
cooperation on structural prevention of atrocity crimes. Aspects of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy are relevant for early prevention,
including the emphasis on sustained investment in inclusive, accountable and
effective governance, as well as greater efforts to promote dialogue and
understanding between civilizations, cultures, peoples and religions. My forthcoming
plan of action on preventing violent extremism will also address many of those
factors and strategies.
49. Third, the options outlined in pillar III of the responsibility to protect may also
be less effective when applied to non-State armed groups. Tools such as public
advocacy, fact-finding missions, monitoring missions and targeted sanctions may
have a more limited influence on actors not seeking international legitimacy. At the
same time, the temptation to readily resort to force must be balanced against the
urgency of the specific situation and the potential impact and effectiveness of
non-coercive tools. Coercive measures should be embedded within comprehensive
political strategies that provide a path towards rebuilding a society, recognize
legitimate grievances, build social cohesion, encourage dialogue and mitigate
intercommunal tensions. Every effort must also be made to ensure that any military
response to non-State armed groups avoids indiscriminate approaches that may
subject populations to potential war crimes.

14/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

50. Finally, policymakers also need to address the issues associated with bringing
the responsibility to protect closer to related agendas such as preventing violent
extremism or countering terrorism. While coordination across those agendas has the
potential to bring additional momentum to efforts to prevent and respond to atrocity
crimes, the responsibility to protect has a distinct objective, legal foundation and
policy framework that will not always sit easily alongside security imperatives.
Member States and other actors will therefore need to ensure that their approaches
for addressing non-State perpetrators are grounded fully and consistently in respect
for international human rights and humanitarian law.
New technologies
51. Access to information and communications technology is connecting once
disparate populations, raising awareness of atrocit y crimes and making visible the
plight of vulnerable populations to an unprecedented degree. This technological
context enables new forms of political action, with both positive and negative
consequences.
52. The challenges created by access to information and communications
technology have been starkly illustrated by the use of the Internet and social media
by groups like ISIL to spread violent extremist ideology, communicate, coordinate
and plan atrocity crimes. These technologies are dramatically expandi ng the reach
of messages from non-State armed groups that would once have been limited to
geographically defined communities. This has in turn encouraged foreign fighters to
engage in conflicts in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and spurred radicalizatio n
in other Member States.
53. The technologies that may facilitate the perpetration of atrocity crimes also
create new opportunities for prevention. Traditional early warning models can be
supplemented with techniques that draw on social media and online i nformation
sources to identify emerging risks at an earlier stage. Mobile telephone networks
can be used to identify and respond to signs of communal conflict in real time or to
provide a vital lifeline between isolated communities at risk and national and
international forces seeking to provide protection. Efforts to combat violent
extremism with counter-speech focused on promoting tolerance and dialogue can
leverage social media to expand reach and impact. The Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect has developed policy options to prevent
incitement to atrocity crimes that particularly focus on the role of media and new
media. 22 As those options demonstrate, the challenge ahead lies in maximizing the
potential of new technologies to prevent atrocity crimes, while also upholding the
freedom of expression and opinion necessary to maintain inclusive and open
societies.

V. Priorities for the next decade
54. Implementing the responsibility to protect requires swift, early, determined
and coordinated action at the global, regional and national levels. Although there is
__________________
22 The policy options are available from www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/pdf/

Prevention%20of%20incitement.Policy%20options.Nov2013.pdf.

15-11846

15/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

scope to accelerate progress in many areas, six priorities are likely to make the
greatest difference in advancing the principle over the next decade.
Demonstrating political commitment
55. The United Nations, regional organizations and Member States will not be
judged on their rhetorical commitments, but rather on the actual protection provided
to communities at risk. Addressing the challenges outlined in this report requires the
adaptation of existing tools and mechanisms, dedicated policy initiatives,
reallocation of resources and, in some cases, bold institutional change. It also
demands that the protection of populations be elevated above more particular
political and strategic interests. All of these steps will require renewed and steadfast
political commitment and leadership.
56. The United Nations has already improved its capacity to prevent and respond
to atrocity crimes, most notably through the establishment o f the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect. The Human Rights up Front
initiative also seeks to embed a commitment to protecting populations from serious
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law in the operati onal
culture of the United Nations.
57. Some Member States and regional organizations have taken similar steps.
Others are exploring alternate ways of institutionalizing a commitment to
preventing and responding to atrocity crimes. I particularly encourage Member
States to pursue atrocity crime prevention and response as an explicit national
priority and to devise concrete national plans for implementation. Beyond action at
the national level, placing the responsibility to protect on the formal agenda of th e
General Assembly could permit a deeper consideration of all aspects of the
principle.
Investing in atrocity crime prevention
58. Additional investment in atrocity crime prevention at the national, regional
and global levels is urgently needed to overcome three enduring challenges.
59. First, despite improvements in early warning methodologies, these
mechanisms too often remain disconnected from early action. Member States, along
with regional and international organizations, need to ensure that ex isting processes
for early warning, conflict analysis and crisis management explicitly identify
atrocity crime risks, convey concrete policy options to senior policymakers in a
timely manner, and are backed by adequate mechanisms and resources to ensure
immediate action. These steps require not only institutional reform but also changes
in the behaviour of individuals working within those institutions.
60. Second, prevention must become the rule rather than the exception. This can
only be achieved if open discussion of situations of concern becomes a more regular
and accepted part of international cooperation. The Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission can all
enhance their contribution to atrocity crime prevention by demonstrating a greater
willingness to consider and respond to the earliest signs of risk. Prevention must
also be embedded in the work of other institutions operating at the national, regional
and global levels. This broader range of actors will need to overcome the prevailing
tendency to see the responsibility to protect as disconnected from related activities

16/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

on conflict prevention, peacebuilding, the protection of civilians, the protection and
empowerment of women and girls, and international criminal justice.
61. Third, more work is required to understand which atrocity prevention tools
work best and in what sequence. By the end of 2016, my Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect will analyse r elevant cases
in order to produce a systematic assessment of atrocity crime prevention measures
to date, with a view to distilling policy guidance for practitioners. I encourage
Member States to engage in their own analysis of lessons learned in order to
determine how they can better encourage and assist States to fulfil their
responsibility to protect.
Ensuring more timely and decisive response
62. The path to providing more timely and decisive response begins by
recognizing the breadth of tools under pillar III, investing in ways to make them
more effective and understanding how they can best be combined. While these
mechanisms can be employed by a variety of actors, a special responsibility has
been entrusted to the Security Council. The growing accep tance of the responsibility
to protect now makes it much more difficult for the Security Council to justify
inaction in the face of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. When members of the Security Council are united, they ca n ameliorate
conditions of insecurity and signal the resolve of the international community. But
when they fail to find common purpose, as they have too often with regard to the
Syrian Arab Republic, the impact can be devastating, including for the reputat ion
and standing of the Security Council itself.
63. Even in exceptionally complex situations, with political dynamics pulling
actors apart, the Security Council has the responsibility to devise an effective and
collective response. I therefore encourage permanent members to exercise restraint
in their use of the veto in situations that include the commission of atrocity crimes
and welcome any effort designed to enhance the Council’s ability to discharge its
responsibilities. If States employ the veto in such situations, they should explain
publicly what alternative strategy they propose to protect populations at risk. All
members of the Security Council should continue to make even greater efforts to
agree on an effective course of action.
64. By placing the coercive tools of the responsibility to protect in the hands of
the Security Council, Member States reaffirmed the importance of collective
decision-making about their use. Subsequent experience suggests that the
deliberation should also be more inclusive. Mobilizing effective protection against
atrocity crimes demands cooperation and contributions from a wider range of actors,
including troop-contributing countries, major financial powers and key regional and
local interlocutors. An additional priority for the responsibility to protect’s next
decade is to consider how protection missions authorized by the Security Council,
but conducted by third parties, should be reported and reviewed, thereby addressing
the concerns expressed after the Libya intervention in 2011.
Preventing recurrence of atrocity crimes
65. The development of the responsibility to protect has paid comparatively
limited attention to preventing the recurrence of atrocity crimes. Interrupting
repeated cycles of violence will require greater attention in the years ahead,

15-11846

17/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

especially with respect to better integrating the implementation of the responsibility
to protect within existing peacebuilding efforts. As the crisis in the Central African
Republic graphically illustrates, the failure of peacebuilding processes can create
conditions conducive to the commission of atrocity crimes, including through the
outbreak of intercommunal violence among groups that had previously coexisted
peacefully.
66. Preventing the recurrence of atrocity crimes requires not only a longer-term
commitment to peacebuilding but also the recognition that societies recovering from
these horrifying forms of violence may face particular challenges. Within the
context of broader assistance for legitimate governance, it i s necessary to adjust
peacebuilding priorities, strategies and programming to address relevant atrocity
crime risks, especially by emphasizing support for reconciliation and accountability.
Formal processes of transitional justice must be coupled with conc rete efforts to
redress violations of international human rights and humanitarian law and be
grounded in inclusive processes of political dialogue. The International Criminal
Court has a particularly important role to play, both by holding perpetrators of
atrocity crimes to account and through the support it provides to national
mechanisms under the principle of positive complementarity.
67. Finally, it is important to remember that the responsibility to protect is an
enduring obligation. As the current situation in Libya illustrates, timely and decisive
response to atrocity crimes can help to address immediate threats, but must also be
succeeded by sustained international assistance. Implementation of the
responsibility to protect requires a spectrum of action, from prevention to timely
and decisive response to addressing the risks of recurrence. The international
community must be more committed and better prepared to engage at all stages.
Enhancing regional action
68. The responsibility to protect is a global commitment that needs to be embraced
and advanced in all corners of the world, not just in the deliberations of Member
State bodies at the United Nations. Regional organizations have a vital role to play
in implementing the three-pillar framework, as they are often the most directly
affected by the negative transnational consequences of atrocity crimes, the most
capable of providing effective assistance to States struggling to protect their
populations and the best suited to understanding how the responsibility to protect
can be incorporated into a particular local context. Each region, to varying degrees,
has institutions and mechanisms that can be leveraged for advancing atrocity crime
prevention and response. Through efforts to strengthen this architecture, and to
develop a particular awareness of the risks and dynamics associated with atrocity
crimes, regional organizations — in partnership with the United Nations and other
international actors — can assume even greater prominence in protecting
populations from atrocity crimes.
Strengthening peer networks
69. One of the key strengths of the 2005 World Summit Outcome was the
commitment made by Member States to support one another in fulfilling their
responsibility to protect. Focal point networks have become a powerful mechanism
for sharing contemporary or historical experiences and lessons learned. Going
forward, focal points should be supported by concrete national strategies that

18/20

15-11846

A/69/981
S/2015/500

include four main elements, namely, an assessment of atrocity crime risks and
sources of national resilience, which could draw on the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes; an identification of priorities for domestic and international action
based on the inhibitors to atrocity crimes; more extensive training for relevant
officials; and the mobilization of resources and political s upport, including where
possible from legislatures. Finally, focal points should cooperate more closely with
civil society and media partners to enable populations to hold State officials to
account.

VI. Conclusion
70. As we reflect on the tenth anniversary of the 2005 World Summit, it is vital to
appreciate the normative advancement represented by the responsibility to protect.
The principle has transformed expectations about the protection of populations from
atrocity crimes in a remarkably short period.
71. This does not mean, regrettably, that its demanding objective — to
encourage effective prevention of atrocity crimes and to ensure timely and decisive
response — has always been met during the past 10 years. Partial or inadequate
efforts by Member States, international organizations, regional organizations and
other actors continue to affect the responsibility to protect’s standing and trajectory.
Nor do those actors always agree on the means through which implementation should
be pursued in a particular situation. Given the magnitude of the challenge, no one
should be surprised that, after just one decade, the responsibility to protect has not
made unfettered progress. However, as I observed in 2011 following the civilian
protection missions in Côte d’Ivoire and Libya, “I would far prefer the growing pains
of an idea whose time has come to sterile debates about principles that are never put
into practice. The world has seen too much of the latter and too little of the former.” 23
72. The high expectations set by the responsibility to protect need to be answered.
I will act on this imperative in four main ways. First, I will continue to exercise my
good offices, including through the authority granted by Article 99, to bring
situations involving the commission or imminent risk of atrocity crimes to the
attention of the Security Council and the broader international community. Second, I
will engage in preventive diplomacy, including through my special envoys and
special representatives, to encourage actors to fulfil their responsibility to protect
populations from atrocity crimes and warn them of the consequences of failing to do
so. Third, I will continue and enhance the use of existing mechanisms for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations — including the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union — to build
a more effective partnership for protection based on a clear understanding of mutual
responsibilities and comparative advantages. Fourth, I will continue to oversee, as a
priority, implementation of the Human Rights up Front Action Plan, which is
focused on improving the United Nations capacity to respond early and effectively
to warning signs of serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, and better mobilize Member States’ political support for
preventive action. I will also develop more targeted recommendations on how to
mainstream the responsibility to protect across the United Nations system.
__________________
23 United Nations, press release, 23 September 2011; available from www.un.org/press/en/2011/

sgsm13838.doc.htm.

15-11846

19/20

A/69/981
S/2015/500

73. Other members of the international community must also take up the call to
action in this report. In particular, I call on the Security Council to act earlier to
address situations of concern before they escalate into intractable conflicts, to provide
robust political backing for United Nations good offices, preventive diplomacy and
mediation, to employ the full range of measures at its disposal in a more timely and
decisive manner, and to ensure that perpetrators of atrocity crimes are held to account
for their actions. I also encourage the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission to more systematically identify and address risk factors for atrocity
crimes, paying particular attention to the sustained and targeted support societies
require in the aftermath of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.
74.

To uphold the responsibility to protect in practice, Member States should:
• Declare atrocity crime prevention and response a national priority, undertake a
national risk assessment and articulate an actionable whole-of-government
strategy for both domestic and international policy.
• Expand international and regional focal point networks and empower focal
points with the institutional authority and resources necessary to drive policy
change.
• Advance prevention by expanding responsive and flexible funding for
preventive diplomacy, updating early warning systems to address atrocity
crime threats and better connect with mechanisms for early action,
regularizing discussion of atrocity crime risk factors in peer review processes,
and conducting a review of lessons learned to date.
• Include regular consideration of atrocity crime prevention and response in the
deliberations and activities of relevant regional institutions and expand the
sharing of best practices and lessons learned, both within and across regions.
• Provide United Nations peace operations with the military and civilian
capabilities necessary to respond rapidly and flexibly to situations at risk of
atrocity crimes, and develop training and guidance relevant to the
implementation of the responsibility to protect.
• Prevent recurrence by tailoring post-conflict peacebuilding to atrocity crime
risks, including through support for transitional justice, reconciliation, and
dedicated early warning and conflict resolution capacity.
• Expand efforts to prevent violent extremism and counter incitement to
discrimination, hostility and violence by non-State armed groups, including
through cooperation with religious and community leaders and by drawing on
new technologies.

75. We are not powerless bystanders to atrocity crimes, even in cases which seem
too big or intractable. Member States have well-established legal obligations to
protect their own populations. They also have the capacity and ingenuity, if they act
collectively, to help to protect populations from acts that the international
community as a whole has condemned as the most egregious crimes. We must not
shirk this responsibility, or act as though it is beyond our reac h. Just as no State is
immune to the risk of atrocity crimes, no State is absolved of its shared
responsibility to protect.

20/20

15-11846
