A /77/PV.84

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

84th plenary meeting

Monday, 26 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 88
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia — residual functions
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/789)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.76)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Germany to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.76.
Mr. Hasenau (Germany): Germany has the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.76, under agenda
item 88, in my capacity as current chair of the Principal
Donors Group, which was formed in support of the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia. In
that function, I am speaking on behalf of Cambodia, as
well as the members of the Group: Australia, France,
Germany, Japan, Norway, the Republic of Korea,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America.
Twenty years ago, following the request of the
Cambodian Government, the United Nations helped
to establish the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts
of Cambodia, a special Cambodian court to prosecute
the crimes of the senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge.
Since then, the Extraordinary Chambers made a critical
contribution to accountability by holding a number of
accused responsible for Khmer Rouge atrocities. By
doing so in public trials, the Extraordinary Chambers
provided access to justice for victims through wide
civil party participation. The achievements of the

Extraordinary Chambers include legal capacitybuilding with regard to the domestic court system, as
well as strengthening civil society organizations as they
provided assistance to victims and civil parties. Finally,
the Extraordinary Chambers contributed to Cambodia’s
public discourse on the Khmer Rouge crimes and
period, including the reflection of Khmer Rouge history
in the curriculum of the public education system. With
the completion of the trial phase, the important residual
phase of the Extraordinary Chambers has begun. That
phase includes, inter alia, the implementation of judicial
orders, the management of the Chambers’ archives and
the dissemination of information.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
today is important to ensure that those residual functions
continue smoothly. Cambodia and the Principal Donors
Group continue their efforts to facilitate them. It
is essential that the Chambers’ legacy be secured
both in Cambodia and internationally. That includes
making use of the lessons learned from the work of the
Extraordinary Chambers in our fight against impunity
for core crimes under international law.
Mrs. Eat (Cambodia): First of all, may I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.76, on the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC). Allow
me to also express my high appreciation to the Principal
Donors Group, in particular Germany, in coming up
with the draft resolution and in co-sponsoring it.
From 17 April 1975 to 6 January 1979, the people
of Cambodia lived under what is well known as the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18345 (E)

*2318345*

A/77/PV.84

26/06/2023

Khmer Rouge regime. The regime deprived our nation
of all forms of human rights. Roughly a third of the
Cambodian population lost their lives to execution,
starvation and diseases. With full peace attained in
1998, the Royal Government of Cambodia sought the
support of the United Nations in seeking accountability
for crimes committed during that darkest period of
Cambodia’s history.

the Principal Donors Group, for their continued
financial, technical and moral supports to the ECCC.
Their support for draft resolution A/77/L.76, on the
residual functions of the ECCC, reflects recognition
of the Tribunal’s accomplishments and the importance
of its residual functions, which ensure the Tribunal’s
fulfilling conclusion, including reparation and support
for the victims.

In 2006, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts
of Cambodia were created to bring justice to the
victims and survivors of the Khmer Rouge regime. In
discharging its role, that hybrid tribunal convicted the
three most senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge for crimes
against humanity, war crimes and genocide. Last year,
the ECCC completed its main function when Khieu
Samphan, the Head of State during the Khmer Rouge
regime, was sentenced to life in prison. Now, there are
still residual functions for the ECCC to perform.

Mr. Hoang Nguyen Nguyen (Viet Nam): My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the
delegation of Germany for its introduction of draft
resolution A/77/L.76, on the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC).

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his leadership and his report, in document A/77/789,
which provides a comprehensive overview of the
court’s proceeding, the challenges it faced and the
achievements it made. The ECCC delivered legal and
moral recognition and accountability for the crimes
committed during the Khmer Rouge regime. While
there is justice for the victims, those surviving the
holocaust, myself included, can look to the future with
a sense of closure that the difficult question of justice
has been addressed. The wounds deep down in our
hearts are healing, even though scars will remain. The
reconciliation that the ECCC helped to engender allows
our nation to build a peaceful and bright future for our
future generations.
Throughout the ECCC process over the past 17
years, an unprecedented number of people — 240,000
individuals to be exact — attended the hearings, and
many more watched live on television. The residual
functions of the ECCC are designed to preserve its
legacy and to ensure that the work of that extraordinary
tribunal continues to have a positive impact long after
its judicial proceedings have concluded. By providing
broad public access to its archives and disseminating
information on its work, the ECCC enables future
generations to have a deep knowledge of the most
tragic chapter of Cambodia’s history and will prevent
the recurrence of the same tragedy in future.
Finally, may I convey my Government’s gratitude
to the United Nations and all Member States, especially
2/28

The fact that this item is on the agenda of the
General Assembly nearly five years after the verdict
and nearly a year after the final decision of the Court
is an indication of the ECCC’s continued relevance and
the significance of its legacy.
Although the Court proceedings and outcomes
were long-awaited, if belated, the ECCC has brought
eventual justice to the millions of innocent victims
and their families, including both Cambodians and
Vietnamese. The ECCC verdicts were also an overdue
vindication of the righteousness of Viet Nam’s selfdefence and subsequent joining forces in solidarity with
the Cambodian United Front for National Salvation to
put an end to the genocidal regime of Pol Pot.
Unfortunately, that fact was politicized at the time,
and, for that, Viet Nam was wrongfully sanctioned for
many years. From a broader perspective, the ECCC can
serve as an example of the perseverance of international
law and a sound reminder of the fact that crimes of
atrocity, especially genocide, must be and will be
duly punished. In that spirit, Viet Nam welcomes the
latest draft resolution to support the residual phase of
the ECCC.
The President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.76,
entitled “Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia — residual functions”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/299).

A/77/L.76

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 88?
23-18345

26/06/2023

It was so decided.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolution (A/77/L.77)
The President: Before we proceed to take action
on these proposals, I should like to inform members
that the Assembly will hold a debate on this item at a
date to be announced.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.77.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Today I have the privilege to introduce, on
behalf of my country, draft resolution A/77/L.77, on an
issue that Mexico has stressed in various forums: the
critical topic of mental health and psychosocial support.
I would like to begin by thanking and acknowledging
those delegations that made up the core group that
submitted the draft resolution for consideration by
the General Assembly: Argentina, Canada, Israel,
Japan and Morocco. Their contribution was critical to
bridging positions and enriching the text.
I wish also to thank all delegations for their
contributions throughout the negotiations. The goal
of the draft resolution that we are submitting for
consideration by the General Assembly is to explicitly
underscore the importance of ensuring access to
mental-health and psychosocial support services in an
inclusive manner. Of course, that is part and parcel of
a broader strategy to put the issue on the multilateral
agenda, and, in that context, it is in line with resolution
2668 (2022), adopted unanimously by the Security
Council in December 2022.
Recognizing the importance of mental health
means recognizing also the dignity and comprehensive
well-being to which we all have a right, without any
exception. During the negotiations, it was crystal-clear
that there are different views on the way in which one
could refer to or understand concepts such as mental
health itself or psychosocial disabilities. However, from
the very beginning it was also very clear that there is
consensus about the importance of those issues on the
United Nations agenda.
Of course, various priorities had to be given
pride of place — for instance, eliminating stigma and
discrimination towards people who suffer from some

A/77/PV.84

kind of mental condition or psychosocial disability and
ensure that we stress the need and the right that they
have to receive psychosocial support services.
The draft resolution also stresses that any kind
of form of discrimination or stigmatization must be
avoided. Mexico has always been a historical ally of
persons with psychosocial disabilities. In 2001 we
proposed to the General Assembly the drafting of a
specific convention to protect the rights of persons
with disabilities. Today we reiterate our commitment
to respect for and the protection of the human rights
of persons with disabilities and, indeed, of all people,
without leaving anyone behind.
I would note also that not all mental conditions lead
to disability. Of course, access to psychosocial support
services, community services, support from peers and,
sometimes, the use of safe and effective medications
enable people to play their role in society on an equal,
active and participatory footing.
Addressing the issue of mental health also means
breaking down forms of fundamentalism. The medical
approach and the human rights perspective are not
mutually exclusive. On the contrary, we must maintain
a healthy balance between the two. To uphold people’s
mental health and comprehensive well-being, we must
bear in mind the progress made in the medical domain
and the human rights of all people with the same degree
of rigour
The draft resolution that we will be adopting today
grapples with all these sensitive and delicate issues in a
clear and balanced way. But adopting it is not enough.
While it is a step in the right direction, we will have to
continue making headway until mental health is part
and parcel of universal health coverage.
Indeed, it is not just about ensuring access to
health services through a human rights approach and a
gender-based approach. We now need to focus more on
the social, economic and environmental conditions that
impact people’s health, with a preventive approach and
with effective care services that bear in mind people’s
living conditions.
Today the General Assembly is adopting, for the
first time in its history, a draft resolution that dignifies
mental health, protects human rights and calls for the
right to mental-health and psychosocial services for all,
with no exclusion. I therefore invite all delegations to
join the consensus and to co-sponsor this unprecedented

23-183453/28

A/77/PV.84

26/06/2023

and momentous draft. It is not only a historic landmark
but also and above all a call for action to translate
the content of the draft resolution into reality. There
remains a great deal more to do.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.77.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/77/L.77, the following countries have
also become co-sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Namibia, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Switzerland, Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom and Uruguay.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/77/L.77, entitled “Mental health
and psychosocial support”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement
is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of the last operative paragraph of
draft resolution A/77/L.77, the General Assembly would
request the Secretary-General to provide, in consultation
with Member States and in close collaboration with the
World Health Organization, other relevant agencies
and relevant stakeholders, a progress report during the
eighty-eighth session of the General Assembly on the
implementation of the present draft resolution.
The request contained in the last operative
paragraph of the draft resolution would constitute
4/28

an addition to the documentation workload for the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management of one pre-session document with a word
count of 8,500 words in all six languages in 2025 and
entail additional non-recurrent resource requirements
in the amount of $24,500 in 2025.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/77/L.77, additional resource
requirements in the amount of $24,500 under section
2, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management, would be included
in the proposed programme budget for 2025 for the
consideration of the General Assembly at its seventyninth session.
The statement I have just read out will also be made
available in The Journal of the United Nations under
the e-statements link for this meeting.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.77?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/300).

A/77/L.77

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position following adoption, may I
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Skoglund (Sweden): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 27 member States. The candidate countries
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the potential candidate country Georgia,
as well as Monaco, align themselves with this statement.
It was just over three years ago that economies
and societies came to a halt as the coronavirus disease
pandemic swept across the world. The pandemic
clearly showed us that we need a concerted approach
at a global level when dealing with health challenges
of that magnitude. It underlined the importance of
international coordination
We are now faced with the longer-term mental-health
consequences of the pandemic, all too often impacting
children and adolescents, and for all too many, that
adds to the disastrous impact on mental health of war,
conflict and crisis. The EU member States co-sponsored
and gladly joined consensus on resolution 77/300. We
23-18345

26/06/2023

thank Mexico, Argentina, Japan, Canada, Israel and
Morocco for their efforts in championing the issue of
mental health at the United Nations and for presenting
this timely text to the General Assembly. We also thank
the World Health Organization (WHO) for its extensive
technical support during the discussions.
The resolution brings, for the first time, the issue of
mental health and psychosocial support for sustainable
development and peace to the attention of the plenary.
We appreciate the fact that the resolution builds on
and bridges the health and human rights perspectives
on mental health. It builds on both the extensive work
of WHO on mental health as well as resolutions of the
Human Rights Council to end stigma, discrimination
and violence in mental health and to respect, protect and
fulfil the human rights of persons with mental-health
conditions and psychosocial disabilities.
The EU and its member States have markedly
reinforced efforts to address mental health. We strive to
promote well-being, prevent mental-health conditions,
ensure access to quality care and enhance access to
mental-health services. Timely support is critical
in managing mental-health difficulties, and the EU
emphasizes the need for a comprehensive approach of
prevention, early intervention and integrated care.
A few weeks ago, on 7 June, the European
Commission presented a comprehensive strategy on
mental health, taking a holistic and human-rights-based
approach based on three guiding principles: adequate
and effective prevention; access to high-quality and
affordable mental-health care and treatment; and
reintegration into society after recovery.
Rapid technological, environmental and societal
changes have greatly affected people and their ability
to cope. This approach recognizes that mental health
is about more than just health. It involves areas such
as education, digitalization, employment, research,
urban development, environment and climate. It has
been developed after extensive consultations with
EU member States, stakeholders and citizens, and it
identifies 20 flagship initiatives on mental health with
dedicated financing.
Mental health will feature increasingly in our global
efforts, notably the EU and its member States’ support
for mental health for those in need. To cite one example,
the new strategy pledges mental-health services for
displaced and affected people and the dissemination of

A/77/PV.84

the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Mental Health
and Psychosocial Support Minimum Service Package.
More broadly, to tackle the crisis, mental health
needs to be put on a par with physical health. Last
November, the European Commission presented a
new EU Global Health Strategy, which puts forward
various actions aimed at tackling health inequalities
worldwide and combating health threats in the age of
pandemics. The strategy addresses important lessons
from the pandemic through a renewed, broad global
health agenda. It promotes health and includes mental
health as an integral part of universal health coverage,
as an essential pillar of EU external action and
international cooperation.
The strategy puts forward three key interrelated
priorities: first, stepping up efforts to deliver better
health for people across the course of their lives;
secondly, strengthening health systems and advancing
universal health coverage; and, thirdly, preventing and
combating health threats, including pandemics.
The EU recognizes the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health. We promote a human-rights-based
approach to mental health. Research and knowledge
exchange lie at the heart of our strategies. We recognize
the importance of evidence-based practices and
seek to advance our understanding of mental health
through scientific exploration, fostering collaboration
and sharing insights, in order to inform policies
and interventions.
In embracing mental health as a priority in our
internal and external policies, the European Union
envisions a healthier and more inclusive society.
Ensuring accessible and high-quality mental-health
services free of stigma and discrimination is key
to achieving universal health coverage and, more
broadly, the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
By working together, we can create an environment
where individuals are supported, stigma is eradicated,
and mental health is recognized as an integral part of
overall well-being. We need to unite in our efforts to
ensure that no one is left behind and that mental health
is truly a priority for us all.
Mr. Al Busaidi (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the
delegations of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC),

23-183455/28

A/77/PV.84

namely, the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the State of
Qatar, the State of Kuwait and my own country, the
Sultanate of Oman.
At the outset, our States express their thanks and
appreciation to the delegation of Mexico for its efforts
in facilitating resolution 77/300, which was adopted
today. We wish also to commend the efforts of the
facilitator and the flexibility shown in listening to the
various viewpoints during the negotiations.
The delegations of the GCC States joined the
consensus on the resolution, as they believe in the
importance of the issue of mental health, which the
resolution addresses and which is of great interest to
our countries.
That resolution is the first of its kind to be submitted
to the General Assembly, as it addresses mental health
and its psychological and social impact. However,
with regard to what is termed sexual and reproductive
health and rights, which the resolution also addresses,
the delegations of the GCC States emphasize that they
view that issue in the context of their cultural and
societal frameworks, in line with the national laws and
regulations of our countries.
Ms. Korac (United States of America): I have the
honour to deliver the statement on behalf of Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and my
own country, the United States.
We were pleased to co-sponsor, and, in my country’s
case, join the consensus on resolution 77/300, entitled
“Mental health and psychosocial support”, which is the
first resolution to address mental health adopted by the
General Assembly. We would like to extend our thanks
to Mexico and members of the core group for their
leadership on this important initiative, which builds on
recent resolutions of the Human Rights Council.
Psychosocial disabilities are a natural part of the
human experience, reflecting the beautiful diversity
that exists within our society. However, far too often,
individuals with psychosocial disabilities face a wide
range of human rights violations and abuses, including
even arbitrary or unlawful deprivation of liberty,
disability-based institutionalization and other coercive
and harmful practices.
For decades, an insufficient amount of attention has
been devoted to mental-health and psychosocial support
services and systems. Too often, efforts have been
6/28

26/06/2023

centred around a medical model of disability, resulting
in the dominance of approaches that favour biomedical
intervention, medicalization and institutionalization.
It is incumbent upon us to recognize that
discrimination and coercive treatment are not the
appropriate responses to psychosocial disabilities. A
psychosocial disability should not be described as a
disorder. We must embrace an inclusive approach that
promotes understanding, acceptance and support, with
full respect for the mental integrity of all persons, in
all their diversity. We appreciate that this important
resolution embraces that approach and rejects an
outdated model that sees psychosocial disabilities
as a problem that should be clinically defined and
treated — a model that we have seen can lead to grave
human rights violations.
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities laid the foundation for a paradigm shift
on mental health. We are grateful that the resolution
presented here today acknowledges that shift, building
on the momentum for deinstitutionalization and
models of care that address underlying determinants
of mental health, provide effective community-based
mental-health services and psychosocial support,
reduce power asymmetries in mental-health settings
and respect the enjoyment of autonomy of persons with
psychosocial disabilities on an equal basis with others.
We are particularly pleased that the resolution
follows the path laid out by Special Rapporteur
Dainius Puras in his landmark report on mental health
(A/72/137), issued in 2017, and the lead of the Human
Rights Council, including in its most recent resolution
on the subject (A/HRC/RES/52/12). It was critically
important that the resolution align with the principles
of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and recognize the need for a human-rightsbased approach.
We reiterate that mental health and well-being
cannot be defined by the absence of psychosocial
disabilities but, rather, by an environment that enables
individuals and populations to live a life of dignity,
with full enjoyment of their human rights.
We therefore call on all Member States to take this
resolution forward through community-, evidence- and
human rights-based services and support that respect,
protect and fulfil the human rights, autonomy, will and
preferences of persons with psychosocial disabilities.
23-18345

26/06/2023

We would like to reiterate the central,
transformative promise of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development to leave no one behind. We
remain deeply concerned that indigenous peoples often
experience disproportionate levels of psychosocial
distress and suicide. We are pleased that this resolution
acknowledges the need to support a holistic approach
to social and emotional well-being for indigenous
peoples, including through connections to land, culture,
spirituality and ancestry.
We also underscore that women and girls with
psychosocial disabilities, in all their diversity, face
an increased vulnerability to sexual and genderbased violence, abuse, discrimination and negative
stereotyping. Furthermore, women and girls with
psychosocial disabilities often face environmental,
attitudinal and institutional barriers that deny them
their sexual and reproductive health and rights. We call
on Member States to take all appropriate measures to
ensure access to gender-responsive mental-health and
psychosocial support services, including in situations
of armed conflict and humanitarian emergencies.
We would have also liked to see the resolution
address the common and unique barriers faced by LGBTI
persons, including multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination. Evidence shows that persons of diverse
sexual orientations and gender identities face disparities
in terms of their mental health and are at increased risk
of violence and abuse, including in medical settings.
We reiterate the call of the United Nations LGBTI Core
Group for adoption and implementation of the World
Health Organization recommendations on an equityfocused and human-rights-based approach to the health
and well-being of LGBTI persons.
Finally, we extend our thanks to Mexico for its
co-facilitation of this process. The resolution is an
important step in the application of a social and rightsbased model of psychosocial disability and mental
health. We thank Member States, the United Nations
system and other stakeholders for their efforts in that
regard while also recognizing that we still have a long
way to go. We call on all Member States to implement
the resolution, and we call on all stakeholders to ensure
that mental-health and psychosocial support remains a
key global priority.
Mrs. Bonilla Alarcón (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like to thank the
delegation of Mexico for introducing and facilitating the

A/77/PV.84

important resolution 77/300. Guatemala is committed
to continuing to work to ensure a healthy life that
promotes well-being at all ages, which is critical to
achieving sustainable development.
Sustainable Development Goal 3 is linked not only
to physical health but also to mental health and is one
of our priority goals. During and after the coronavirus
disease pandemic, promoting mental health became
a priority issue, which, as we know, is a process that
allows people to adapt to conflict situations and emerge
stronger from them.
Guatemala supported the resolution, entitled
“Mental
health
and
psychosocial
support”.
Nevertheless, we would like to disassociate from the
twenty-eighth preambular paragraph, bearing in mind
that the language contained therein contravenes our
national legislation and public policies to protect life
and the institution of the family.
Guatemala promotes, defends and protects human
rights for all, without any discrimination, in the
framework of conventionality control. For that reason,
our country has reservations about the use of terms,
conditions and provisions that would contravene,
explicitly or implicitly, the Republic of Guatemala’s
Political Constitution and its internal legal order,
including, but not limited to, issues pertaining to sexual
and reproductive rights.
We therefore reserve the right to interpret the term
“reproductive rights” in our own way, which, for the
State of Guatemala, does not include abortion. There is
no international consensus on how we should interpret
reproductive rights, and Guatemala has its own
national laws that cover only sexual and reproductive
health policies, without addressing reproductive rights,
which could be interpreted as the right to abortion or
abortive practices and which contravene our country’s
national legislation.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation joined the consensus on the adoption
of resolution 77/300. Meanwhile, we would express
our concern regarding the lack of transparency in the
process of informal consultations on the draft resolution.
We note that many technical views were disregarded
in the latest version; in spite of disagreements among
Member States on many paragraphs, the text was
presented to the General Assembly. We also note that
the progress achieved during the informals has been

23-183457/28

A/77/PV.84

ignored, and the revision presented lacks an adequate
balance across the various parts of the text. That has
actually rendered the present resolution inaccurate
in its account and description of issues in the field of
mental health.
The negative impact of unilateral coercive
measures on the mental health and well-being of people
is, unfortunately, a reality. Such unlawful measures,
which are a violation of the fundamental principles of
international law and the principles set out in the Charter
of the United Nations, impede the full achievement of
economic and social development by the population
of the affected countries, in particular children and
women; hinder their well-being; and impair the full
enjoyment of their human rights, including the right of
everyone to a standard of living adequate for his or her
health, well-being and medical care.
Moreover, those illegal measures hinder access to
medicine, including specialized medical treatment, and
also negatively affect the ability to realize commitments
in the field of physical and mental health.
In that regard, we express our serious disappointment
at the fact that despite the strong support by many
Member States for the inclusion of proposed language
with direct reference to national coercive measures,
that specific language is not included in the resolution.
Referring to the other observations, the Islamic
Republic of Iran disassociates itself from the eighth
preambular paragraph of the present resolution, entitled
“Mental health and psychosocial support”, in particular
with respect to its references to the updated World
Health Organization comprehensive mental health
action plan 2013–2030. We would like to clarify that
consideration and implementation of the provisions of
the resolution by the Islamic Republic of Iran are subject
to and contingent upon its national laws, regulations,
policies and priorities as well as its religious, cultural
and social specificities and values
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is delivering this statement as
an explanation of position on resolution 77/300, entitled
“Mental health and psychosocial support”, facilitated
by the delegation of Mexico and submitted jointly by a
group of countries.
First, Venezuela thanks the delegation of Mexico
for facilitating that process and for its delegation’s
8/28

26/06/2023

readiness to promote dialogue and discussion on
complex issues and to endeavour to find compromise
solutions among the various delegations.
We believe that even though we have not managed
to reach such compromise solutions on all issues, it is
the goal of all negotiation processes on United Nations
resolutions to ensure that all parties are heard in order
to produce a text that reflects the positions of all
Member States and that, to the extent possible, reflects
their specific priorities and concerns.
Discussions on mental health and psychosocial
support have been underscored in various United
Nations forums in the past, and for the first time here
we have a resolution that is directly linked to the
issue. That is a historic milestone that must continue
to be developed in a cross-cutting manner in all of the
Organization’s various bodies.
We are speaking here of an inherent health problem
on which social stigmatization, disinformation and the
need for greater social focus have set the tone. That is
why consistent and impactful action is required in order
to make headway in terms of effective multilateral
cooperation, in which the World Health Organization
is called upon to play an active role to support States
in drafting and implementing comprehensive policies
and in research on the subject that is tailored to their
respective national and local realities.
The impact of the coronavirus disease emergency
was particularly strong on mental health, because the
human, economic and social impact has had major
repercussions on all populations, particularly the
potentially most vulnerable. That is also a priority issue
for the United Nations.
During the negotiations, many Member States
raised the issue of including in the text the impact of
unilateral coercive measures on States’ capacity to
respond effectively through national mental health
programmes, including addressing the consequences of
the pandemic, and noted that acts against economies
and societies represent such actions in the light of
international law, as they have an impact on society as
a whole and have repercussions on mental and physical
health and human development.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
includes provisions in that regard, in paragraph 30 of
resolution 70/1, as minimum agreed language on the
need to refrain from the use of such measures, which
23-18345

26/06/2023

are contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and which impede economic and social
development, particularly in developing countries.
Venezuela suggested that that wording be included
as a minimum, but even that language was not acceptable
to those countries that promoted the resolution. That
reflects their lack of respect for the 2030 Agenda and
is inconsistent with the spirit of the United Nations,
particularly at a time when we are so far from achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and even
preparing to hold an SDG summit that will address
ways of accelerating the implementation of the Agenda
and the achievement of the SDGs in the short amount of
time we have left to do so.
Therefore, Venezuela believes that no negotiation or
document on health that does not include that reference
can be considered comprehensive or complete, because
one of the areas that been most impacted by such
illegal acts is, in fact, the human right to health, as
they impede and make more difficult and expensive
people’s access to medicines, medical treatments, new
technologies, vaccines, supply chains in general and
education, among other critical means, and prevent
States from acting to ensure that that fundamental right
is guaranteed.
Venezuela hopes that the proposals based on the
2030 Agenda will be included in the political declarations
on health that are being prepared for the seventy-eighth
session of the General Assembly, and that there will
finally be agreement on their inclusion in subsequent
resolutions on the important issue of mental health. We
are prepared to contribute constructively to that end.
Mr. Siringoringo (Indonesia): Indonesia would
like to join others in extending our appreciation to the
delegation of Mexico for its leadership in facilitating
this first-ever General Assembly resolution on mental
health (resolution 77/300).
We welcome the importance of the resolution.
Having said that, we would like to register our
disassociation from the seventeenth preambular
paragraph and explain our position on operative
paragraph 17, as follows.
First, the issue of mental health cannot be separated
from the local and national context and the value system
of a society. It is essential to ensure that no one-size-fitsall approach is taken; instead, every approach has to
be tailored to address the needs of the people on the

A/77/PV.84

ground and must be respectful of their local context.
On that note, it is our understanding that the clauses
contained in this resolution must all be in line with, not
conflictual with, local and national settings.
Secondly, the issue of health, including mental
health, is closely related to economic and development
issues. It is therefore important to address the lopsided
capacity of developing countries in building their
health systems and in tackling all non-communicable
diseases, including on mental health, as we move
forward on this matter.
Thirdly, we register our reservation on the use of
certain language that has no agreed definition or clear
reference. In our view, the use of such language should
be avoided so as to prevent any confusion that might
hinder the effective implementation of the resolution on
the ground.
In the case of technical terminology, Indonesia
believes that the resolution should take into account
the advice of the World Health Organization (WHO)
technical terminology on the issue of mental health.
That is very important to ensure consistency,
particularly since the resolution acknowledges and
gives strong support to the role of WHO as the leading
and coordinating authority on international health.
On that note, Indonesia expresses its reservation on
the terminology used in the resolution and will keep
the term as per the WHO reference on mental health
conditions as a generic term that encompasses mental
disorders, psychosocial disabilities and other mental
states associated with significant distress, impairment
in functioning or risk of self-harm. That understanding
will apply to all paragraphs that contain the phrase
“mental-health conditions and psychosocial disability”.
Mr. Mohamed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt’s
delegation welcomes the initiative of the Mexican
delegation to include the issue of mental health and
psychosocial support in the discussions of the General
Assembly. This is an opportunity for us to emphasize
the international commitment to strengthen efforts
to achieve Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
3 by 2030, taking into consideration the close and
complementary relationship between promoting health
and sustainable development.
Egypt continues to be committed to providing the
best mental and physical health care to all. The Egyptian
State works unfailingly to develop our national health-

23-183459/28

A/77/PV.84

care system to enable each and every person to receive
the best health care possible. We are expanding medical
coverage to our citizens in order to build a health-care
system that is integral and provides universal health
care for everyone while respecting higher standards.
The State of Egypt has implemented a number of
initiatives to improve mental and psychosocial health
care for its citizens. We are focusing on research and
on expanding general psychiatric care with child and
adolescent psychiatry. We have also improved our
services to treat drug addiction.
As regards resolution 77/300, on mental health and
psychosocial support, adopted today by the General
Assembly, Egypt’s delegation would like to make the
following comments.
First, we would like to underscore the fact that
despite lengthy negotiations that lasted more than 50
hours on the text of draft resolution A/77/L.77, we were
able to negotiate on only 17 paragraphs out of a total of
55. There was a need to continue consultations among
delegations regarding the whole text, particularly since
it is the first resolution of its kind introduced in the
General Assembly.
Furthermore,
numerous
amendments
were
made to the text after each round of negotiations,
including the very title of the resolution, which was
changed after the end of the negotiations and which,
unfortunately, no longer contains any reference to
sustainable development.
Secondly, Egypt’s delegation would like to express
our deep regret vis-à-vis the attempts made by some
delegations during the negotiations to weaken the
development aspects of the text, creating unrealistic
competition between the development texts and those
related to human rights based on a false understanding
that the various national contexts of each of our
countries are the same and not different.
(spoke in English)
There was a deliberate attempt to undermine the
development language and to not take into account the
fact that there are different contexts in each country.
(spoke in Arabic)
Egypt’s delegation believes that if the
international community and the General Assembly
do not acknowledge that promoting health systems,
particularly in developing countries, requires increased
10/28

26/06/2023

international support and solidarity, the achievement of
Sustainable Development Goal 3 will be undermined.
For its part, Egypt remains committed to engaging in
constructive international cooperation in that regard.
Thirdly, in the absence of comprehensive
negotiations leading to consensus among all delegations
on the contents of the resolution, Egypt’s delegation
stresses that its goal in joining the consensus was only
to support international efforts to realize Sustainable
Development Goal 3. Egypt’s delegation would like
to note that its interpretation of the text is based on
our commitments in that regard and on Egyptian
national legislation, as well as the national context. We
would stress also the primary role played by national
Governments. It is their responsibility to decide on ways
to provide universal health-care coverage according to
the national contexts and priorities of each country and
based on the principle of national ownership, as noted
in operative paragraph 3 of the resolution.
Ms. Ochoa Espinales (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation would like to take the
floor to explain our position following the adoption
of resolution 77/300, entitled “Mental health and
psychosocial support”.
Our delegation would like to stress the lack of
goodwill in the negotiation process, as the position of
the 28 countries that stated repeatedly, throughout the
more than two months of negotiations, that language
must be included in the resolution on the impact of
illegal unilateral coercive measures was ignored.
That includes language agreed in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
This document is the first resolution of the General
Assembly devoted to the issue of mental health and
psychosocial support, with an approach focused on the
right to access appropriate services in that area, and
it also underscores the fact that mental health is an
essential component of universal health coverage. It is
therefore unacceptable that no reasonable explanation
was provided for excluding reference to the negative
impact of unilateral coercive measures, which are
clearly an obstacle to achieving universal health
coverage in all its aspects.
Mr. Wallace
the Chair.

(Jamaica),

Vice-President,

took

That is unjustifiable, in particular given that it is
undeniable and universally known that developing
23-18345

26/06/2023

countries, which, in addition to facing greater
challenges in that area, need access to sources of
financing and capacity-building in order to provide
better, comprehensive medical care in general and
specialized care to their citizens.
We cannot disregard, turn away from or even less
leave behind the more than 2 billion people and more
than 40 countries that every day suffer from the impact
of the application of illegal terrorist unilateral coercive
measures, which hinder access to practicable loans and
projects in international financial institutions.
For developing countries that are implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
eradication of poverty and the achievement of universal
health coverage are of special importance. It is also a
reality that imperialist and neocolonialist countries are
daily stepping up those harmful unilateral coercive
measures and applying them to even more countries.
Those acts of aggression and sanctions are incompatible
with and contravene the Charter of the United Nations
and the joint efforts of the United Nations to implement
the 2030 Agenda and should therefore be eliminated.
Mr. Komarkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank Mexico
for this useful initiative. For the first time in the history
of the General Assembly, we have adopted a resolution
on mental health protection (resolution 77/300).
Today there is a need to pay particular attention
to measures to protect people’s mental health, as the
coronavirus disease pandemic led to a crisis in that
area. According to World Health Organization data, in
the first year of the pandemic the number of people with
such disorders grew by 25 per cent. At the same time,
mental-health services were severely limited because
the entire health-care system was channelled towards
combating the coronavirus infection.
In addressing mental illness, the Russian Federation
pays particular attention to prevention. Psychiatric care
is guaranteed and is provided free and paid for by the
State. In that context, our delegation was focused on
achieving consensus on this action-oriented document
and took a constructive approach. Unfortunately,
ultimately the scales were tipped towards integrating
human rights and gender aspects into this specific
sector of health care.
At the same time, a number of very significant
issues were left out. The proposal by 28 delegations to

A/77/PV.84

include in the text a paragraph on the negative impact
of illegal unilateral coercive measures on the mental
health of the people of our planet was left out. We
express our disquiet at the fact that due attention was
not paid to the issue of universal access to good-quality
psychiatric care. That could complicate not only the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution at the
global level but also the application thereof in national
policies and teh use of its text in multilateral processes.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus would like to thank the delegation of Mexico
for introducing resolution 77/300. We understand
the importance and pertinence of this issue, so we
joined consensus.
Unfortunately, we cannot but note that the
paragraph on the impact of unilateral coercive measures
on the health-care sector, which was broadly supported
by delegations at each stage of the negotiation process,
was not reflected in the final draft of the document.
Clearly, in the absence of the relevant provision, the
resolution does not reflect the contemporary realities
encountered by people living in countries that are
under sanctions. Unilateral coercive measures have an
impact on the provision of medications and medical
equipment; they complicate international payments
and logistics; and they present a threat to the supply of
necessary medicines for those most in need.
Belarus is firmly committed to ensuring
comprehensive health-care coverage, inter alia in the
area of mental health and psychosocial support. To that
end, Belarus takes the necessary legal, organizational
and economic measures at the State level.
We recognize the leading and coordinating role
of the World Health Organization in tackling global
health-care issues. At the same time, Belarus reaffirms
the principle of national ownership and the key role
of national Governments in defining their own path
to ensuring universal health-care coverage, given the
national context and national priorities.
Mrs. Asaju (Nigeria): My delegation would like
to thank Mexico and the core group for facilitating
resolution 77/300. We equally thank the World Health
Organization for its technical support.
The resolution is extremely important to my
delegation with regard to ensuring the provision of
adequate, accessible, affordable and quality treatment
and care to persons with mental disorders and

23-1834511/28

A/77/PV.84

psychosocial disabilities. My delegation supported the
adoption of the resolution by consensus. We welcome
the amendment with regard to the inclusion of some
non-consensual language in the nineteenth preambular
paragraph (bis), with reference to sexual and
reproductive health and reproductive rights, which is
open to misinterpretation. Nigeria urges that we retain
language that is agreed to through negotiation. We are
equally surprised that the only language concerning
unilateral coercive measures that was proposed is not
included in the final version, despite the overwhelming
support of 28 delegations for that proposal and
several bilateral consultations. That shows that some
delegations were given preferential treatment over
others. It is imperative to state that we understand the
use of the term “gender” as referring to men and women.
We made a proposal to replace the term, together with
other delegations, but it was rejected.
We would like to reiterate that the inclusion of
some non-consensual language in the resolution that is
open to misinterpretation will be interpreted based on
our national priorities and laws.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after the adoption.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 128.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/910)
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President for convening this meeting
and the Secretary-General for his report on this topic
(A/77/910).
The report examines the relationship between
the challenges to sustainable development and the
risks, causes and drivers of atrocity crimes. While the
world is becoming more divided, uncompromising and
intolerant, people throughout the planet continue to
suffer from conflicts, forced displacement, terrorism,
separatism, violent extremism, inequality, insecurity,
poverty and climate change. Hate propaganda,
disinformation and policies aimed at building
monoethnic societies and advocating the ideas of
ethnic incompatibility, dehumanization and racial
12/28

26/06/2023

superiority continue to fuel identity-based intolerance,
destabilize societies, undermine peaceful coexistence
and significantly increase the risk of atrocity crimes.
The lack of accountability for serious violations of
international law undermines the rule of law and is
also among the conditions conducive to the protraction,
expansion or resurgence of conflicts and violence.
As the Secretary-General emphasizes in his report,
the propensity for a State or other actor to carry out
large-scale offences does not occur spontaneously,
but arises from pre-existing patterns of systematic
violations and impunity.
It is critical that the United Nations continue
promoting a culture of tolerance and respect, mobilizing
the world against racism and confronting hatred of all
kinds and incitement to discrimination and violence.
Furthermore, providing support to States affected by
conflict and engaged in post-conflict peacebuilding,
reconstruction, rehabilitation and reintegration and
taking measures to secure their borders from illegal
cross-border activities that could be used to commit
atrocities must remain a critical commitment of the
entire United Nations system.
The topic under discussion is of particular
importance for my country and for our region as a
whole. Azerbaijan’s experience of almost 30 years of
occupation of its sovereign territories by neighbouring
Armenia —in blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions — is an illustration and
reminder of the need to do much more to prevent and
resolve conflicts, ensure respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, fight against impunity for
serious crimes, confront hatred and build and sustain
peace. The consequences of the aggression against
my country, at the core of which was a long-standing
ultranationalist ideology, speak for themselves.
Thousands of Azerbaijani civilians were executed in
acts of mass murder, while many captives were subjected
to severe torture. More than 200,000 Azerbaijanis were
expelled from and are still prevented from returning
to their historical homeland in Armenia. In addition,
all occupied territories were ethnically cleansed of
more than 700,000 Azerbaijanis. Hundreds of cities,
towns and villages in my country were razed to the
ground, and Azerbaijani cultural heritage was looted,
vandalized, desecrated and destroyed both throughout
Armenia and in the formerly occupied territories.
23-18345

26/06/2023

A/77/PV.84

Following the long-awaited end of the war in the
fall of 2020, together with large-scale restoration
and reconstruction works in the liberated territories
to ensure the safe return of the displaced population
and a high standard of living, Azerbaijan initiated the
normalization of inter-State relations in good faith,
based on mutual recognition and respect for each
other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within their
internationally recognized borders.

this topic (see A/77/PV.83). I have to remind the General
Assembly that the so-called Nagorno-Karabakh region
to which Armenia stubbornly refers has long ceased
to exist as an administrative and territorial unit. That
area is an integral part of Azerbaijan that was under
Armenia’s unlawful occupation for nearly three
decades. The legal name of that area is the Karabakh
economic region. Armenia must memorize that name
and never forget it.

However, despite the ongoing dialogue and progress
towards such normalization, serious challenges remain.
Armenia refuses to completely withdraw the remnants
of its armed forces from the territory of Azerbaijan,
regularly violates the ceasefire, maintains its territorial
claims, continues hate propaganda and defies the order
of the International Court of Justice of 7 December
2021 by allowing racist paramilitary organizations
to operate on its territory, raise funds, openly spread
hate speech and recruit and train civilians, including
children, for war and the commission of mass violence.
Furthermore, Armenia refuses to disclose the location
of the hundreds of thousands of landmines that it laid
on the territory of Azerbaijan. As a result, in the postconflict period, since November 2020, 57 citizens
of Azerbaijan have been killed and 247 injured by
mine explosions. Armenia must share accurate and
comprehensive information about all minefields and
cease and desist from mine terrorism. In addition, more
international support to further develop and strengthen
national mine action efforts in Azerbaijan is critically
important to save lives and ensure the safe return of
internally displaced persons to their homes.

It is ironic that mono-ethnic Armenia, whose
central message continues to be that Azerbaijanis
and Armenians are fundamentally incompatible,
and where international terrorists, war criminals and
racist ideologues are national heroes, talks profusely
about human rights and minorities in other countries.
Armenia’s allegations about the so-called blockade of
the Lachin-Khankandi road are false and provocative.
Azerbaijan has never created impediments to the
residents’ freedom of movement on the road or to the
road’s use for humanitarian purposes. That is supported
by abundant documented evidence that exposes
Armenia’s fabrications.

In addition, with the exception of a few individuals
brought to justice by Azerbaijan for war crimes
and terrorist and mercenary activities, most of the
perpetrators continue to enjoy impunity, as Armenia is
unwilling to prosecute and punish them and to provide
redress for its breaches.
The fate of the nearly 4,000 citizens of Azerbaijan
who went missing in connection with the conflict,
including 719 civilians, remains unknown. Although
several mass graves have been discovered in the
liberated territories, shedding light on the wilful killing
of Azerbaijani civilians and other persons protected
under international humanitarian law, Armenia refrains
from clarifying the whereabouts of the missing persons.
We categorically reject the statement made by the
representative of Armenia at the earlier meeting held on

Armenia has neither the legal, political or moral
grounds to make any statements or comments concerning
the sovereign territory of Azerbaijan or matters falling
within my country’s exclusive rights, competence and
responsibilities. Instead, Armenia must take serious
care of its own international obligations and strictly
comply with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
Azerbaijan is determined to continue its efforts
towards advancing post-conflict peacebuilding,
reconciliation, reintegration, peaceful coexistence and
development in the region, as well as to ensure justice
and invest in national capabilities for early detection,
early warning, prevention and response to any threats
to the safety and well-being of its people and the State’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mr. Khaddour (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My country’s delegation associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Defence of the Charter
of the United Nations (see A/77/PV.83). It also takes
note of the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document A/77/910 and would like to make the
following observations:

23-1834513/28

A/77/PV.84

First, my country’s delegation reaffirms that the
concept of the responsibility to protect in its broad
or expanded sense should not be viewed under any
circumstances as anything but a general theoretical
framework, centred mainly on the existence of a moral
and political commitment to applying established and
existing legal rules at the international level. Therefore,
that concept does not rise to the level of international
legal rules, be they conventions or customary law, and
does not add new rights or legal obligations to the existing
rights and obligations recognized under international
law with regard to crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing.
Secondly, the concept of the responsibility to
protect is nothing more than a general concept of a
political nature and does not represent an exception
to the principle of State sovereignty, the principle of
prohibiting the use of force, or the principle of prohibiting
interference in the internal affairs of States, which are
firmly established in the Charter of the United Nations.
The concept does not grant new powers to the Security
Council. With or without it, the Council can use its
powers as required by the provisions of the Charter
for the purpose of protecting civilian populations and
confronting threats to international peace and security,
including resort to military force.
Moreover, the responsibility for protecting people
in a given country from crimes of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity rests
primarily with the concerned country and within the
framework of exercising its sovereignty. The concept
of the responsibility to protect is mainly based on the
prevention of mass atrocities and should not be seen as
synonymous with the concept of military intervention.
Even if it appears that the use of force is necessary for
the implementation of the responsibility to protect,
it is imperative to take into account the principles
established in international law that govern this issue,
the most prominent of which is the approval of the
Security Council.
Thirdly, military interventions, whatever their
driving goals and justifications may be, lead in most
cases to highly dangerous results and repercussions that
may exceed by far the gravity of the situations that led
to those interventions, as they may prolong the crises
that are supposedly being addressed. Interventions
may result in the emergence of new conflicts,
exposing civilians to other massacres in addition
to the massacres that the interventions are aimed at
14/28

26/06/2023

stopping or preventing. In addition, such interventions
often result in transforming the State that is subject to
intervention into a failed State, dominated by bloody
conflicts that threaten civil peace and stability in the
concerned region and in the world at large, and may end
in dividing a single State into ethnic or religious States
that are more easily controlled.
There is no doubt that the concept of the
responsibility to protect is suffering today more
than ever before from a crisis of confidence at the
international level that cannot be ignored, following
the deviation of the 2011 military intervention in Libya
from its stated goal, which was to protect civilians,
to the goal of overthrowing the State regime. That
definitely had nothing to do with the concept of the
responsibility to protect. As a result, international
support diminished for that relatively recent concept,
which has long been misused, and States became more
alert to the importance of not tolerating any similar
concepts aimed at promoting interference in the internal
affairs of other States, including under the pretext of
the responsibility to protect.
Fourthly, protecting civilians and saving
humankind from the scourge of international wars and
atrocities, which are objectives that my country shares
with all Member States, requires us to strictly respect
the provisions of international law and the principles
and purposes of the United Nations Charter, foremost
among which are the principles of sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
resort to peaceful means for resolving disputes, the
establishment of international relations in good faith,
and the development of international cooperation and
friendly relations among States. Other factors to be
taken into account include promoting opportunities
for sustainable development, enhancing cooperation
in the fields of education and health, making efforts to
eradicate poverty, marginalization and discrimination,
and the immediate lifting of unilateral, coercive and
inhumane measures. Those factors contribute to
preventing conflicts and violations while fostering a
culture of peace and tolerance.
However, politicization and selectivity in relation to
the issue of the responsibility to protect open the door to
foreign interference, regime change and the imposition
of the agendas and interests of certain countries at
the expense of other countries and peoples. Attempts
by certain States members of the Security Council
to impose upon it their selective policies and double
23-18345

26/06/2023

A/77/PV.84

standard will further undermine the role assigned to the
Council under the Charter.

actors, with civilians forced to leave homes to find
electricity, running water and food supplies.

In conclusion, many Governments of States that
seek to impose the concept of the responsibility to
protect on the approach adopted by the United Nations
have ignored for decades the practices of the Israeli
occupation of our people in the Golan and occupied
Palestine, including settlement policies, war crimes
and torturing civilians, which are explicit and grave
violations of international legitimacy and Security
Council resolutions. Those Governments also ignored
the recruiting, financing and facilitated transfer of tens
of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters who joined the
terrorist organizations that my country, Syria, has been
fighting, given its national responsibility to protect
its citizens. Those are the same Governments that
hinder a political solution to the crisis in my country.
At the same time, those same countries impose unjust
blockade and unilateral coercive measures that deprive
Syrian citizens of essential basic living and health
services. That is, regrettably, the pinnacle of political
and moral hypocrisy.

Civilians are facing the brunt of the destruction of
the Kakhovka dam, with global repercussions, due to
flooding. The destruction of the dam also endangers
operations at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and
has damaged agricultural fields and facilities that will
further set back food production on which much of the
world depends. We have also seen Russia use Iraniansupplied kamikaze drones to attack cities throughout
Ukraine, killing hundreds and destroying schools,
hospitals and other civilian infrastructure. That is in
addition to the Russian missiles that have targeted
civilians and civilian infrastructure since the beginning
of the full-scale invasion in February 2022.

Mr. Shrier (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Adviser on the Responsibility to
Protect Okoth-Obbo and for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/77/910) (see A/77/PV.83).
It has been 18 years since the General Assembly
adopted its World Summit outcome document
(resolution 60/1), which proclaimed that each State
has the responsibility to protect its populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, and two years since the General
Assembly decided to include that item in its annual
agenda. Despite those efforts, we continue to see the
perpetration of atrocities in numerous situations around
the world. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s
report’s focus on the risks and drivers of atrocity crimes
and on the importance of prevention.
As the Secretary-General has urged, we, the States
Members of the United Nations, must do more to address
the risks that can create conditions that lead to atrocities.
It is vital that we continue to address food insecurity
and poverty and, more generally, accelerate progress
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
in order to help lower the risk of atrocities occurring.
We must focus our attention and efforts on addressing
atrocities that are taking place across the world. Far
too often, critical infrastructure is targeted by armed

In April, Burma’s military conducted an air strike
on a village in Kanbalu township that killed more
than 160 people, including dozens of children. The
regime’s violence and oppression have perpetuated a
humanitarian crisis in Burma, with reports indicating
more than 3,600 killed, 19,000 detained and more than
1.5 million displaced since the coup d’état. And let us
not forget the genocide and crimes against humanity
perpetrated against the Rohingya in 2016 and 2017.
People’s Republic of China authorities continue to
commit genocide and crimes against humanity against
predominantly Muslim Uyghurs and members of other
ethnic and religious minority groups in Xinjiang. In
response to the situation in Xinjiang, the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, acting under
its early-warning system and urgent action procedure,
referred the matter to the attention of the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect in November 2022.
The United States condemns in the strongest
terms the ongoing human rights violations and abuses
and horrific violence in the Sudan, especially reports
of widespread sexual violence and killings, based on
ethnicity in West Darfur by the Rapid Support Forces
(RSF) and allied militias. The atrocities occurring in
West Darfur and other areas are an ominous reminder
of the horrific events that led the United States to
determine in 2004 that genocide had been committed
in Darfur. We specifically condemn the killing of West
Darfur Governor Khamis Abbakar on 14 June after
he accused the RSF and other forces of perpetrating
genocide. While the atrocities taking place in Darfur
are primarily attributable to the RSF and affiliated

23-1834515/28

A/77/PV.84

militia, both sides have been responsible for abuses.
In Darfur, the Sudanese Armed Forces have failed to
protect civilians and have reportedly stoked conflict by
encouraging the mobilization of tribes.
Security Council resolution 2573 (2021), on the
protection of objects indispensable to the survival of
the civilian population, condemned acts of violence
in conflict areas, whether deliberate or not, that
threaten or harm civilian populations and essential
infrastructure. Under that resolution, those acts are
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law.
All parties to armed conflict must immediately end
such practices. The resolution further demanded that
all parties comply fully with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and urged all parties
to protect civilian infrastructure. All States and armed
groups must comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and should implement
good practices to mitigate and respond to harm to
civilians and civilian objects.
In an effort to continually improve its policies
and practices relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the United States released the Civilian
Harm Mitigation and Response Action Plan. The Plan
includes doctrine, guidance and procedures to mitigate
and respond to civilian harm in United States operations
and multinational operations, led by the United States.
The United States remains committed to upholding its
obligations regarding the protection of civilians and to
promoting accountability for those who are responsible
for atrocities.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow me, first of all,
to thank the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
on the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. George OkothObbo, for his briefing (see A/77/PV.83). I also thank
those representatives of Member States who delivered
statements before us.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect (see A/77/PV.83).
The responsibility to protect (R2P) serves as a
powerful reminder of our shared duty towards the
preservation of humankind. Our debate today on R2P
should extend beyond mere discussion and be aimed
at encouraging proactive measures to prevent mass
atrocity crimes. In that context, it is pertinent to note
that, just last Monday, we marked the International
Day for Countering Hate Speech. That occasion
16/28

26/06/2023

underscored the severe ramifications of unchecked
hate speech and its potential to foster the seeds of mass
atrocities. Hate speech today continues to proliferate in
our societies, violence escalates and innocent civilians
are increasingly at risk on a daily basis. The onus is
on all of us to protect the marginalized and to counter
hate speech.
We must emphasize the remarkable work done
by the Office on Genocide Prevention and the
Responsibility to Protect and by the Special Adviser.
Their energy is indispensable in countering those
destructive narratives. Rwanda has reiterated on
several occasions the need to bolster support for the
Office and the Special Adviser, whose dedicated efforts
to prevent mass atrocities deserve recognition from and
reinforcement by all of us.
We extend our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive 2023 report on R2P (A/77/910).
The correlations drawn between mass atrocity crimes
and the broader theme of development underscore the
need for us to focus our attention on the root causes
of conflict. By understanding those triggers, we can
respond more effectively and pre-emptively to mitigate
future atrocities. In that regard, Rwanda urges the
Secretary-General to include in future reports an
examination of progress made concerning previous
recommendations, along with an analysis of emerging
trends in genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing.
The R2P doctrine, as has been mentioned here
before, rests on three pillars: the responsibility of the
State, international assistance and capacity-building,
and timely and decisive responses. Unfortunately,
today we are witnessing those pillars falter in real time.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we face
a disheartening situation. An escalating trend of hate
speech and anti-Rwandaphone sentiment, disseminated
through schools and social media platforms, is causing
immense harm and deepening divisions among societies.
The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Ms. Alice Nderitu, and the former High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, issued a
statement in that regard, but statements are not enough.
The repercussions of those acts extend far beyond
immediate harm inflicted upon individuals and
communities — they create a dangerous foundation
for large-scale atrocity crimes. Prioritizing governance
accountability is of utmost importance. Preventive
23-18345

26/06/2023

actions require assuming responsibility and promoting
a zero-tolerance approach to hate speech. We appeal
to the international community to come together
and demand accountability as a means to prevent
atrocity crimes.
The third pillar calls for a timely and decisive
response. The current situation, as we have observed,
has surpassed the threshold for such a response. For
example, a group of Rwandaphone women in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were recently
rounded up, attacked and falsely accused of spreading
HIV among the Congolese people. Such acts of
stigmatization, dehumanization and persecution
demand the attention of the General Assembly and
must be called out.
We find ourselves at a critical juncture. We reiterate
our warning of a potential genocide if we do not heed
what has been reported. Together, we possess the
power and bear the obligation to alter that trajectory.
The international community must act now, as dialogue
without action amounts to a disservice to those people
we must protect. We need a committed and tangible
approach to preventing mass atrocity crimes around
the world. Let us tread the path of peace, ensuring that
the responsibility to protect transforms from a mere
doctrine into a tangible reality for all.
In conclusion, we urge all Member States to
recognize and support the Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect in its
efforts to stem the tide of violence and protect innocent
civilians. We must transform our collective rhetoric into
concerted action to ensure lasting peace and security
for all people.
Mr. Sekonyana (South Africa): I wish to begin by
acknowledging the importance of this annual debate
and, importantly, the provision of the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on the matter (A/77/910). I
thank him for this year’s report, entitled “Development
and the responsibility to protect: Recognizing and
addressing embedded risks and drivers of atrocity
crimes”. In addition, it is also important to applaud the
complementary role provided by the United Nations
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility
to Protect and the mandate of the respective Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect (R2P).
South Africa agrees with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that, while many States and the international

A/77/PV.84

community have embraced that fundamental norm,
further actions are needed by Member States, the
international community and other actors to support
sustainable development as a means towards preventing
future atrocity crimes. Therefore, it is our duty as
States and as the international community to commit
to preventing such acts from occurring by establishing
methodologies and approaches that enable and increase
support for sustainable development. Such development
can then be leveraged towards the realization of
the cardinal objectives of R2P, as delineated in the
Secretary-General’s report.
As we are all aware, the notion of the responsibility
to protect, as defined in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document (resolution 60/1), highlights
that it is the responsibility of the State to protect its
population from atrocity crimes, namely, genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
The report presented this year is a further examination
of the root causes of those crimes and the importance
of sustainable development as a preventative measure.
It is important to recognize that extreme poverty
and inequality present structural risks and a possible
environment for atrocity crimes, especially when
compounded with political instability, discrimination
and societal shocks.
The report holds that the State remains critical in
ensuring that it sustains an environment that averts such
crimes through sustainable development approaches
and in addressing concerns of discrimination and
inequality. The report is equally valuable, inasmuch as
it makes a fundamental connection between sustainable
development and human rights. We acknowledge
the point that inclusive and sustainable development
systems strengthen and protect human rights, as they
build societies where populations are protected. In that
regard, South Africa would further like to highlight the
following points.
First, development policies and discrimination
serve as a connection between gradual human rights
violations and atrocity crimes, and a State or another
actor does not spontaneously carry out such heinous
actions but rather acts on pre-existing conditions
in which human rights are being violated. That is
especially true when identity politics are directed to
discriminate and isolate a particular group. The report
highlights that

23-1834517/28

A/77/PV.84

“[d]iscriminatory policies that are evident prior
to (or part of) genocidal processes include the
deprivation of social, cultural, economic, political
and civil rights, the exclusion of targeted groups
from society and the denial of their basic humanity”
(A/77/910, para. 18).
Those rights being deprived are often particular
to development and the upliftment of a group or
community, and when a specific identity or group is
deprived of them, such deprivation should serve as an
early warning sign.
Secondly, there is a clear link between the
Sustainable Development Goals and the prevention of
atrocity crimes; economic development approaches that
are sensitive to the responsibility to protect serve as a
mechanism that inherently pre-empts discrimination
and counters inequality. Addressing and eliminating
poverty avert competition over scarce resources and
discourages identity-oriented discrimination. South
Africa also believes that transparent and accountable
governance structures — as determined in Sustainable
Development Goal 16 — and the effective management
of resources in an economy serve to reduce tensions
that can drive instability.
Thirdly, the international community must
strengthen the tools provided by the Charter of the
United Nations for the pacific settlement of disputes.
At the 2005 World Summit, the States Members of the
United Nations committed themselves to protecting
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. However, since
then, conflicts have drastically changed, becoming
more complex and multidimensional. Thus, we must
find innovative means to address those unprecedented
threats and challenges, and achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals is a key tool to avoid utilizing more
drastic measures of last resort.
Fourthly, the international community has access
to a multitude of tools provided by the Charter and
decisions by Member States on sustainable development
to prevent the deprivation of human rights, conflicts
and, ultimately, atrocity crimes. That development
approach should incorporate a sensitivity to atrocity
crimes and to the potential for such crimes to occur
if the sustainable development and financing is not
directed equitably within a culture of human rights and
accountable governance. In that regard, South Africa
was pleased to note that the report of the Secretary18/28

26/06/2023

General acknowledges the importance of global
cooperation among all development actors, including
international financial institutions and the United
Nations development system, to encourage a human
rights-based approach as a key pillar for sustainable
development and the achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
We should also note that the report substantively
discusses the importance of preventative measures
during periods of stability. To that end, South Africa
concurs with the report’s specific acknowledgement
that security sector reform, inclusive of effective
disarmament and the regulation of the flow of
weapons, is both a preventive measure and a long-term
development goal, with an acknowledgement of the
intersection between security and development.
States should be encouraged to build societies that
promote socioeconomic equality, that value difference
and diversity and that have systems in place to identify
and respond to early warnings. Therefore, R2P is
very clearly aligned with sustainable development.
Furthermore, South Africa will continue to support the
primacy of prevention through a strong development
agenda that is centred around human rights.
Lastly, I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate
that South Africa remains committed to instruments that
promote and implement R2P and further acknowledges
the details contained in the Secretary-General’s report.
In particular, South Africa appreciates the inclusive
nature of the report in identifying several concrete
actions that can be undertaken to not only prevent such
crimes but also to invest in national capacities for early
detection and prevention to respond to atrocity crimes.
South Africa, as a member of the Global Network
of R2P Focal Points, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Group of Friends on Security Sector Reform,
will continue to use those platforms to promote
and prioritize negotiations, the use of good offices,
mediation, arbitration and other peaceful means to
address any challenges faced by countries affected
by conflict.
In conclusion, we must acknowledge that this
plenary meeting is more critical today than ever, as
we strive together to protect people from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. We are deeply appreciative of the link drawn
in this year’s report between development and atrocity
crimes and the understanding that inequality and the
23-18345

26/06/2023

consequential competition over resources serve as a
driver to increase discrimination in a society.
The application of the principles of R2P should
not be selective and should apply universally to all
States — as is expected of all international norms and
legal frameworks. This is reinforced by frank and open
debates that are critical to recognizing our current
shortcomings, such that we are able to advance as an
international community.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I thank the President for convening this meeting and
commend the Secretary-General for his enlightening
report on the link between the responsibility to protect
and development (A/77/910).
There can be no doubt that poverty and the
commission of mass atrocities are linked. The
responsibility to protect, through its deterrent effect
alone, helps to promote peace and stability, which
are prerequisites for development of any kind. At the
same time, as the Secretary-General’s report rightly
underscores, the international community and States
have the opportunity to prevent conflicts and mass
atrocities associated with them by eliminating poverty,
unemployment and social inequalities that fuel the
drivers of violence, including xenophobia, hate speech
and intolerance.
At a time when inequality is on the rise and half
of the world’s wealth remains concentrated in the
hands of a mere 1 per cent of the world’s population,
we cannot say that we are on the right track, unless
a reform of the international financial architecture is
undertaken, as proposed by the Secretary-General in
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), to provide countries
with more favourable investment opportunities to
reduce unemployment and poverty.
In joining the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect in 2012, Côte d’Ivoire wished to reiterate
its allegiance to the principle as a key mechanism for
ending mass atrocities. However, the events of recent
years have reduced the United Nations to a nearly
passive witness to armed conflicts and constant
insecurity, with actors showing ever-diminishing
concern for humanitarian law and human life, forcibly
displacing more than 100 million people to date.
That state of affairs reinforces our conviction that
it is necessary to reform the Security Council, the
main guarantor of international peace and stability, in

A/77/PV.84

order to make it more representative. That will entail
improving its working methods, including by holding
briefings to the Council on situations that could lead
to atrocity crimes; adopting the Code of Conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
which calls for the prohibition of the veto in the event
of mass atrocities; and supporting the Franco-Mexican
initiative on limiting the veto.
In an interconnected world, where the effects
of even the most localized crises affect us all, we
need to look for solutions to prevent the principle of
sovereignty being used as a pretext for impunity for the
perpetrators of mass atrocities, including those who
use hunger and rape as weapons of war or deliberately
target civilian infrastructure.
Under these conditions, while leaving States with
the primary responsibility to protect, the international
community should provide itself with the legal, judicial
and military means, including by increasing the budget
for peacekeeping operations, to put an end to atrocity
crimes, prosecute the perpetrators and compensate
the victims.
My country remains convinced that conflict
prevention is the best way to implement the responsibility
to protect. To that end, the United Nations must rely on
early warning mechanisms at the regional, subregional
and national levels, as well as on civil society, while
ensuring that they receive the necessary financial and
technical assistance.
For its part, my country adopted legislative and
institutional measures and set up monitoring and
awareness-raising bodies to counter the risks of
mass crimes. Those include the High Authority for
Audiovisual Communication, which seeks to prevent
hate speech in the media and on social networks;
the National Council for Human Rights and the
Observatory of Solidarity and Social Cohesion, which
raise awareness of hate speech; and the Platform to
Combat Cybercrime, which tracks down and punishes
the perpetrators of hate speech. Furthermore, aware
that the prevention of conflicts and atrocities requires
combating poverty and social inequality, my country
integrated social development into its national
development plan, focusing on young people, with an
investment plan covering the period 2021 to 2025 for
their professional integration and a target of creating
8 million jobs by 2030.

23-1834519/28

A/77/PV.84

I would like to conclude by reiterating my country’s
support for the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect and by
encouraging him to continue to provide information
and share analyses on situations that could lead to
conflicts and mass atrocity crimes.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your introductory
remarks and express our continued support for the
Office of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
on the Responsibility to Protect. Slovakia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union and the statement made on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
I will add a few remarks from my national perspective.
Slovakia welcomes the fourteenth report of the
Secretary-General (A/77/910), focused this time
on the crucial nexus between development and the
responsibility to protect. However, like other speakers,
we would like to encourage the Secretary-General
to include, in his future reports, assessments of the
implementation of recommendations of previous
reports, as well as country-specific analyses. For this
year’s debate, allow me to focus briefly on three points.
First, on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, poverty, long-standing institutionalized
discrimination, poor education, economic and
gender inequalities and social exclusion, as well
as corruption and lack of good governance, are all
important risk factors of atrocity crimes. Addressing
these factors need to be at the heart of our policies
for the prevention of atrocities. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development provides a framework
for global cooperation to achieve a better and more
sustainable future and can significantly contribute
to atrocity-prevention efforts. However, as outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report, only about 12 per
cent of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) targets
are on track to be met by 2030. The upcoming SDG
Summit and the later Summit of the Future are great
opportunities to not redouble, but triple our efforts and
commitments towards the attainment of the SDGs.
Secondly, prevention is the most important part of
the responsibility to protect populations from atrocity
crimes. In addition to my first point, I would like to
emphasize the importance of early-warning systems in
the prevention of atrocity crimes, both at a national and
international level. In order to facilitate the prevention
20/28

26/06/2023

of atrocity crimes, early-warning information must feed
into processes that will enable an adequate response.
In the absence of a response on the local or national
level, the Security Council must be able to take action
if the situation poses a threat to international peace and
security. In that context, we recall the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group and the French-Mexican initiative on the use of
veto in cases of mass atrocities.
Thirdly, on accountability, if efforts to prevent
atrocities are not successful, perpetrators have to be
brought to justice in order to prevent the recurrence of
atrocities. In that connection, I would like to emphasize
the role of the International Criminal Court as an
independent and impartial judicial body that steps in
when national jurisdictions are unable or unwilling
to fulfil their primary obligation. Slovakia takes this
opportunity to encourage all Member States who have
not yet done so, to ratify the Rome Statute and its
amendments. The twenty-fifth anniversary of the Rome
Statute serves as an ideal opportunity to demonstrate
our common commitment to the fight against impunity.
We also reiterate our call to take a step forward
towards the elaboration of a new comprehensive
convention on the prevention and punishment of crimes
against humanity. The open and extensive discussions
earlier this year within the Sixth Committee were
encouraging and we hope that they will lead to concrete
action in the General Assembly during its seventyninth session.
Slovakia also commends the recent adoption of the
new Ljubljana-Hague Convention, which aims to foster
the primary responsibility of States to investigate,
prosecute and punish the perpetrators of the most
serious international crimes by providing a robust and
modern framework of inter-State cooperation. It will
be crucial in our future endeavours, including on the
crimes against humanity treaty, to avoid weakening our
common goal of closing the impunity gap.
I could not conclude my statement without
mentioning the situation in our neighbouring country
Ukraine, where atrocities have been committed. An
easy and quick way to prevent their further commitment
is the immediate cessation of Russian military activities
in Ukraine and the unconditional withdrawal of all
Russian troops from the entire territory of Ukraine. We
urge Russia to do this.
23-18345

26/06/2023

A/77/PV.84

Mr. Khan (Pakistan): We would like to thank the
President for convening the thematic debate and the
Secretary-General for his report on the responsibility
to protect (A/77/910).

High Commissioner for Human Rights has issued two
reports citing massive human rights violations and
proposed the establishment of a commission of inquiry
to investigate these violations.

At the 2005 World Summit, the concept of the
responsibility to protect was presented as a noble
humanitarian doctrine aimed at preventing mass
atrocities and protecting vulnerable populations.
Yet history has proven that there are inherent
double standards and political considerations both
in the rationale of the responsibility to protect and
the application of its principles that undermine its
credibility and objectivity.

The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) has
proudly equated their ideology with Hitler’s Nazis and
called for the persecution of India’s Muslims, just as the
Jews were persecuted. Inspired by the same philosophy,
today’s Indian Government is leading a systematic
campaign to cleanse India — and the occupied territory
of Jammu and Kashmir — of all vestiges of their rich
Islamic heritage. The RSS was responsible for the
organized pogroms against Indian Muslims in Bombay
in 1992, Gujarat in 2002 and Delhi in 2021, and the
destruction in 1992 of the historic Babri Mosque and
the construction of a Hindu temple on the site.

There is ample evidence to suggest that in many
cases a military action to protect civilians was
swiftly transformed into so-called regime change and
destabilized the country further. Such an abuse of the
concept of responsibility to protect not only exposes the
ulterior objective of pursuing geopolitical interests in
the garb of duty to intervene to protect civilians but
also highlights the inherent weakness of the concept of
responsibility to protect.
Apart from its abuse, the concept of responsibility
to protect has also led to the criticism that some States
have failed to invoke it and shown hesitancy either
in condemning the massive human rights violations
committed by so-called strategic allies or by holding
them accountable in the Security Council. One specific
circumstance where the responsibility to protect would
surely apply is in situations of foreign occupation or
alien domination, such as in occupied Palestine or
in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir, which are
rife with pressing human rights emergencies often
equated with genocide and other similar crimes, but
where voices to intervene to protect populations are
unappealingly quiet.
For more than seven decades, India has denied the
right of self-determination to the Kashmiri people,
in violation of multiple resolutions of the Security
Council prescribing a free and fair plebiscite. India
has deployed 900,000 troops, resorted to extrajudicial
killings, forced abductions, collective punishments and
the incarceration of the entire political leadership of the
All Parties Hurriyat Conference, which is the true voice
of the Kashmiri people. In the past, Pakistan has also
circulated a detailed dossier documenting with evidence
over 3,432 war crimes committed by Indian officials
in occupied Jammu and Kashmir. The United Nations

The persecution of Muslims has become a routine
norm in today’s India and in occupied Jammu and
Kashmir, and the list of acts of persecution continues
to grow. However, most recently, on Saturday, during
a visit by Indian Home Minister Amit Shah to Indianoccupied Jammu and Kashmir, Indian Army personnel
stormed a mosque in the Pulwama district of south
Kashmir while Muslims were offering prayers, and
they forced these Muslims to chant certain slogans
against their will.
Gregory Stanton, the founder of Genocide Watch,
recently warned us of the possibility of genocide in
Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir and in India. The
international community, especially the advocates of
the responsibility to protect, must carefully analyse the
devastating human rights situation that is transpiring
in India and in the occupied territory of Jammu
and Kashmir.
The responsibility to protect concept was generated
from an expectation that the international community
would act to protect those in danger. However, the
selective application of the responsibility to protect driven
by double standards and geopolitical considerations,
together with certain underlying ambiguities within
the concept, undermines its credibility as a genuine
humanitarian doctrine. To truly uphold the principle
of accountability and protect vulnerable populations,
a more nuanced and balanced approach that avoids
selectivity and promotes objectivity and impartiality is
very much necessary.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the President of the General

23-1834521/28

A/77/PV.84

Assembly for convening today’s formal debate on the
responsibility to protect, which presents the Member
States with an opportunity to reflect on and assess
the efforts made and to be made to prevent crimes
against humanity and mass atrocities. Before I begin
the statement that I will make on behalf of my country,
I wish to express my delegation’s support for the
statement made by representative of Croatia on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
(see A/77/PV.83).
We welcome and appreciate the presentation of the
report of the Secretary-General entitled “Development
and the responsibility to protect: recognizing and
addressing embedded risks and drivers of atrocity
crimes” (A/77/910), which underlines that poverty,
institutionalized discrimination, lack of access to
education, economic and gender inequalities and social
exclusion are risk factors for atrocity crimes. Indeed,
extreme poverty generates a lack of opportunities,
competition for resources and major inequalities within
a society that can exacerbate grievances between groups.
Some of the most effective policies for preventing
atrocities are those aimed at reducing socioeconomic
inequalities and strengthening governance. Likewise,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
provides a framework for global cooperation to achieve
a better and more sustainable future, can significantly
contribute to atrocity-prevention efforts by addressing
inequalities in development and governance through
the building of more advanced societies. Building
more resilient societies specifically requires, inter alia,
respect for the rule of law as well as respect for and
protection and fulfilment of all human rights, without
discrimination. Key to this are legitimate, accountable
and inclusive national constitutions that also ensure
that all people have access to justice.
Despite initial progress following the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in 2015,
various global challenges such as the lasting effects of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, armed conflicts,
climate emergencies and the financial, food and energy
crises have led to the stalling or reversing of progress
towards the Sustainable Development Goals targets and
have served as elements propagating armed conflicts.
The world is facing unprecedented levels of violence,
mass atrocities and displacement, and, despite collective
efforts to prevent the escalation of conflict and protect
populations, there are currently more than 100 million
22/28

26/06/2023

people worldwide displaced by conflict, persecution
and atrocities.
The Peacebuilding Commission can, in particular,
play an important role in supporting States in the
transition from conflict and atrocity crimes to
sustainable peace by tracking underlying development
indicators. Member States should explore the
possibilities of engaging further with the Peacebuilding
Commission, which can assist States and advise the
Security Council on how to fulfil their obligations
relating to the responsibility to protect. My delegation
also wants to encourage the members of the Security
Council to make use of its working methods to consider
situations that could potentially involve atrocities as
early as possible. In that regard, we support holding
open debates on the responsibility to protect, the
threat of atrocity crimes and the role of the Council
in their prevention, and we urge Council members to
request regular briefings by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Furthermore, I also want to point out that as a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, Uruguay affirms its support for the proposal for
a code of conduct for the Security Council with regard
to draft resolutions aimed at protecting populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. We also endorse the FrenchMexican declaration asking the permanent members
of the Council to abstain voluntarily from the use of
the veto when mass atrocities are committed. The
Security Council, which is mandated by the Charter of
the United Nations with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must make every effort and provide effective measures
to protect the civilian population and prevent atrocity
crimes. From the perspective of a representative of a
troop-contributing country, I would like to emphasize
the usefulness of peacekeeping missions as one of
our most effective tools to shield civilians from
atrocity crimes.
Uruguay recognizes the three pillars of the
responsibility to protect. We prioritize the first and
second pillars, concerning prevention, as the most
effective means for taking on the responsibility to
protect. In that regard, we support the work of the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to Protect and encourage them to
share their analyses of developing crises with members
and to provide recommendations and early warnings on
23-18345

26/06/2023

atrocity prevention to the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council. We cannot
overemphasize the importance of the work of the
Human Rights Council and its mechanisms, including
the Universal Periodic Review, the special procedures
and the treaty bodies, and of the technical assistance
provided by the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, all of which play a fundamental role in
early warnings of risks and detecting indicators of mass
atrocity crimes, while we underline the central role that
early warnings must play in such cases.
In conclusion, Uruguay reaffirms its commitment
to the responsibility to protect and calls for efforts
to continue to be stepped up in order to advance its
proper implementation.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): In 2005, our leaders
agreed that each individual State had the primary
responsibility to protect its own populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. That is the first pillar on which the
concept of the responsibility to protect (R2P) rests.
The second pillar stresses the role of the international
community in providing cooperation and assistance
to enable States to develop local capacities that will
enable them to discharge that responsibility. The third
pillar applies only in exceptional circumstances and is
subject to material, temporal and formal limitations.
Should peaceful means be inadequate and national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations,
the international community may take collective action
through the Security Council to protect populations from
grave crimes. The responsibility to protect is not laid
down in legally binding instruments nor does it reflect
customary international law. It is a political concept to
be used collectively through the United Nations.
Under no circumstance, may the concept of
responsibility to protect be used as a pretext for
unilateral coercive measures, intervention in domestic
affairs or regime change. No State has the right to
invoke the concept as a justification for acts not in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, the international community, as it
exercises its responsibility to protect, must demonstrate
a high level of responsibility while protecting. Any
collective action should be based on an agreed set of
fundamental principles, parameters and procedures,
such as the emphasis on prevention, including preventive
diplomacy, and the exhaustion of all diplomatic,
humanitarian and other peaceful means available in the

A/77/PV.84

protection of civilians. The use of force is a measure of
last resort and must always respect international law.
We are proud to have co-sponsored resolution
75/277, which included the item on the responsibility to
protect on the annual agenda of the General Assembly.
The resolution confirmed that the General Assembly,
with its wide and representative composition, is the
main locus to discuss R2P. Its adoption also reflected
the recognition that there was a need to collectively
discuss the protection of populations from R2P crimes.
I thank the Secretary-General and the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect for
this year’s report on development and the responsibility
to protect (A/2023/910). In 2011, the Security Council
underlined in presidential statement S/PRST/2011/19
that security and development are closely interlinked,
mutually reinforcing and key to achieving sustainable
peace. It recognized that their relationship is complex,
multifaceted and case-specific. Poverty does not always
lead to violence, but social, political and economic
exclusion can contribute to the eruption of violence
and conflict. It is important to underline that there is
no direct link between development deficits and the
commitment of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
or crimes against humanity.
Regarding Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)
16, mentioned in the report, it must be considered in
conjunction with all the other SDGs. Any effort towards
the implementation of SDG 16 needs to take place as
part of a broader endeavour that necessarily involves
the social, environmental and economic dimensions
of sustainable development. In order to prevent R2P
crimes, there is a need for a comprehensive approach
that strengthens coherence among political, security,
development, human rights and rule of law activities.
In that respect, the Peacebuilding Commission is well
positioned to help fill the gap by playing its bridging role
between peace and security efforts and development
solutions, as well as mobilizing international support in
cooperation with the entire United Nations System. It
must always preserve its demand-driven approach and
alignment with peacebuilding priorities.
Brazil reiterates its concern that once again the
Secretary-General’s report uses the term “atrocity
crimes” to refer to the horrendous acts associated
with R2P. As Brazil has underscored in previous
interventions, Member States and the United Nations
alike should avoid the temptation of multiplying and

23-1834523/28

A/77/PV.84

using imprecise concepts. The term “atrocity crimes”
is not defined under international law or in multilateral
resolutions or decisions. The four crimes mentioned
in the 2005 World Summit outcome document are
undoubtedly atrocious, but so are other crimes that
are not part of the definition used in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
The report of the Secretary-General acknowledges
that food insecurity is a critical development concern.
As co-focal point in the Security Council on food
security and armed conflicts, Brazil highlights its
centrality in conflict prevention and resolution, as
well as in mitigating the impact of armed disputes
involving the most vulnerable populations. Armed
conflicts and food insecurity can form a vicious cycle
that traps populations and countries in a spiral of
degrading living conditions. Conflicts generate forced
displacement, the destruction of essential infrastructure
and, quite often, the degradation of otherwise viable
soil. Food insecurity and malnutrition hamper human
development, which is necessary for sustainable peace,
and may intensify competition over resources. We need
to break that cycle, and to do that we need concrete
action in the three pillars of the United Nations. We
call for increased cooperation between the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in
order to make the integration of efforts more effective.
In conclusion, Brazil looks forward to continuing
discussions on the best strategies to advance the
prevention and response to R2P crimes, as well as to
increase capacity-building and long-term measures
capable of promoting more inclusive, diverse and
tolerant societies.
Mr. Ekren (Türkiye): At the outset, we would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/77/910),
which provides an analysis of the relationship between
development and the responsibility to protect. We also
thank the Special Adviser for presenting the report to
the General Assembly.
In 2005, Member States made an important
commitment to their responsibility to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Nevertheless, despite national and
global efforts, we continue to witness grave human
suffering, human rights violations and humanitarian
crises around the world.
24/28

26/06/2023

The full achievement of peace and stability in the
world is closely related to developing the means and
capabilities that can effectively address humanitarian
crises and prevent human rights violations. In that
regard, we note the emphasis in the report on patterns
of discrimination and other violations of human rights
as major risk factors. Today hate crimes, racism,
xenophobia and discrimination based on religion have
reached unprecedented levels. Those practices run
counter to the principles of respect for human dignity,
equality, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
It is of the utmost importance for the international
community to act in solidarity against the deplorable
acts of violence and discrimination based on religion,
in particular against Islamophobia, which is alarmingly
on the rise.
On the other hand, violence against women
continues to be a major threat to women in all countries.
The severe effects of conflicts on women and girls in
various geographies remain a significant problem that
needs to be addressed by the international community,
with a comprehensive and inclusive approach.
Section II of the Secretary-General’s report
analyses the major risk factors and drivers of atrocities
in economic, social, governance, conflict, human
rights and development contexts. We note the inclusion
of food insecurity, including hunger, famine and
starvation, as a critical development concern under that
section. For its part, Türkiye has assumed a pioneering
role in addressing and mitigating the effects of food
insecurity. The Black Sea Grain Initiative, which we
brokered together with the United Nations, has been
instrumental in providing food access to millions
of people and bringing down global food prices. We
continue our efforts for the smooth implementation and
further extension of the Initiative.
The Secretary-General’s report lists stressors
on social resilience among the major risk factors for
atrocities. Terrorism is indeed a major threat against
social resilience. The instability and destruction caused
by terrorist organizations threatens not only lives,
rights and freedoms, but also economic welfare and
social stability. Funds that should ideally be allocated
for the realization of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) instead have to be utilized to remedy the
damage caused by terrorist organizations. As indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General on the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674),
working towards achieving the SDGs is a long-term plan
23-18345

26/06/2023

A/77/PV.84

to eradicate terrorism. The scope of the responsibility
to protect must therefore take into account the fight
against terrorist organizations.

there can be no development without peace — and
even less so if our vision for a peaceful world does not
include respect for human rights.

We welcome the fact that the report under
consideration today stresses the importance of
prevention as the responsibility of States and the
international community. Beyond doubt, prevention is
one of the most effective instruments in our toolbox.
However, when the efforts for prevention do not
prevail, United Nations organs should step in to fulfil
the duties, as envisaged in the Charter of the United
Nations. In particular, we would like to underline
the responsibility of the Security Council to act in
situations of mass atrocities.

We cannot but share the Secretary-General’s
conviction that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is the appropriate framework for working
towards development and prevention. Development
clearly enables us to reduce the zones of exclusion
and poverty from which acts of mass violence arise.
Sustainable development is no longer a mere expression
of wishful thinking or a long-term objective; it is an
urgent matter and must be addressed as such. It is
indispensable for achieving a peaceful world. We are
met with frightening figures — hundreds of millions of
people are in a state of food insecurity, reports show us
how rapidly ecosystems are deteriorating, and marine
resources are diminishing by the day. What can we
expect other than more conflicts and violence if we
continue on this path?

The responsibility to protect is yet to be an
established norm of international law. Its scope and
implementation need to be defined and refined. We
believe that such a definition must be based on the
broadest possible consensus within the international
community, taking into consideration the concerns of
all Member States. Those efforts should refrain from
reinterpreting or renegotiating the well-established
principles of international law and the existing legal
framework. International treaties addressing the
crime of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity provide an authoritative and
comprehensive legal framework for the prevention and
punishment of those crimes. We should implement
the relevant legal framework in a faithful and
consistent manner.

Similarly, we cannot but welcome the report’s
assertions that human rights violations play a role in
driving violence. We are all aware of the tremendous
amount of extremist political rhetoric that is being
spread around the world, including hate speech,
intolerance, extremism of all kinds, discrimination and
exclusion, for a wide variety of reasons. They strike a
blow to the protection standards that the international
community has worked so hard to build.

Mr. Oddone (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
align ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Croatia on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/77/
PV.83), and I would like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

The picture painted in the report is both a road map
and a call to action, and the responsibility to protect
must be understood as such. It is a call to all States
to fulfil our obligations in protection and prevention.
As the report points out, the United Nations system
has a wide array of institutions that are equipped to
implement their role in prevention, and we cannot be
indifferent to their potential. It is at our disposal.

We highly appreciate the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/77/910) on development and the
responsibility to protect. In paragraph 9 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), Heads
of State acknowledged that the three pillars of the
international system are peace and security, human
rights and development. In the same paragraph of that
document, it is stated very clearly that those three pillars
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The report
under consideration today leaves no room for doubt as
to the profound interlinkages among those three pillars.
There can be no peace without development, just as

Allow us to point out that Argentina is a heavy user
of those instruments. Regrettably, we are among those
countries that have had to endure mass atrocities. We
will not explain the consequences here, other than to
point out that there is always a before and an after in a
country’s history. However, we try to learn. The first
lesson is that the path of prevention has a beginning
but no end and, above all, that prevention is a relentless
struggle. On many occasions, we have discovered
that the causes of violence do not die, but only lie
dormant. Therefore, in the fight, no tool is superfluous.
Everything at our disposal is useful: the contributions

23-1834525/28

A/77/PV.84

of the international system, cooperation with civil
society, the incorporation of international human rights
law into domestic law and new ideas.
We are aware that prevention is, above all, an
activity that must be carried out by States, that it must
be comprehensive and that each State must develop a
strategy as it sees fit. We also believe that regardless
of the path, prevention is not an option for States, but
a duty to be fulfilled by everyone. But it is also true
that prevention is a Herculean task and that is why we
reaffirm our commitment to strengthening the efforts
of the international community in support of that
work. In that context, we would also like to express
in particular our support for the work of the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
and the efforts of both Special Advisers.
Lastly, Argentina would like to reiterate its
commitment and willingness to continue working
on the early prevention of atrocity crimes. It is our
responsibility to ensure that they do not occur.
Mr. Greco (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and the representative of Croatia on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
(see A/77/PV.83), and would like to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
Italy reiterates its support for the responsibility
to protect (R2P) principles. The commitment to
the responsibility to protect is first and foremost a
commitment to preventing and mitigating the risk of
the most heinous crimes. Atrocities can and must be
prevented and all possible efforts should be devoted to
identifying and addressing their root causes.
We welcome the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/77/910) on this item and its focus on
the intersection between R2P and development, by
applying a human rights-based approach. We need
early-warning mechanisms, as well as structural
policies and comprehensive strategies, to build more
resilient societies, based on respect for human rights
for all. International cooperation for sustainable
development, human rights and peace are an integral
part of Italian foreign policy. Under our national
legislation, development cooperation recognizes the
centrality of the human person, in her or his individual
and community dimension, and pursues the objectives
of eradicating poverty, protecting and fulfilling human
rights, as well as preventing conflicts; supporting peace
26/28

26/06/2023

processes, reconciliation, post-conflict stabilization,
consolidation;
and
strengthening
democratic
institutions, in line with the principles and strategies of
the United Nations and the European Union.
Extreme poverty, human rights violations, weak
institutions and impunity can represent risk factors
that need to be properly recognized, identified and
addressed before becoming actual drivers of conflict,
hate and violence. Stepping up our capacities at the
national, regional and international levels to address the
root causes of atrocity crimes is key in that perspective.
In its capacity as Vice-President of the Economic
and Social Council, Italy welcomed the Council’s
special meeting, held on 24 January, which was aimed
at considering the potential of social and economic
measures to prevent genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. That meeting highlighted the need
to further develop our knowledge on the prevention
of atrocity crimes through socioeconomic measures.
We support the collective efforts of the international
community in that direction.
In particular, we welcome a bottom-up approach to
prevention and reiterate our support to the ongoing work
of the Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, aimed at engaging with local communities
and grassroots organizations, embedding the principles
of local ownership and factoring in a gender-sensitive
and gender-responsive approach, in a way that
encompasses various agendas, such as those related
to the fight against hate speech, women and peace and
security, peacebuilding and sustainable development.
In that spirit, we congratulate the Office of the
Special Adviser for the recent launching of the Plan
of Action for Women in Communities to Counter Hate
Speech and Prevent Incitement to Violence that Could
Lead to Atrocity Crimes, known as the Napoli Women
in Communities Plan of Action. The Plan is the result
of the joint work carried out by a group of community
women leaders who met in Naples in July 2022 to
discuss new ways to protect, support and empower those
women who are at the forefront of atrocity prevention.
Their joint work has resulted in the drafting of a series
of recommendations, aimed at advancing that very
ambitious and challenging agenda.
Addressing the topic of R2P in its various and
interrelated dimensions is crucial to upholding our
collective commitment and to ending the climate of
23-18345

26/06/2023

impunity that challenges our individual and collective
prevention efforts.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): Czechia aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the observer of the
European Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/77/PV.83).
Czechia has been a strong supporter of the principle
of the responsibility to protect (R2P) since its adoption
in 2005. As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
the World Summit, delivering on that global political
commitment, both in terms of prevention and response,
remains a shared challenge. However, the persistence of
horrific atrocities around the world is a stark reminder
that implementing the responsibility to protect must
stand at the forefront of the efforts of the international
community as a whole.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s message
in this year’s R2P report (A/77/910) that poverty,
inequality and social exclusion, as well as a lack
of good governance, are important risk factors for
atrocity crimes. Prevention should therefore involve
broader efforts to adopt effective public policies that
can contribute to building more resilient societies and
protecting vulnerable populations.
Renewing our commitment to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its 17 Sustainable Development Goals at the September
summit will therefore be crucial. There is also a
need to work effectively across the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus, and we should be doing
so with an increased focus on the peace pillar. As we
prepare the New Agenda for Peace, we should look
closely at strengthening international capacities to
identify key risk factors and shape responses to all
forms of violence. The emphasis on prevention requires
holistic approaches, and the international community
can pursue those through a range of tools at its disposal.
First and foremost, it is important to strengthen
the protection of human rights globally. Member States
should implement their human rights obligations and
build their capacities in that respect. The Universal
Periodic Review, the special procedures and other
mechanisms play a crucial role in prevention and
early warning.
A safe and enabling environment needs to be
fostered for civil society actors, including human rights
defenders, humanitarian workers and the media, who

A/77/PV.84

have an indispensable role to play in assisting R2P
efforts. Various entities of the United Nations system
can contribute more effectively to the implementation
of the R2P principles. The Security Council, in the first
place, must utilize all means to react to crises, protect
civilians and support peace processes. We fully support
the Franco-Mexican initiative on veto restraint in cases
of mass atrocities.
We support the mandate and appreciate the work
of the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect, as well as that of the Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide. In view of
the Secretary-General’s annual report on R2P, we
would welcome the inclusion of assessments of the
implementation of recommendations from previous
reports, as well as an analysis of trends regarding the
risks of atrocity crimes.
In addition to the ultimate goal of preventing atrocity
crimes from happening, the international community
must address the challenges of achieving accountability
for committed atrocities — from genocide and crimes
against humanity to war crimes — as a priority. The
consistent pursuit of justice by national authorities,
as well as by international jurisdictions such as the
International Criminal Court, remains essential
to fostering a global culture of accountability that
champions the responsibility to protect.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item for this meeting.
We will hear the remaining speakers at a later date to
be announced.
The exercise of the right of reply has been
requested. May I remind members that statements
made in the exercise of the right of reply are limited to
10 minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Bhat (India): We heard today another
statement from the delegation of Pakistan that was
devoid of facts and full of vicious propaganda that
does not stand up to scrutiny — especially against my
country, where democracy runs in our veins, religious
freedom is constitutionally guaranteed, institutions run
strong and Government policies are carried out without
discrimination on the basis of religion, sect, caste or
sex. Words like “genocide” were freely thrown in by
the delegation of Pakistan in a Goebbelsian attempt to
turn the world away from its own abysmal record.

23-1834527/28

A/77/PV.84

However, the facts speak for themselves. The fact
is that Pakistan is perhaps the only country that has
committed genocide and gotten away with it without
so much as an acknowledgement, let alone an apology.
The scars of the genocide in erstwhile East Pakistan
and present-day Bangladesh still run deep. As has been
fully documented by independent and multilateral
agencies, the fact is also that, due to Pakistan’s bigoted
policies, including its use of blasphemy laws, religious
and sectarian minorities in Pakistan live in a state of
fear. I am certain that the representatives of Pakistan,
who are sure to take the floor again after me, will have
nothing to say about that. That should be unsurprising
to all of us here who have seen their actions over the
past several decades.
As for their unsolicited views on the Indian union
territory of Jammu and Kashmir, I do not wish to dignify
their comments with a response, since it is well known
that the entire union territories of Jammu and Kashmir
and Ladakh are inalienable territories of India. That
includes the territory of Jammu and Kashmir, which is
currently under the illegal occupation of Pakistan.
Mrs. Ijaz (Pakistan): My delegation is constrained
to take the floor in response to the assertions just made
by the representative of India.
The Indian delegation did not address the facts
presented by my delegation regarding its deeply
troubling trajectory of human rights. Rather, it made
a sad attempt to spread falsehoods and propaganda
against my country. India has used terrorism as a State
policy against its neighbours. Since Bharatiya Janata
Party-Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh zealots cannot
realize their dream of Akhand Bharat, they try to enlist,
train, fund and sponsor terrorists to do their bidding
and further their destabilizing agenda in the region.
What is there to say about genocide? The threat of
genocide is looming in Jammu and Kashmir, illegally
occupied by India, as well as in India itself. India
is shamelessly engaged in crushing the legitimate
Kashmiri request for self-determination with an
occupation army of 900,000 troops. Let me reiterate
here that Jammu and Kashmir is an internationally
recognized disputed territory and not an integral part
of India. Repeating a wrong position does not make it
acceptable at any point.
India has no right to take any unilateral action to
change the status of the territory, according to Security

28/28

26/06/2023

Council resolutions on Jammu and Kashmir. If India
has any respect for international law and moral courage,
it will end its reign of terror, withdraw its troops and let
the Kashmiris freely decide their future in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Ms. Jiang Hua (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
firmly rejects the baseless accusations and malicious
smears against China made by the representative of
the United States in his statement earlier. The United
States’ claims that a genocide is taking place in
Xinjiang, China, have a political purpose — to control
China. The so-called Xinjiang issue is the outright lie
of the century.
What is genocide? The United States knows it
best. The United States Government’s policy of the
purposeful and systematic slaughter and plunder
of Native Americans led to a sharp decline in the
indigenous population from 5 million in 1492 to 250,000
in the early twentieth century. That is a historical
original sin that the United States cannot shake off.
The United States should face up to its genocide of
Native Americans, its systematic racial discrimination
against ethnic minorities and its unilateral coercive
measures against developing countries, and it should
stop dictating to other countries.
Under the political manipulation of the United
States and the West, the United Nations Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination has not
communicated with China regarding such claims, nor
has it verified them. It has abused the so-called earlywarning and urgent action procedure to smear and
slander China’s human rights situation based on false
information, which China firmly rejects.
The United States so-called anti-terrorism military
operations have caused the deaths of some 900,000
people over the past decade. In the name of the
responsibility to protect, the United States has waged
wars in Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan that have caused
serious humanitarian disasters. I hope that the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect will pay attention to that issue and make
recommendations on accountability.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 132.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

23-18345
