General Assembly-Second Emer1ency Speclal Sesaion

C onsidering that the immediate withdrawal of the
Soviet forces from Hungarian territory is necessary,
l. Calls again upon the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics to withdraw its forces
from Hungary without any further delay:
2. C onsiders that free elections should be held in
Hungary under Lnite<l :--Jations auspices, as soon as
law and order have been restorcd, to enable the people
of Hungary to deterrnine ior thernselve, the form of
government they wish to estahlish in their country;
3. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to
continue to investigate, through representatives named
by him, the situation caused by foreign intervention in
Hungary and to report at the earliest possible moment
to the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-Ceneral to report in the
shortest possible time to the General Assembly ori
compliance herewith.
571 st plenary meeting,
9 November 1956.

Resolution 1006 (ES-U)
The General Assembly,
I
Considering that the military authorities of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics are interfering with the
transportation and distribution of food and medical supplies urgently needed by the ci vilian population in
Hungary,
1. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to cease immediately actions against the Hungarian
population which are in violation of the accepted
standards and principles of international law, justice
and morality;
2. Calls upon the H ungarian authorities to facilita te,
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics not to
interfere with, the receipt and distribution of food and
medical supplies to the Hungarian people and to cooperate fully with the United Kations and its specialized agencies, as well as with other international
organizations such as the I nternationa 1 Red Cross, to
provide humanitarian assistance to the people of
Hungary;
3. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the Hungarian authorities to co-operate fully with
the S~cret';ry-General and bis duly appointed representat1ves m the carrying out of the tasks referred
to above.

II
. Consi~ering that, as a_ result of the harsh _and repress1ve action of the SoVJet armed forces, mcreasingly

3

large numl>ers of refugees are being obliged to leave
l111ngary and to seek asylurn in neighbouring countries,
1. Hequests the Senetary-General to ca!l upon the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
consult with other appropriate international agencies
and interestecl Government~ with a Yiew to ma.king
speedy and effective arrangements for emcrgency
assistance to L'fugees from IT ungary,
.?. L'rges ~1ember State, to makc special ,·n 11 trilmtions for this purpose.
571 st plenary mceti115;,
9 N Oi'!'mbn 1956

Resolution 1007 (ES-II)
The Ceneral Assembly,
Considering the extreme suffering to "hich the
Hungarian people are subjected,
fTrgently 7!Ùhing effecti,ely to F)iminak "\:s ,!1ifering,
Corrcinced that humanitarian dut:rs ,·an ',e fulfilli::d
must effectively thruugh the inten,;1' ·onal ,1. u;,,:r1 tic ;1:
stipulated in Article 1, paragraph .3, uf the Lk«t .r u:
the United ~ ations,
l. R esofres to undertake on a large :-.ca1e ;nrn lt'diatt'
aid for the affected territories by furnishin,, medical
supplies, fnod~tuffs and ciothes;
2. Calls upon ail Memll('r States t.n pa:-ticip:ite w t 1,e
gn·atest extent possible in this relief acti,m ·
3. Requests the Secret:.iry--General to 1mticrtake
immediately the necessary mrasures;
4. Urgently appeals to all countries concerned to
give full assistance to the Secretarv-Grneral in t !te
implementation of this task.
571st f'!enary meeting,
9 November 1956.

Resolution 1008 (ES-li)
The General Assembly,
l. Derides to plac~ on the proYisiunal agenda uf its
eleventh reg1ilar session, as a matter of prioritv, the
que~tion 011 the agenda nf ils serond emerg-ency ipecial
sess1011;
2. Refers to its eleventh regular session for consideration the records of the meetings and the documents
of its second emergency spe,·ial session ;
3. Deeides that, notwithstanding paragrapb 1
above, the second emergency special session mav continue to consider the question, if necessary, prior- to the
eleventh regular session of the Assemhly .
573rd plenary meeting,
10 November 1956.
