S/PV.7911

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7911th meeting

Friday, 31 March 2017, 1.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Zalyalov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Gee
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-08553 (E)
*1708553*

S/PV.7911

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 1.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Cameroon to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/270, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Senegal,
Sweden, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2349 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2349 (2017) — the first of its kind on the
Lake Chad basin. We thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for making it a priority of its presidency of
the Council, which is coming to an end today.
There is no doubt that the resolution attests to the
Council’s strong and firm resolve to support the efforts
of the countries of the Lake Chad basin to combat
the Boko Haram terrorist movement and, in so doing,
to resolve the humanitarian crisis and address the
underlying causes of the situation in the region, which is
2/8

31/03/2017

particularly dire. The adoption of the resolution comes
on the heels of the Council’s visit to Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria from 2 to 7 March and of the open
briefing held two days after the end of the mission,
which was launched at the initiative of the United
Kingdom delegation and which Senegal had the honour
of leading alongside France. The resolution places, in a
timely manner, the crisis facing these countries at the
top of the international community’s agenda.
Since the Boko Haram terrorist movement uprising,
in 2009, the region has been facing a dual crisis, both
security and humanitarian. I need not mention all the
figures, as the Oslo conference dwelt at length on the
statistics in relation to the humanitarian crisis ravaging
the countries of Lake Chad basin countries.
Our resolution, which represents a response to
this situation, calls for continued action against Boko
Haram through, inter alia, the Multinational Joint
Task Force, which was created by and is composed
of personnel of countries of the region and deployed
by the African Union, so as to help create conditions
conducive to stabilizing the region and to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. In that respect, it calls on
multilateral and bilateral partners to strengthen their
support for the Force so as to boost its operational
capacity, especially in the areas of logistics, mobility,
communication, equipment and intelligence. States are
also called upon to contribute generously to the African
Union Trust Fund.
The resolution also welcomes the $458 million in
humanitarian assistance pledged at the Oslo conference
for 2017 and urges swift disbursement of these funds,
especially since the countries of the region have already
dipped into their own pockets.
Even more important is the interest that the
resolution shows in the development dimension,
recognizing the indivisibility between peace, security,
development and human rights and their importance
to the concept of sustainable peace. The resolution
also points to the pressing need for the countries in
the region to resolve political, economic and gender
inequalities, as well as environmental challenges, and
encourages the Governments concerned to step up the
coordination of their efforts in implementing their
respective programmes. It also invites international
partners to lend assistance.
Likewise, it calls on the Economic Community of
West African States and the Economic Community of
17-08553

31/03/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Central African States, along with the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, to devise a holistic and effective joint
strategy to address the root causes that contributed to
the advent of Boko Haram.
In conclusion, I should like to express the wish that
the report that the resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to produce within five months will provide
an in-depth understanding of the progress made with
respect to the measures that have been adopted.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
country voted in favour of draft resolution 2349 (2017)
following extensive negotiations between the African
members of the Council and the countries of the Lake
Chad basin. Following these negotiations, substantive
amendments were made to the draft, which resulted in
a text that is in line with the purposes and goals of the
Council’s visit to the region earlier this month.
The resolution stresses the sovereignty of these
States while remaining within the bounds of the
mandate of the Council under the Charter of the United
Nations. The resolution also expresses the Council’s
solidarity with the countries of the region in their
efforts to combat the terrorist Boko Haram movement
despite their limited capacity, the complex military
environment and the gravity of the humanitarian crisis
in the region.
Negotiations on the draft resolution on the Lake
Chad basin have shown the imperative to improve the
working methods of the Council, especially in the area
of consulting on its draft resolutions. We stress once
again the need to uphold the principles of transparency
and of the full and effective participation of all members
of the Council, whether permanent or non-permanent,
in such negotiations, notably the African members of
the Council, in discussions on issues related to the
African continent.
The Council must maintain channels of serious,
effective and transparent communication with all
of the countries concerned by any draft resolution
under negotiation, in order to take into consideration
their opinions, concerns and proposals, in order to
strengthen the credibility of the Council, to prevent
any unacceptable interference in the internal affairs
of Members of the United Nations and to address the
realities on the ground.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) and

S/PV.7911

thanks the United Kingdom for its leadership. Japan is
pleased to have co-sponsored the resolution.
The resolution represents a milestone in the
Security Council’s increased attention to the Lake
Chad basin. It also represents a test for us in terms
of taking a truly integrated approach to the region’s
multidimensional challenges. The issues facing the
Lake Chad Basin, which range from terrorism and
trafficking to food insecurity and climate change,
cannot be solved individually.
The resolution reflects the fact that security
gains must be paired with support for development,
livelihoods, human rights and other efforts to address
the root causes of instability. We must build on this
foundation resolution on the Lake Chad basin by using
a variety of tools to achieve these aims, including
through the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, the Peacebuilding Commission,
subregional and regional organizations, and bilateral
and multilateral support mechanisms.
Japan stresses the importance of implementing
this resolution, which clearly requires a comprehensive
approach. Japan looks forward to working with Council
members and many other actors to help sustain peace in
the Lake Chad basin.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Once again, we welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) as
a follow-up to the Security Council mission to the
countries of the Lake Chad basin from 2 to 7 March
2017. There is no doubt that negotiations on the draft
required some work. We worked as a trio, together with
the countries of the region and the penholder, to reflect
the objective of the visit and the sentiments expressed
by the Council during the series of meetings with a
number of stakeholders, including the leadership at the
highest level of some of those countries.
Before proceeding further, I should like to pay
tribute to the co-leaders of the mission, the United
Kingdom and Senegal, for the success of the mission,
which was aided by the meticulous preparation that was
done in advance. They deserve commendation.
We believe that the resolution in its current form
conveys the right message; that is why we decided to
co-sponsor it. We are also happy that the countries
in the region are here with us, and it is good that the
Council had the opportunity to listen to their views.

17-085533/8

S/PV.7911

Peace and security in Africa

I am sure that Council members will agree that we
were unanimous in our appreciation of the interrelated
nature of the security and climate-change-induced
environmental challenges that the countries of the Lake
Chad basin region are facing and the major impact
that the fall in the price of commodities has had on
their economies.
It was also very clear to us that there was
no sufficient realization within the international
community of the magnitude of the serious challenge
faced by the region. We therefore expressed our firm
solidarity and support for countries in the region in
overcoming their challenges and underscored the need
for a comprehensive and holistic solution through
intervention oriented towards long-term development.
It is therefore only appropriate that the resolution
remain true to that sentiment, and that is what we tried
to do during the negotiations. That is also precisely
what countries of the region that enthusiastically
welcomed us during the visit — for which we must be
grateful — expected from the Council. We hope that
the resolution will live up to that expectation.
I must conclude by applauding the cooperation and
coordination among the four countries of the region in
combating Boko Haram, as exemplified in the activities
of the Multinational Joint Task Force.
Mr. Zalyalov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2349 (2017), on the situation in the Lake
Chad basin, owing to the importance of maintaining
consensus in the Security Council and given that
the language of the document was acceptable to the
representatives of the region. However, we believe that
it is necessary to stress that not all of our comments
and arguments were incorporated into the text of
the resolution.
First of all, we believe that is inaccurate to consider
the situation in the Lake Chad basin a conflict. Boko
Haram was included in the Security Council’s list
of terrorist organizations. In March 2015, the group
proclaimed its allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. That means that combating the group
is, above all, a counter-terrorism operation. We regret
that the authors of the draft resolution did not refer to
that well-founded description of the situation.
Moreover, one of the important causes behind the
deterioration of the situation and the rampant terrorism
in the States of the region was not mentioned, namely,
4/8

31/03/2017

the irresponsible policy of interfering in the internal
affairs of neighbouring States, in particular Libya.
Like others, we have repeatedly asked our United
Kingdom colleagues not to rush the adoption of
the resolution simply because the mandate of their
presidency was ending, but they did not listen to us.
The final document is therefore partially unfinished
and unbalanced. We hope that our comments will be
taken into consideration with regard to future work.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
The Plurinational State of Bolivia thanks the delegation
of the United Kingdom for having taken the initiative of
introducing resolution 2349 (2017), which was adopted
unanimously, thereby showing the Security Council’s
commitment to combating terrorism. In that regard, we
would like to highlight the goal of the resolution, which
is to show support for the Governments of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria in their struggle against
Boko Haram. We appreciate the efforts that have been
made by those countries in developing action plans to
combat terrorism, which is a fight that they are waging
on behalf of all of us. Accordingly, we call on the
Council to maintain a unified front with regard to that
issue, while respecting the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of those countries.
However, we support and share the concerns
expressed by other delegations with regard to the
working methods concerned. We believe that, in
this instance, the time allotted to negotiations was
insufficient, which meant that some of the delegations’
observations were not reflected as optimally as they
could have been in the resolution. We believe that, had
it been possible, we could have planned for additional
negotiations starting where we left off, or postponed
putting the draft resolution to the vote.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the establishment of the Multinational Joint
Task Force (MNJTF) by countries in the region — such
as Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Benin, as
well as the positive progress that they have achieved
in combating terrorism. We appreciate the unwavering
determination and tireless efforts of countries in the
region in combating terrorism. We support countries in
the region to strengthen coordination and cooperation
with the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. While respecting the principles of the
17-08553

31/03/2017

Peace and security in Africa

sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
countries in the region, the international community
should vigorously help those countries to step up their
counter-terrorism capabilities and support the MNJTF
in carrying out operations effectively so as to improve
the humanitarian situation therein.
The Security Council should concentrate on
sending a positive message pledging the international
community’s support for the efforts of the countries
in the region in combating terrorism and mitigating
the humanitarian situation. China has always believed
that, if members of the Security Council have concerns
about a draft resolution, full attention should be given
to all such concerns and they should be reflected in
the relevant text so as to make the maximum effort to
achieve consensus on a draft resolution.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2349 (2017). I am grateful that
that consensus was achieved, and I would like to thank
Senegal in particular and all members of the Security
Council for their work on those issues and support for
this important text. The adoption marks the beginning
of the next chapter of our work on the Lake Chad basin.
Seeing a crisis first-hand is a good start, but it is
not enough on its own. It is not enough just to bring
attention to its situation. We will fail the people of the
region if we do not respond to what we saw and do not
take tangible action to bring real relief and respite to
the suffering, the hunger and the instability. Through
today’s resolution, we have made clear what action
needs to be taken.
First and foremost, we need the countries in the
region, the international community and the United
Nations urgently to scale up their response to the
humanitarian crisis. If we act now, famine can be
avoided. But that means quickly dispersing money
pledged at Oslo — every single dollar of the $458 million
pledged by donors, and of the $1 billion pledged by the
Government of Nigeria. It means supporting the regional
Governments to lead a comprehensive and effective
response to the crisis while building on the leadership
that they have already shown. It means that all in the
region — including the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States — address the
root causes of the crisis and economic inequalities,

S/PV.7911

counter violent extremism and empower women. Boko
Haram exploits the poverty of the north-east. It exploits
the men who view women as no more than objects,
wives and cooks without the prospect of a future. That
is unacceptable.
We also must avoid a protracted crisis by better
bridging the divide between humanitarian and
development programming. The United Kingdom
is leading by example. We were one of the earliest
contributors to the response. We are supporting the
regional Governments. And we are expanding our
development programming, even as humanitarian aid
continues to be delivered.
If we are to bring a conclusion to the crisis, we must
also commend and support the countries in the region
with regard to their efforts to combating Boko Haram,
including through the Multinational Joint Task Force.
They must sustain their momentum to defeat Boko
Haram and Da’esh. But, as they do so, all parties and
countries must comply with human rights, especially
during counter-terrorism operations. You cannot
defeat terror or build peace if you commit or condone
the abuse of civilians. We all must hold ourselves to a
higher standard than that. We therefore hope to see the
deployment of United Nations human rights officers to
help in that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Cameroon.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
As everyone can see, we, the four member States of the
Lake Chad basin, are here. My colleagues have asked
me to speak on their behalf on this memorable day on
which the Security Council, several years after issuing a
presidential statement, has now adopted a firm Council
resolution — resolution 2349 (2017). I therefore have
the honour to speak on behalf of the countries of the
Lake Chad region, that is, Chad, the Niger, Nigeria and,
my own country, Cameroon.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Security
Council for its visit from 2 to 7 March to the countries
of the Lake Chad basin, an unprecedented visit by the
Council to that part of the world. It allowed Council
members to understand the real nature of Boko Haram,
which is a nebulous terrorist group, and its actions; the
material and human damage it has done; its extremely

17-085535/8

S/PV.7911

Peace and security in Africa

31/03/2017

barbaric methods using young people, women and
girls, including the very young, as suicide bombers or
common bandits to burn down schools and villages,
attack markets, steal livestock and ambush soldiers and
civilian populations. The visit was also an opportunity
for members to hear at first-hand from the most
senior officials of the countries concerned and to see
for themselves on the ground the efforts made by our
countries and their peoples at the military, security,
humanitarian, diplomatic and development levels to
counter the Boko Haram.

knows, Boko Haram never sleeps. Although roundly
defeated on the military front, its capacity to do harm
can still be seen in its suicide bombings, abductions and
ambushes. We hope that the adoption of this resolution
will mark the beginning of more decisive support not
only for the Multinational Joint Task Force and regional
initiatives, but also for each of the Lake Chad Region
countries, which, in order to deal with the multifaceted
crises arising from Boko Haram’s terrorist actions, are
now forced to reduce their budgetary allocations to
other national sectors, such as education and health.

The resolution adopted today, following the
Council’s visit, is an important step forward in
mobilizing the international community in support of
the countries of the subregion in their onerous task of
combating that terrorist sect. As representatives have
already said, we are fighting against terrorism. We
must recall that the shadowy Boko Haram terrorists
were linked with the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant/Da’esh by the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities.

Eradicating Boko Haram is a pressing need, both
for the countries of the region and for the international
community as a whole. We fully appreciate the substance
of paragraphs 33 and 34 of resolution 2349 (2017),
which invite the Secretary-General to conduct a joint
high-level visit to the region with the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, the President of the World
Bank, the President of the African Development Bank
and the High Representative of the European Union
in order to strengthen the international community’s
commitment to implementing the various development
programmes being carried out in the region with a view
to eradicating poverty and destitution, which are the
real deep-seated causes and breeding grounds for Boko
Haram. Once the Council has begun to prepare for that
visit, we stand ready to welcome Council members with
the hospitality that the countries in the Lake Chad basin
are known for.

Given the humanitarian, economic, political,
social and military costs of this crisis, the countries
of the subregion quickly realized that the military
response, while essential for the security of people and
property, should be part of a holistic approach. In that
connection, the Council saw for itself during its visit
that each State concerned had adopted and implemented
initiatives aimed not only at tackling the root causes,
but also at the disastrous consequences of the current
situation. I am pleased that the resolution refers to the
many development plans designed by the countries of
the region.
In the same vein, Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria
and Chad have stepped up their cooperation in
several areas to curb and put an end to this situation.
This cooperation can also be seen in the framework
of regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Lake Chad
Basin Commission. One of the key outcomes of this
regional cooperation was the establishment of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, which enabled us to
significantly reduce Boko Haram’s military capabilities.
We appreciate the multifaceted support provided by our
bilateral and multilateral partners, but as the Council
6/8

Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad hope that
the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General will
be bold and will make it possible to focus on finding the
most appropriate solutions not only in terms of security
and humanitarian needs, the urgency of which is
beyond question, but also in terms of the deficiencies in
education and training, in resilience to climate change
and in sustainable development, while at the same time
keeping in mind the objective of eradicating poverty.
Then and only then can we be sure that we can, all
together, ensure a decisive victory over the shadowy
Boko Haram terrorists.
We count on the Security Council, just as the
Security Council can fully count on us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your efficient leadership of the Security Council
during this month. I also take this opportunity to thank
17-08553

31/03/2017

Peace and security in Africa

members of the Security Council for their visit to the
Lake Chad basin region, which allowed them to assess
the security and humanitarian challenges faced by the
Governments in the region.
Nigeria fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Cameroon on behalf of
countries of the region, and appreciates this opportunity
to share one or two remarks as a country at the centre of
this insurgency.
We welcome today’s unanymous adoption of
resolution 2349 (2017), which not only recognizes
the complex challenges faced by the region but also
encourages regional Governments to sustain their
momentum in the fight against Boko Haram and to
further enhance regional military cooperation and
coordination — a welcome development. Nigeria’s
consistent support for the work of the Security
Council is an indication of our appreciation of this
foremost United Nations organ, which has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. The robust discussions that members of
the Council held with senior officials of the Nigerian
Government during their recent visit bears testimony
to that assertion.
At this critical juncture, after an improvement in
the security situation due to recent military gains, it
was our expectatio that the Security Council and the
international community would continue to engage
the Governments in the region in the search for
lasting peace, security, protection of civilians and the
resolution of the humanitarian crisis that arises from
Boko Haram activities. We look to the Security Council
to continue to approach the situation constructively, as
it has done since the emergence of Boko Haram in the
regional crisis.
Despite the enormous challenges resulting from
the terrorist activities of Boko Haram, the Government
of Nigeria remains resolutely committed to combating
terrorism and all of its ramifications. We have put in place
a robust people-driven counter-terrorism strategy, built
on the combination of revamped security operations and
a human rights approach, to help lead to rehabilitation,
reintegration and reconstruction. In order to achieve
that strategic objective, the presidential committee on
the north-east intervention has been empowered with a
mandate to provide and coordinate synergy, leadership
and direction to the various initiatives in the zone.

S/PV.7911

It encompasses Government development partners,
private foundations and civil society.
We are also accelerating the implementation of
existing legal and institutional frameworks to alleviate
the suffering of our people and to provide effective
humanitarian aid, in the spirit of the May 2016 World
Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul. In effect,
Nigeria is providing food, support, integrated heath
care, shelter, psychosocial support and access to water
and sanitation amenities for those in need. We are also
engaging highly respected community and religious
leaders to discourage vulnerable youths from being
radicalized. We will continue to accord the highest
priority to bolstering the resilience of internally
displaced persons and to increasing their participation in
vocational training and skill-acquisition programmes.
The countries of the Lake Chad basin region now
desperately need the support of the United Nations and
the international community, if it is to achieve credible
implementation of resolution 2349 (2017). It is also time
for the Council to focus, once again, on the imperative
of providing those countries with comprehensive
assistance programmes in a variety of areas related to
peacebuilding, including ensuring security, building
capacity and generating socioeconomic development.
The shrinking of Lake Chad has adversely affected the
communities around the basin, thereby exacerbating
their hardship.
With the scale of the knock-on cross-border
effects of the humanitarian crisis, it is increasingly
difficult for any single State in the Lake Chad region to
independently meet the needs of the vicitims. In spite
of our national capacities, we are stretched, especially
with the duelling financial resources. All Lake Chad
basin countries are making spirited efforts to alleviate
human suffering. Nigeria reiterates its call for strong
international action in support of the implementation of
the the Lake Chad development and climate resilience
action plan.
It is apparent that we neither lack ideas nor
initiative, but resources — owing to competing
demands from all development sectors. We therefore
reiterate the urgent imperative for increased global
action and active engagement with countries of the
Lake Chad basin in order to accelerate recovery efforts.
Nigeria reaffirms its commitment to working with
the Council and with the international community as
a whole. We deeply appreciate the critical assistance

17-085537/8

S/PV.7911

Peace and security in Africa

of the United Nations system and partners that support
us in the north-east intervention and the Lake Chad
basin. We urge the Council to continue to work with
us to find more structural solutions, with national
ownership spearheading the drive for urgent lifesaving
and protecion measures.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the future
of the people of the Lake Chad basin region rests on
durable security and sustainability of the resources
around the lake. We are confident that building genuine
collaboration and forging strong partnerships with the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and the African Union
will enable us to swiftly tackle that challenge.
The President: Before adjourning this meeting,
as this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council for
the month of March, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of the United Kingdom to
the members of the Security Council, especially to my
colleagues the Permanent Representatives, their team

8/8

31/03/2017

members and to the secretariat of the Council for all
their support. It has been a busy month, with numerous
highlights that we will summarize for the whole of the
United Nations membership and for civil society at the
informal wrap-up session this afternoon, at 3 o’clock.
We could not have done any of that alone, or without the
hard work, support and constructive contributions of all
members of the Security Council and of the secretariat,
as well as all of the relevant conference services and
the interpreters.
In addition to all of those I have thanked, I would
also like to express my personal thanks to my excellent
team for all that they have done to make this presidency
a success. As we end our presidency, I know that I
speak on behalf of the Council as a whole in wishing
the delegation of the United States all the very best in
the month of April.
The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.

17-08553
