S/2005/789

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2005
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 14 December 2005 from the
Chairman of the working group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004)
addressed to the President of the Security Council (see annex), transmitting a report
of the working group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).

05-64018 (E) 201205

*0564018*

S/2005/789

Annex
Letter dated 14 December 2005 from the Chairman
of the working group established pursuant to resolution
1566 (2004) addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to forward the report of the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) (see enclosure). It would be highly appreciated if
the present letter and its enclosure could be circulated as a document of the Council.
(Signed) Lauro L. Baja, Jr.
Chairman
Working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004)

2

S/2005/789

Enclosure
Report
Security Council working group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004)

I. Background
1.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1566 (2004) on 8 October 2004.
Under paragraph 9 of the resolution, the Council established a working group
consisting of all members of the Security Council to consider and submit
recommendations to the Council on practical measures to be imposed upon
individuals, groups or entities involved in or associated with terrorist activities,
other than those designated by the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee,
including more effective procedures considered to be appropriate for bringing them
to justice through prosecution or extradition, freezing of their financial assets,
preventing their movement through the territories of Member States, preventing
supply to them of all types of arms and related material, and on the procedures for
implementing these measures.
2.
In paragraph 10 of the resolution, the Security Council further requested the
working group to consider the possibility of establishing an international fund to
compensate victims of terrorist acts and their families, which might be financed
through voluntary contributions, which could consist in part of assets seized from
terrorist organizations, their members and sponsors, and submit its
recommendations to the Council.
3.
Upon agreement of the Security Council (see S/2005/4) Lauro L. Baja, Jr.,
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations, was appointed
Chairman of the working group.
4.
The working group held its first meeting on 27 January 2005. At that meeting,
members agreed to conduct the activities of the working group in two phases. The
initial phase would involve gathering information, views and perspectives from
sources inside and outside the United Nations to assist the working group in
accomplishing its mandate. The second phase would be devoted to discussion and
consideration of the recommendations submitted by the working group to the
Security Council, as mandated under resolution 1566 (2004).
5.
The working group agreed that dialogue between it and the wider membership
of the United Nations would be advantageous. A key strategy for the working group
would be to maintain transparency and openness in its work. Contributions from
non-members of the Security Council would be welcomed and encouraged. The
working group held an informal meeting on 27 April 2005 with interested Member
States to listen to their views on the issues it faced in relation to its mandate under
resolution 1566 (2004). More than 50 Member States participated in the meeting.
6.
The working group emphasized the importance of maintaining flexibility in its
working methods. In particular, no rigid approaches would be imposed on the time
frame of its work.

3

S/2005/789

7.
The working group agreed that members and non-members could submit
written proposals and ideas on how to achieve its mandate. Several delegations have
done so. Members emphasized the need to have close contact and interaction with
other subsidiary bodies of the Security Council dealing with counter-terrorism.
8.
The working group noted that paragraphs 9 and 10 of resolution 1566 (2004)
would be indicative of the themes that its efforts should focus on. These would
include the practical measures that could be pursued against individuals, groups or
entities involved in or associated with terrorist activities, other than those
designated by the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee; the question of the
victims and the possible establishment of a compensation fund for them; and the
scope of application of the measures recommended by the working group.
9.
As part of its information gathering phase, the working group invited resource
speakers to discuss relevant topics. The speakers invited were Richard Barrett,
Coordinator of the Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee;
Javier Ruperez, Executive Director of the Security Council Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; Jean-Paul Laborde, Chief of the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and Edward Luck
of the School of International and Public Affairs of Columbia University. The
working group also held a joint meeting with the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
hear a briefing by Guy de Vel, Director-General of the Council of Europe, and
Rafael A. Benitez, head of the Counter-Terrorism Task Force of the Council of
Europe, on the latest activities of the Council of Europe on counter-terrorism. The
working group benefited from the experience and expertise of the resource speakers
covering practical and theoretical, legal and political aspects of the work of the
Security Council and other international and regional bodies in counter-terrorism.

II. Agenda
10. In the light of its mandate under paragraphs 9 and 10 of resolution 1566
(2004), the working group agreed to explore possible recommendations for
submission to the Security Council under three broad headings: (1) practical
measures to be imposed against individuals, groups or entities involved in or
associated with terrorist activities other than those designated by the AlQaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee; (2) victims of terrorist acts; and (3) the scope
of application of the measures that could be adopted under resolution 1566 (2004).
11. Under the rubric of “practical measures”, members agreed to focus their
discussions on the following issues: freezing of financial assets; preventing
movement; preventing the supply of arms; strengthening prosecution and
extradition; curtailing recruitment and training; preventing public provocation; and
use of the Internet. On the issue of victims, members agreed to discuss the support
for victims and the possible establishment of a compensation fund for them. In the
area of the scope of the application of the measures against terrorist individuals,
groups and entities other than those designated by the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee, members agreed to discuss the question of establishing effective means
to identify those individuals, groups and entities, including the possibility of
establishing a new Security Council list that would identify such individuals, groups
and entities.

4

S/2005/789

III. Discussion
12.

The outcome of the discussion of the working group is set out below.

13. The working group stressed that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to international peace and security and
that any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed;
14. The working group recalled that States must ensure that any measures they
take to combat terrorism should comply with all their obligations under international
law and that they should adopt such measures in accordance with international law,
in particular international human rights, refugee, and humanitarian law;
15. The working group agreed that the Security Council consider the different
capacities of States to implement counter-terrorism measures. While some States are
in an advanced stage with regard to the legal framework, technology and mechanism
of combating terrorism, other States, in particular many developing countries, lack
the essential capacity to establish a system to effectively implement counterterrorism measures. The working group considered it critical that technical
assistance be extended to such States. The working group recommended that the
Council establish stronger cooperation with international, regional, and subregional
organizations that can assist the capacity of States in this area.

A.

Practical measures
Freezing of financial assets
16. The working group agreed that freezing of financial assets is an indispensable
tool in curtailing terrorism. The working group recommended that the Security
Council continue its efforts to stop financial support for terrorism, based on existing
multilateral instruments, international agreements, standards and best practices.
17. In its resolution 1617 (2005), the Security Council strongly urged all Member
States to implement the comprehensive international standards embodied in the
Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) Forty Recommendations on Money
Laundering and the FATF Nine Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing.
The facility extended by various international bodies, such as the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to provide technical assistance to countries that
lack capacity must be fully utilized.
18. The working group agreed that international, regional, and subregional
organizations provide an excellent source of best practices on the freezing of
financial assets. It was aware that existing subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee, use these practical standards and practices when evaluating
implementation by States of asset freeze measures. The working group
recommended that the Council build on those resources to strengthen the
effectiveness of freezing and curtailing the flow of financial assets that may be used
for terrorism.
19. The working group recommended that the Security Council continue to seek
stronger engagement and cooperation with international, regional, and subregional

5

S/2005/789

organizations in the fight against international terrorism. Many terrorist groups are
localized to specific regions and do not have any global reach or operations.
20. The working group expressed concern about cases of abuse by charitable
organizations and institutions in funnelling financial support for terrorism. It
recommended that the Council continue to pay close attention to the issue.
Preventing movement
21. The working group agreed that preventing the movement of terrorists is an
essential measure in the fight against terrorism. Noting the experience of other
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, the working group agreed that preventing
the movement of terrorists requires careful implementation, through the use of
complete and accurate identifiers of individuals who may be subjected to this
measure.
22. The working group noted that effective implementation of this measure also
relies on close bilateral cooperation between States sharing common borders. The
working group recommended that the Council continue to encourage bilateral
arrangements for stronger border controls to prevent the movement of terrorists.
Preventing the supply of arms
23. The working group agreed that prevention of the supply of arms to individuals,
groups or entities involved in or associated with terrorist activities is an essential
measure in the fight against terrorism. While current efforts of the international
community regarding small arms provide the strategic and long-term framework to
make this measure effective, the working group recommended that the Security
Council work to enhance the prevention of the supply of all types of arms and
related materials to terrorists.
24. The working group stressed that the effectiveness of this measure requires a
regional focus on where the flow of arms is normally concentrated. Existing
international instruments and initiatives, such as on marking and tracing, could
provide a useful framework in the implementation of this measure.
Strengthening prosecution and extradition
25. The working group stressed that bringing terrorists to justice is a principal
obligation of all States as set out in Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). The
working group recommended that the Council urge States to fully implement the
principle of extradite or prosecute, as stated in the relevant resolutions of the
Council. The working group recommended furthermore to the Council to continue
to urge States to become parties to relevant international conventions and protocols
relating to terrorism, whether or not they are a party to regional conventions.
26. The working group recommended that the Security Council encourage States
to boost their efforts to bring terrorists to justice by entering into agreements for
mutual legal assistance with other States. These efforts would lead to the
strengthening of the rule of law, as well as the protection of the rights of the
accused.

6

S/2005/789

Curtailing recruitment and training
27. The working group agreed that the fight against terrorism requires necessary
attention to the suppression of the recruitment of would-be terrorists and their
training. Individuals, groups or entities involved in or associated with terrorist
activities must not have unfettered resort to recruitment and training of individuals
for their nefarious activity.
28. The working group reiterated that the Security Council had decided that States
should deny safe haven for terrorists. The working group recommended that the
Council consider inviting States to put in place preventive measures, in particular
but not exclusively the criminalization of the recruitment and training of terrorists.
Preventing public provocation
29. The working group agreed that public provocation to commit acts of terrorism
is an insidious activity contributing to the spread of the scourge of terrorism. The
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1624 (2005), which includes a call to
States to take such measures as may be necessary and appropriate to prohibit by law
incitement to commit a terrorist act or acts, on the occasion of the Council’s meeting
at the level of Heads of State and Government, is a milestone.
Use of the Internet
30. The working group agreed that the use of the Internet by individuals, groups
and entities involved in or associated with terrorist activities to spread hate and to
incite to violence poses a grave danger to peace and security. The working group
welcomed efforts and initiatives to curb cybercrime in other international, regional,
and subregional bodies.

B.

Victims of terrorist acts
Support and compensation fund
31. The working group noted that the number of victims of terrorism, especially
among civilians of diverse nationalities and beliefs, has been increasing in various
regions of the world. Solidarity with victims and their families can include
assistance and provision of support to cope with their loss and grief.
32. The working group noted that, owing to various reasons the resolution of
questions about the establishment of a compensation fund for victims of terrorist
acts at the international level was premature. While recognizing the importance of
helping victims of terrorist acts, the working group recommended that the best
approach for the time being was to encourage individual States to determine ways
and means to extend assistance to victims of terrorist acts.

7

S/2005/789

C.

Scope of the application of the practical measures
Establishing effective means to identify individuals and groups
associated with terrorist activities
33. The working group stressed the imperative to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations by all means, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
34. Owing to various reasons including the lack of consensus, agreement was not
reached on the expansion of the list of individuals, groups and entities involved in
or associated with terrorist activities beyond the one already established under the
Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee.

8
