62

General Assembly-Thirtieth Sesaion

throughout a given time frame, in order to enable them
to plan their national economic development in a more
systematic and productive manner,
A ware that total disbursements of official development assistance have been steadily decreasing from an
estimated 0.5 per cent of gross national product some
teri .. years ago to about 0.3 per cent nrt975,
Realizing the necessity of enlisting popular support
for the new international economic order, inter alia
through the mobilization of public opinion in both developed and developing countries, as called for in the
International Development Strategy,
Stressing the need for observance of the principles
of justice, mutual understanding, co-operation, interdependence and equity in the economic behaviour of
nations and peoples towards one another,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the heads of
other appropriate bodies, as well as with the Committee
for Development Planning, to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session a study on ways and
means of accelerating the transfer of real resources to
developing countries on a predictable, assured and continuous basis, bearing in mind the relevant provisions
of the above-mentioned resolutions, particularly those
of Assembly resolution 3362 (S-VII);
2. Urges anew the economically advanced countries which have not yet done so to reach the target for
official development assistance laid down in the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade by taking appropriate
measures, such as including in their national budgets,
if possible through forward planning, a provision for
the financing of such assistance;
3. Decides to consider the above-mentioned study
at its thirty-first session.
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975
3490 (XXX). Implementation of the World Plan
of Action adopted by the World Conference
of the International Women's Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, adopted by the World Conference of the
International Women's Year, 611 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
Convinced that a comprehensive and· thorough review and appraisal of progress made in meeting the
goals of the World Plan of Action is of crucial importance for the success of the Plan and should be undertaken at regular intervals by organizations of the United
Nations system,
Recognizing that the results -of the exercise of the
implementation of the World Plan of Action will contribute to the consideration of the review and appraisal
of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade and will consequently promote the role of women in the development process,
1. Calls upon the governing bodies of the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
65 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.l), chap. II, sect. A.

Children's Fund, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the relevant specialized agencies
and the regional commissions to review annually the
activities they have undertaken in accordance with the
World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
Objectives of the International Women's Year and to
integrate such reviews into the reports submitted to the
Economic and Social Council;
2. Affirms that a system-wide review and appraisal
of the implementation of the World Plan of Action
should be undertaken, in the years of the biennial review
and appraisal of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
as an input to the process of review and appraisal of
progress made under the Strategy;
3. Urges all States and the relevant organs of the
United Nations to report to the Secretary-General on
measures they have taken for implementing the World
Plan of Action and .to _include relevant information
about the integration of women in development;
.4. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to consider reports submitted on measures undertaken
in implementation of the World Plan of Action, in
accordance with the International Development Strategy, and to report its findings and conclusions on major
trends and policies with regard to the status of women,
particularly the integration of women in development,
to_ the Economic and Social Council through the C9mrruttee for ~evelopment Planning and the Committee
on Review and Appraisal;
5. Urges the Committee for Development Planning,
the Committee on Review and Appraisal and the Economic and Social Council to pay special attention to
the question of the status of women in the review and
appraisal of the International Development Strategy;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements for the first review and appraisal of
the implementation of the World Plan of Action.
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975
3503 (XXX). Establishment of an International
Fund for Agricultural Development66

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the continuing food problem of the
world is afflicting a large segment of the people of the
developing countries and is jeopardizing the most fundamental principles and values associated with the
right to life and human dignity,
Considering the need to improve the conditions of
life of the poor in the developing countries and to promote socio-economic development within the context of
the priorities and objectives of the developing countries, giving due regard to both economic and social
benefits,
Conscious of the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade67 and especially the need
to spread the benefits of assistance to all,
Bearing in mind its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974 containing the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order,
with special reference to developing countries most
seriously affected by the economic crisis and to the
66 See also p. 79, item 60.
67 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
