A/74/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions and Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its seventy-fourth session
Volume III
28 December 2019 – 15 September 2020

General Assembly
Official Records·Seventy-fourth Session
Supplement No. 49

United Nations·New York, 2020

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses indicating
the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several resolutions were
adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a capital letter placed
between the two numerals (for example: resolution 3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A
and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another arabic
numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several resolutions or
decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been identified by a
capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution 31/16 A,
resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a roman
numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The decisions
were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly
were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letters “ES” and
a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 2252 (ES-V)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by
an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1, decision
ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly
from 28 December 2019 to 15 September 2020. Resolutions adopted by the Assembly from
17 September to 27 December 2019 appear in volume I. Volume II contains the decisions adopted
by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252–7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee................................................................... 1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) ............................................................................................................................... 81
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee .................................................................... 83
IV. Decisions ............................................................................................................................................. 151
A. Elections and appointments .......................................................................................................... 154
B. Other decisions............................................................................................................................. 159
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee................................................... 159

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee .................................................. 179

3.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee ...................................................... 179
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items .................................................................................................................. 183
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions.................................................................................................. 185

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

74/232.

Title

Page

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries ............................................... 2
Resolution B ...................................................................................................................................................... 2

74/261.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur .............................................................. 2
Resolution B ...................................................................................................................................................... 3

74/267.

Enlargement of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: amendment to rule 155
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly .................................................................................................. 3

74/268.

The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts............................................................. 4

74/269.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the summit on biodiversity .................................................................. 8

74/270.

Global solidarity to fight the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‑19) ....................................................................... 10

74/271.

Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat ............................................................ 12

74/272.

Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch ........... 15

74/273.

International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda ................................................... 16

74/274.

International cooperation to ensure global access to medicines, vaccines and medical equipment to face
COVID-19....................................................................................................................................................... 17

74/275.

International Day to Protect Education from Attack............................................................................................... 19

74/276.

Special session of the General Assembly against corruption ................................................................................... 21

74/297.

Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 71/243 on the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system ................................................ 24

74/298.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 67/290 on the high-level political forum on
sustainable development, resolution 70/299 on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level and resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council ......... 26

74/299.

Improving global road safety.............................................................................................................................. 27

74/300.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia ............................................................................................................................................... 34

74/301.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support .............................. 36

74/302.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa................................................... 44

74/303.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly .............................................................................................. 54

74/304.

Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union ................................ 56

74/305.

Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2030 ............................................................................................................................ 60

74/306.

Comprehensive and coordinated response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic..................................... 69

74/307.

United response against global health threats: combating COVID‑19 ...................................................................... 80

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/232 B
Adopted on 11 August 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of
27 March 2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.74, sponsored by Guyana (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China)

74/232. Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 73/242 of 20 December 2018 and 74/232 A of 19 December 2019, in which the
Assembly decided to convene the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries in Doha from
21 to 25 March 2021 at the highest possible level, including Heads of State and Government,
Recalling also that in its resolution 74/232 A it decided that the meeting of the intergovernmental preparatory
committee agreed upon in paragraph 43 of its resolution 73/242 should be organized in New York in two parts, from
27 to 30 July 2020 and from 11 to 15 January 2021, of no more than five working days each,
Noting with concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID‑19) pandemic,
Recognizing the unprecedented effects of the pandemic, including the severe disruption to societies and
economies, global travel and commerce, and the devastating impact on the livelihood of people,
1. Decides to reschedule the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and to hold
it in Doha from 23 to 27 January 2022 at the highest possible level, including Heads of State and Government, in line
with the mandate specified in resolutions 73/242 and 74/232 A;
2. Also decides to reschedule the meeting of the intergovernmental preparatory committee and to hold it in
New York in two parts, from 24 to 28 May 2021 and from 26 to 30 July 2021, of no more than five working days each;
3. Invites the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Economic and Social Council to
reschedule the half-day dedicated thematic event requested in resolution 74/232 A and to hold it during the seventyfifth session of the Assembly in order to provide substantive input to the Conference.
RESOLUTION 74/261 B
Adopted on 31 March 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.50, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

74/261. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
B2
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur3 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,4

_______________
Resolution 74/232, in section IV of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 74/232 A.
2
Resolution 74/261, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 74/261 A.
3
A/74/679.
4
A/74/746.
1

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, by which the Council established the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for an initial period of 12 months from 31 July 2007, and
the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was
resolution 2495 (2019) of 31 October 2019, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until
31 October 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 62/232 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the Operation and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 74/261 A of 27 December 2019,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,4 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020
2. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur the amount of 514,505,600 United States dollars for the maintenance of the Operation for the period from
1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020, inclusive of the amount of 388,198,700 dollars previously authorized for the Operation
for the period from 1 July 2019 to 31 March 2020 under the terms of its resolutions 73/278 B of 3 July 2019
and 74/261 A;
Financing of the appropriation
3. Decides, taking into account the amount of 388,198,700 dollars already apportioned under the terms of its
resolutions 73/278 B and 74/261 A for the period from 1 July 2019 to 31 March 2020, to apportion among Member
States the additional amount of 126,306,900 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation for the period from 1 April
to 30 June 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
4. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 3 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,464,700 dollars, representing the balance of the estimated staff assessment
income of 14,186,300 dollars approved for the Operation for the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020;
5. Further decides to keep under review, during its seventy-fourth session, the item entitled “Financing of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”.
RESOLUTION 74/267
Adopted at the 53rd plenary meeting, on 14 January 2020, by a recorded vote of 120 to 48, with 4 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.5, sponsored by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States that are members of the Group of 77
and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018) and as orally
amended
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Republic of Moldova, Serbia

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

74/267. Enlargement of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: amendment
to rule 155 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 14 (I) of 13 February 1946 on the establishment of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and its resolutions 1659 (XVI) of 28 November 1961, 2798 (XXVI)
of 13 December 1971 and 32/103 of 14 December 1977 on the enlargement of the Advisory Committee,
Acknowledging that the membership of the United Nations has increased substantially since the adoption of the
last resolution enlarging the Advisory Committee,
Mindful of rules 156 and 157 of its rules of procedure, and desiring, accordingly, to increase the participation of
members from developing countries in the Advisory Committee in order to ensure broad geographical representation
in the Committee,
1. Decides to increase the membership of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions from sixteen to twenty-one members, beginning from 1 January 2021;
2. Also decides that seats shall be distributed as follows among regional groups: Group of African States,
five; Group of Asian and Pacific States, five; Group of Eastern European States, three; Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, four; and Group of Western European and other States, four;
3. Further decides to amend, with effect from 1 January 2021, rule 155 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly to read: “The General Assembly shall appoint an Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions consisting of twenty-one members, including at least three financial experts of recognized
standing”.
RESOLUTION 74/268
Adopted at the 60th plenary meeting, on 3 March 2020, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.39 and
A/74/L.39/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Angola, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Namibia, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/268. The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of rough
diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the trade in conflict diamonds continues to be a matter of serious international concern, which
can be directly linked to the fuelling of armed conflict, the activities of rebel movements aimed at undermining or
overthrowing legitimate Governments and the illicit traffic in and proliferation of armaments, especially small arms
and light weapons,
Recognizing also the devastating impact of conflicts fuelled by the trade in conflict diamonds on peace and the
safety and security of people in affected countries, and the systematic and gross human rights violations that have
been perpetrated in such conflicts,
Noting the negative impact of such conflicts on regional stability and the obligations placed upon States by the
Charter of the United Nations regarding the maintenance of international peace and security, and recognizing that
continued action to curb the trade in conflict diamonds is imperative,
Noting with appreciation that the Kimberley Process, as an international initiative led by Participants, has
pursued its deliberations on an inclusive basis involving concerned stakeholders, including producing, exporting and
importing States, the diamond industry and civil society, as well as applicant States and international organizations,
Welcoming the important contribution of the Kimberley Process, which was initiated by African diamondproducing countries, and calling for the consistent implementation of commitments made by Kimberley Process
Participants and the diamond industry and civil society organizations, as observers,
4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Acknowledging that the diamond sector is an important catalyst for promoting economic and social
development, which are necessary for poverty reduction and meeting the requirements of the Sustainable
Development Goals5 in many producing countries, particularly in developing countries,
Noting that, while the vast majority of rough diamonds produced in the world are from legitimate sources, the
elimination of conflict diamonds from legitimate trade is the primary objective of the Kimberley Process, and stressing
the need to continue its activities in order to achieve this objective,
Recognizing that the Kimberley Process promotes legitimate rough diamond trade, and recalling the positive
benefits of legitimate diamond trade to producing countries, including its transparency and accountability throughout
the diamond industry, and the contribution it has made to the economies of producing, exporting and importing States,
and therefore underlining the need for continued international action with regard to the ethical exploitation, sale and
trade of rough diamonds,
Welcoming the efforts to enhance regional cooperation on Kimberley Process matters among artisanal and
alluvial diamond-producing countries in Central Africa and the Mano River Union facing similar challenges, and
further encouraging the sharing of lessons with partners in the region and outside,
Acknowledging the successful role that the Kimberley Process has played, in the last 17 years, in stemming the
flow of conflict diamonds and the valuable development impact it has had in improving the lives of many people
dependent on the trade in diamonds, recognizing the contribution of the Kimberley Process to the settlement of
conflicts and the consolidation of peace in Angola, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone, and noting that the 2019
plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process, in looking towards the future, committed to continuing to ensure that the
Kimberley Process remains an effective multilateral tool for conflict prevention in stemming the flow of conflict
diamonds,
Recalling the Charter and all the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security Council
related to conflict diamonds, and determined to contribute to and support the implementation of the measures provided
for in those resolutions,
Noting with satisfaction that the implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme6 continues to
have a positive impact in reducing the opportunity for conflict diamonds to play a role in fuelling armed conflict and
helps to protect legitimate trade and ensure the effective implementation of the relevant resolutions on trade in conflict
diamonds,
Recognizing that regular review and reform of the Kimberley Process will be necessary to keep pace with and
aim to address the ongoing threat of instability, conflict and contemporary challenges in the diamond trade, as well as
to seize contemporary opportunities,
Welcoming the decision of the 55 Kimberley Process Participants, representing 82 countries, including the
27 States members of the European Union and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland represented
by the European Commission, to address the problem of conflict diamonds by participating in the Kimberley Process
and implementing the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme,
Welcoming also the admission of the United Kingdom as a Kimberley Process Certification Scheme Participant,
with such participation taking effect from the date on which European Union law ceases to apply to and in the United
Kingdom,
Welcoming further the applications of Kyrgyzstan and Qatar to join the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme,
Noting that the Russian Federation, in its official capacity as the incoming Chair of the Kimberley Process for
2020, has been made aware of the interest expressed by Uzbekistan in joining the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme, while recognizing that this interest was expressed after the conclusion of the 2019 plenary meeting of the
Kimberley Process,

_______________
5
6

See resolution 70/1.
See A/57/489.

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing and appreciating the work done by the Ad Hoc Committee on Review and Reform with respect to
the Kimberley Process Permanent Secretariat, a multi-donor fund, strengthening the peer review mechanism and
strengthening the scope of the Kimberley Process in the core document and the consolidation of the core document,
Recognizing that State sovereignty should be fully respected and that the principles of equality, mutual benefits
and consensus should be adhered to, and welcoming the implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme in such a way as not to impede the legitimate trade in diamonds or impose an undue burden on Governments
or industry, particularly smaller producers, and not to hinder the development of the diamond industry,
Recognizing also that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, which came into effect on 1 January 2003,
will be credible only if all Participants have the requisite national legislation coupled with effective and credible
internal systems of control designed to eliminate the presence of conflict diamonds in the chain of producing,
exporting and importing rough diamonds within their own territories and across their borders, while taking into
account that differences in production methods and trading practices, as well as differences in the institutional controls
thereof, may require different approaches to meeting minimum standards, and encouraging all Participants to work
towards overall compliance with the Kimberley Process standards,
Welcoming the important contribution to fulfilling the purposes of the Kimberley Process that has been made
and continues to be made by Participants, civil society organizations from across Participant countries, and the
diamond industry, to assist international efforts to stop the trade in conflict diamonds,
Welcoming also the progress achieved with the World Customs Organization in adopting separate Harmonized
System codes on natural and synthetic diamonds within the 2022 version of the Harmonized System,
Taking note of the updated System of Warranties guidelines promulgated by the World Diamond Council
in 2018,
1. Takes note of the outcomes of the 2019 plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process, hosted in New Delhi
by India from 18 to 22 November 2019,7 and reaffirms its strong and continuing support for the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme6 and the Kimberley Process as a whole;
2. Recognizes that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme helps to ensure the effective implementation
of relevant resolutions of the Security Council containing sanctions on the trade in conflict diamonds and contributes
to the prevention of future conflicts fuelled by diamonds, and calls for the full implementation of existing Council
measures targeting the illicit trade in rough diamonds, particularly conflict diamonds which play a role in fuelling
conflict;
3. Reaffirms the importance of the tripartite nature of the Kimberley Process, stresses that the widest possible
participation in the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme is essential, encourages Participants to contribute to the
work of the Kimberley Process by participating actively in the Certification Scheme and ensuring compliance with
its undertakings and the effective implementation of its measures, underscores the importance of the Civil Society
Coalition and its members to the Kimberley Process, and acknowledges the importance of supporting additional
applications for membership by civil society organizations;
4. Commends and appreciates the work of Kimberley Process working bodies in advancing the objectives
of the Kimberley Process;
5. Recalls the central place of mining communities in the Kimberley Process and the need to devote
particular attention to engaging artisanal miners in governance structures, developing best practices, building upon
experiences in other minerals and gold in artisanal and small-scale mining and promoting the rule of law;
6. Welcomes efforts to enhance cooperation with and assistance to Participants in Kimberley Process matters,
including with a regional dimension, focusing on the implementation of best practices, capacity-building and
compliance with Kimberley Process standards, rules and procedures;
7. Recognizes the value of engaging with relevant external organizations to support the work of the
Kimberley Process and its working bodies, and in this regard welcomes the guidelines adopted by the Kimberley
Process, which will facilitate engagement in a spirit of transparency and inclusiveness;
_______________
7 See A/74/637.

6

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Encourages further strengthening of the Kimberley Process to enhance its effectiveness in addressing
challenges posed to the diamond industry and related communities, including from instability and conflict, and to
ensure that the Kimberley Process remains relevant for the future and continues to contribute to international peace
and security and the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development5 and the Sustainable Development
Goals, and looks forward to further exploring and advancing the ways in which the Kimberley Process contributes to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace;
9. Welcomes the effort made with a view to strengthening the scope of the Kimberley Process in the core
document, including in-depth discussions in the Ad Hoc Committee on Review and Reform on how best to capture
the evolving nature of rough diamond conflict and actors involved in this conflict, about a definition of conflict
diamonds, the importance of capacity-building and mutual support, and the positive contribution of rough diamonds
to prosperity and social and economic development, and looks forward to continue this work in the future;
10. Welcomes the expressions of interest from Austria, Botswana, China, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America to host the Kimberley Process Permanent Secretariat, and notes the recommendation of the
plenary meeting to create a tripartite Technical Expert Team under the Working Group of Diamond Experts to work
on the practicalities of the Permanent Secretariat;
11. Notes the acceptance of the principle of implementing a voluntary multi-donor fund in the Kimberley
Process and the identification of four areas of focus for the fund, namely capacity-building, technical assistance, the
participation of civil society and the participation of the least developed countries;
12. Welcomes the progress in consolidating the core document that has enabled provisional closure of several
sections, and notes that the work will continue;
13. Also welcomes the adoption of the 2019 administrative decision on the peer review mechanism to improve
the provisions of peer review, including annual reporting, review visits and review missions;
14. Notes the adoption of provisional changes to the operational framework for the resumption of exports of
rough diamonds from the Central African Republic and the terms of reference for the monitoring team for the Central
African Republic, with the objective of increasing legal exports and maintaining safeguards to stop conflict diamonds
from entering the legitimate supply chain;
15. Encourages efforts to assist the Central African Republic in achieving compliance with the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme;
16. Acknowledges with great appreciation the important contribution that India, as Chair of the Kimberley
Process in 2019, has made towards curbing the trade in conflict diamonds, and welcomes the selection of the Russian
Federation as the Chair and Botswana as the Vice-Chair for 2020;
17. Requests the Chair of the Kimberley Process to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session
a report on the implementation of the Kimberley Process;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “The role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
RESOLUTION 74/269
Adopted on 31 March 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.49, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

74/269. Scope, modalities, format and organization of the summit on biodiversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 74/4 of 15 October 2019, entitled “Political declaration of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly” and its call on gearing up for a
decade of action and delivery for sustainable development,
Recalling also its resolutions 73/234 of 20 December 2018 and 74/221 of 19 December 2019 and its decision
to convene a summit on biodiversity at the level of Heads of State and Government, within existing resources, before
7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, in 2020, in order to
highlight the urgency of action at the highest levels in support of a post-2020 global biodiversity framework that
contributes to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development8 and places the global community on a path towards
realizing the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity, “Living in harmony with nature”,
1. Decides that the summit on biodiversity at the level of Heads of State and Government to be convened by
the President of the General Assembly shall be held at United Nations Headquarters in New York on the first day of
the general debate of the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, from 3 to 6 p.m., and on the second day of the general
debate, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.;
2. Also decides that the summit and its preparatory process shall provide for the effective participation of all
States Members of the United Nations, all members of the specialized agencies and all parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity;9
3. Further decides that the summit will consist of an opening segment, a plenary segment for general
discussion, two leaders dialogues and a brief closing segment and that the overall theme of the summit will be “Urgent
action on biodiversity for sustainable development”;
4.

Decides that:

(a) The opening segment, to be held from 3 to 3.50 p.m. on the first day of the general debate, will include
the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, the Secretary-General, the President of the
Economic and Social Council, the host of the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on Biological Diversity, the host of the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, the Executive Secretary
of the Secretariat for the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Chair of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, as well as an eminent champion of biodiversity and a youth leader,
one of whom should be a representative of indigenous peoples and local communities, both to be selected, in
consultation with Member States, by the President of the General Assembly;
(b) The plenary segment will start at the end of the opening segment and end at 6 p.m. on the first day of the
general debate and will comprise statements by States Members of the United Nations, members of the specialized
agencies, parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and observers of the General Assembly and the time limits
for these statements, strictly observed, will be three minutes for individual delegations and five minutes for statements
made on behalf of a group of States;
(c) Delegations will have only one opportunity to speak in the summit, either in the plenary segment or in one
of the leaders dialogues;
(d) The closing segment, to be held after the conclusion of the leaders dialogues on the second day of the
general debate, will comprise key messages from the leaders dialogues and concluding remarks by the President of
the General Assembly;
5.
(a)
debate;
(b)

Also decides that the organizational arrangements for the leaders dialogues will be as follows:
Two consecutive leaders dialogues of 75 minutes each will start at 10 a.m. on the second day of the general
The leaders dialogues will address the following themes:
Dialogue 1: Addressing biodiversity loss and mainstreaming biodiversity for sustainable development;
Dialogue 2: Harnessing science, technology and innovation, capacity-building, access and benefitsharing, financing and partnerships for biodiversity;

_______________
8
9

8

Resolution 70/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(c) Each leaders dialogue will be presided over by two co-chairs, one from a developing country and one
from a developed country, to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly from among the Heads of State
or Government attending the summit, with adequate regional representation;
(d)

The time limit for interventions in the leaders dialogues will be three minutes, strictly observed;

(e) The President of the General Assembly may invite parliamentarians, local governments, the heads or
senior representatives of relevant United Nations entities as well as intergovernmental organizations, the secretariats
of the Rio and biodiversity-related conventions, civil society, the private sector, including the financial sector,
academia, youth, indigenous peoples and local communities to serve as speakers in the leaders dialogues, taking into
account gender balance, level of development and geographical representation;
6.

Invites all observers of the General Assembly to participate in the summit at the highest possible level;

7. Invites non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council with
relevant expertise to register with the Secretariat to attend the summit;
8. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of other relevant representatives of
relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions, indigenous peoples and
local communities, youth and the private sector who may attend the summit, taking into account the principles of
transparency and equitable gender and geographical representation, and to submit the list to Member States for their
consideration on a non-objection basis;10
9. Invites the United Nations system, including the funds, programmes and specialized agencies, regional
commissions and relevant envoys of the Secretary-General and the secretariats of the biodiversity-related conventions,
to participate in the summit, as appropriate, to highlight the need to support a post-2020 global biodiversity
framework, and urges them to consider initiatives, including through the United Nations Environment Management
Group, in support of the summit and its preparation, particularly with regard to sharing relevant good practices,
challenges and lessons learned;
10. Encourages participation in the summit at the highest possible level and the inclusion in delegations of
representatives of parliamentary institutions, local governments, civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, indigenous peoples and local communities, community organizations, faith-based organizations,
academia, philanthropic foundations, youth and the private sector, with due regard to gender balance;
11. Encourages all participants to demonstrate ambition to accelerate action on biodiversity for sustainable
development;
12. Decides that the proceedings of the summit shall be webcasted, and encourages the President of the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General and all relevant United Nations entities to give the highest visibility to the
summit, including during its preparation, through all relevant media platforms and information and communications
technologies;
13. Requests the President of the General Assembly to prepare, before the opening of the fifteenth meeting of
the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, a factual summary to reflect the discussions
of the summit held to highlight the urgency of action at the highest levels in support of a post-2020 global biodiversity
framework that contributes to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development8 and places the global community on a
path towards realizing the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity, “Living in harmony with nature”;
14. Also requests the President of the General Assembly to bring the summary of the summit to the attention
of all participants, as well as all relevant United Nations entities, the secretariats of the Rio and biodiversity-related
conventions and all other relevant stakeholders;
15. Further requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member States, to finalize
the organizational arrangements for the summit.

_______________
The list of proposed as well as final names will be brought to the attention of the General Assembly. Where a name is objected to, the
objecting Member State will, on a voluntary basis, make known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly the general basis of
its objections and the Office will share any information received with any Member State upon its request.
10

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/270
Adopted on 2 April 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.52 and A/74/L.52/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

74/270. Global solidarity to fight the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‑19)
The General Assembly,
Noting with great concern the threat to human health, safety and well-being caused by the coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, which continues to spread globally,
Recognizing the unprecedented effects of the pandemic, including the severe disruption to societies and
economies, as well as to global travel and commerce, and the devastating impact on the livelihood of people,
Recognizing also that the poorest and most vulnerable are the hardest hit by the pandemic and that the impact
of the crisis will reverse hard-won development gains and hamper progress towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals,11
Recognizing further the central role of the United Nations system in catalysing and coordinating the global
response to control and contain the spread of COVID-19, and acknowledging in this regard the crucial role played by
the World Health Organization,
Welcoming the call by the Secretary-General to tackle the health emergency and focus on the social impact and
economic response measures and his emphasis on the need for a sustainable and inclusive recovery,
Recognizing the efforts made by Governments as well as health-care workers and other essential workers
around the world to deal with the pandemic through measures to protect the health, safety and well-being of their
people,
Acknowledging the need for all relevant stakeholders to work together at the national, regional and global levels
to ensure that no one is left behind,
Recognizing that the COVID-19 pandemic requires a global response based on unity, solidarity and renewed
multilateral cooperation,

_______________
11

10

See resolution 70/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Reaffirms its commitment to international cooperation and multilateralism and its strong support for the
central role of the United Nations system in the global response to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic;
2. Emphasizes the need for full respect for human rights, and stresses that there is no place for any form of
discrimination, racism and xenophobia in the response to the pandemic;
3. Expresses its profound condolences to and solidarity with the families and societies whose people have
lost their lives to the disease, those who are battling for their survival and those whose lives and livelihoods have been
affected by the crisis;
4. Expresses its gratitude and support to all frontline health-care workers, medical professionals, scientists
and researchers, as well as other essential workers around the world who are working under difficult and challenging
circumstances to deal with the pandemic;
5. Calls for intensified international cooperation to contain, mitigate and defeat the pandemic, including by
exchanging information, scientific knowledge and best practices and by applying the relevant guidelines
recommended by the World Health Organization;
6. Renews its commitment to help people and societies in special situations, especially the weakest and most
vulnerable, and recognizes that many Governments have offered their assistance and support to others in a spirit of
solidarity and mutual support;
7. Reaffirms its full commitment to the decade of action and delivery for sustainable development, and in this
regard underlines the need for the United Nations system to work as one to support all Governments;
8. Expresses optimism that the unprecedented crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic can be mitigated
and successfully reversed through leadership and sustained global cooperation and solidarity;
9. Calls upon the United Nations system, under the leadership of the Secretary-General, to work with all
relevant actors in order to mobilize a coordinated global response to the pandemic and its adverse social, economic
and financial impact on all societies.
RESOLUTION 74/271
Adopted on 13 April 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.53, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

74/271. Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat
The General Assembly,
I
Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat
Recalling its resolutions 59/272 of 23 December 2004 and 60/254 of 8 May 2006, section I of its resolution
60/260 of 8 May 2006 and its resolutions 60/283 of 7 July 2006, 61/245 of 22 December 2006, 63/276 of 7 April
2009, 64/259 of 29 March 2010, 66/257 of 9 April 2012, 67/253 of 12 April 2013, 68/264 of 9 April 2014, 69/272 of
2 April 2015, 70/255 of 1 April 2016, 71/283 of 6 April 2017, 72/303 of 5 July 2018 and 73/289 of 15 April 2019,
Reaffirming its commitment to strengthening accountability in the United Nations Secretariat and the
accountability of the Secretary-General for the performance of the Secretariat to all Member States,
Emphasizing that accountability is a central pillar of effective and efficient management that requires attention
and strong commitment at all levels of the Secretariat, especially at the highest level,
Recognizing and reaffirming the important role of the oversight bodies in the development of an accountability
system that is relevant to the United Nations,
11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Having considered the ninth progress report of the Secretary-General on accountability: strengthening
accountability in the United Nations Secretariat12 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,13
1. Takes note of the ninth progress report of the Secretary-General on accountability: strengthening
accountability in the United Nations Secretariat;12
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;13
3. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General towards a strong culture of accountability throughout the
Secretariat, acknowledges that a culture of accountability stems from the leadership of an organization, and stresses
that an effective accountability system is central to the successful management of the Organization;
4. Underscores that senior management bears special responsibility for setting the tone and standards for a
strong culture of responsibility, accountability and personal integrity in the Secretariat, with an impact on mandate
implementation and on the reputation of the Organization;
5. Stresses the indispensable roles of external and internal oversight mechanisms, carried out through regular
audit reviews and the issuance of pertinent recommendations, and that the full and timely implementation of the
recommendations of oversight bodies, which are aimed at strengthening the performance of managers in monitoring
the activities for which they are held accountable, is an essential part of any effective system of accountability;
6. Notes with appreciation the operationalization of the Business Transformation and Accountability
Division and its important role within the accountability system, including the role it plays in the implementation of
the new delegation of authority framework and in providing management functions related to accountability, including
results-based management and enterprise risk management, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to include
in his next progress report information on how the Division has provided support to the Secretariat, including
programme managers, in the monitoring, assessment and reporting of programme performance;
7. Stresses the continued need for a well-functioning system of delegation of authority through well-defined
roles and responsibilities of individuals at all levels to whom authority is delegated, systemic reporting mechanisms
on the monitoring and exercise of delegated authority, risk mitigation and safeguard measures, and actions to be taken
in cases of mismanagement or abuse of authority;
8. Recognizes the progress made in implementing the system of delegation of authority, stresses that
strengthened accountability is central to successful delegation of authority, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to provide to the General Assembly, in his next progress report, information on the implementation of the
system-wide delegation of authority and on how it is supporting accountability;
9. Recalls paragraphs 8 and 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General
to continue to enhance the accountability framework under the new delegation of authority, including by defining
additional key performance indicators to comprehensively and accurately monitor the exercise of delegated authorities
and compliance with the respective regulations and rules, and to report thereon in his tenth progress report;
10. Stresses, as one of the essential components of accountability, the importance of compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations, its resolutions and the regulations and rules;
11. Encourages the Secretary-General to further increase the use of data to inform decision-making and
improve organizational performance, and to report on the impact of the effective use of data on shifting the
Organization to a culture of results in his next progress report;
12. Recognizes the importance of results-based management and performance reporting, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts aimed at strengthening the implementation of results-based management,
programme monitoring and reporting, and at shifting towards a culture of results in the Secretariat;
_______________
12
13

12

A/74/658.
A/74/741.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

13. Stresses the importance of effective performance management in mandate delivery, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to develop a coherent evaluation framework for managers, including clear indicators
of achievement and instruments to identify underperformance, and to report on the progress made in the context of
his next progress report;
14. Welcomes the continued strengthening of senior managers’ compacts by including new commitments such
as fraud prevention and the effective operation of the system of delegation of authority, notes the reactivation of the
Management Performance Board, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure the
effectiveness of those compacts as instruments of accountability;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next progress report an analysis of compliance with the
management objectives and performance measures of senior managers’ compacts, in particular with targets stipulated
in the compacts, and to ensure that appropriate measures are taken in cases of non-compliance;
16. Reiterates that the timely submission of documents is an important aspect of the accountability of the
Secretariat to Member States, notes the need for the ongoing efforts to address the underlying challenges related to
documentation, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure the continued inclusion in the senior
managers’ compacts of a related managerial indicator, and to provide information in his next progress report on how
this indicator is used to improve senior managers’ accountability and the timely submission of documents;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of priority, to ensure that staff performance is made an explicit
criterion for career progression in the Organization;
18. Emphasizes the importance of the internal control framework in the accountability system, and requests
the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen internal controls in programme planning, the programme aspects of
the budget, the monitoring of implementation and the methods of evaluation and to report on the measures taken in
that regard in the context of his tenth progress report;
19. Recognizes the efforts towards the creation of guidelines for donor and implementing partner agreements,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that those guidelines include standard template agreements
with implementing partners that contain an anti-corruption and anti-fraud clause;
20. Notes with appreciation the progress made on conduct and disciplinary issues, including the revision of
the policy addressing discrimination, harassment, including sexual harassment, and abuse of authority,14 and requests
the Secretary-General to continue to undertake a cultural change in order to ensure a workplace where discrimination,
harassment, including sexual harassment, and abuse of authority are not tolerated, perpetrators are held accountable
and staff feel safe to report misconduct;
21. Recalls paragraph 16 of its resolution 72/303, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
concrete measures to enhance in-house capacity for evaluation and self-evaluation, including through the Evaluation
Section in the Business Transformation and Accountability Division;
22. Notes with appreciation the measures taken by the Secretary-General to ensure appropriate ethical
standards and integrity in the Organization, and requests him to make efforts aimed at improving the culture of
accountability in the Secretariat, including by continuing to encourage, inter alia, a conducive environment for the
reporting of fraud and misconduct, and to continue to take appropriate and effective measures for the protection of
whistle-blowers and the prevention of retaliation;
23. Recalls paragraphs 10 to 12 of its resolution 73/268 A of 22 December 2018, and reiterates its request to
the Secretary-General to ensure full implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors;
24. Also recalls paragraph 37 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to provide in his next progress report details on the lessons learned and data analysis as a result of the regular
reviews of reports of oversight bodies, and on the latest implementation status of the recommendations contained
therein;

_______________
14

ST/SGB/2019/8.

13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on progress made in the implementation of the
accountability system of the Secretariat, including on the system of delegation of authority, for its consideration at the
first part of its resumed seventy-fifth session;
II
Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the review of audit and oversight committees in the United
Nations system
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General drawing attention to the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit15 as well as the comments of the Secretary-General and of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board
for Coordination thereon,16
1. Notes with appreciation the review of audit and oversight committees in the United Nations system
conducted by the Joint Inspection Unit;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take action on the relevant recommendations, as appropriate, and to
provide an update thereon to the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 74/272
Adopted on 13 April 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.55, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

74/272. Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,
Arusha branch
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 66/240 A of 24 December 2011, 66/240 B of 21 June 2012, 67/244 B of 12 April 2013,
68/257 of 27 December 2013, 68/267 of 9 April 2014, 69/276 of 2 April 2015, 70/258 of 1 April 2016, 71/282 of
6 April 2017, 72/270 of 4 April 2018 and 73/288 of 15 April 2019,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General17 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,18
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;17

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,18 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Notes with appreciation the continued efforts of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania in
facilitating the construction project;
4. Notes the progress made in the construction of the new premises, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a final report to the General Assembly during its seventy-sixth session;
5. Recalls paragraphs 10 and 26 of the report of the Advisory Committee, urges the Secretary-General to
intensify his efforts to ensure full implementation of the project, including the remaining remediation works on the
heating, ventilation and air conditioning system and pending closeout activities, without further delay, within the
revised timelines and the total budget of 8,787,733 United States dollars approved for the project, and requests him to
report thereon in the context of his final report;

_______________
A/74/670.
A/74/670/Add.1.
17
A/74/662.
18
A/74/707.
15
16

14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of his final report, to include, inter alia, an analysis of
updated and comprehensive information on lessons learned and best practices, including areas of contract and project
management, as well as knowledge gained during the ongoing implementation of the remaining project activities for
application, as appropriate, to other construction projects;
7. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to pursue the recovery of the direct and indirect costs arising from errors and delays by contracting
partners, namely the architect and the contractor, where economically feasible to do so, and to report thereon in the
context of his final report;
8. Notes with concern the intention of the contractor to contest the deduction in the amount of approximately
230,000 dollars from the final payment, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to make every effort to
bring this matter to a swift conclusion;
9. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to include local knowledge and capacity in the
implementation of the project.
RESOLUTION 74/273
Adopted on 20 April 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.40 and A/74/L.40/Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gambia, Georgia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Kenya, Liberia,
Mauritius, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Republic
of Tanzania

74/273. International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights19 and the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,20
Emphasizing that the crime of genocide, as recognized in the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, is an odious scourge that has inflicted great losses on humanity,
Recalling that the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide was adopted in 1948
in order to avoid the repetition of acts of genocide and that international cooperation is required to facilitate the timely
prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide,
Recalling also its resolution 58/234 of 23 December 2003, and recalling further its decision 72/550 of 26 January
2018, by which it designated 7 April as the International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda, amending the title of the annual observance,
Recalling further that the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 issued, on 16 June 2006, a judicial notice
concluding that it was a “fact of common knowledge” that “between 6 April and 17 July 1994, there was a genocide
in Rwanda against the Tutsi ethnic group”, recalling that more than a million people were killed during the genocide,
including Hutu and others who opposed it, and noting with concern any form of denial of the genocide,
Recalling its resolution 73/328 of 25 July 2019 on promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
tolerance in countering hate speech,

_______________
19
20

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 260 A (III), annex.

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Commending the tremendous efforts of the Government and people of Rwanda to restore the dignity of the
survivors, including the allocation by the Government of 6 per cent of its annual national budget for the support of
genocide survivors,
Honouring the courage and dedication shown by the men and women who stopped the genocide,
Expressing concern that many of the genocide suspects continue to elude justice, recognizing the importance of
all States combating impunity for all violations of human rights and acts that constitute the crime of genocide, and
reaffirming its strong opposition to impunity,
Convinced that exposing and holding the perpetrators, including their accomplices, accountable, as well as
restoring the dignity of victims through acknowledgement and commemoration of their suffering, would guide
societies in the prevention of future acts of genocide and human rights violations,
Noting that the prosecution of persons responsible for genocide and other serious international crimes, through
the national and international justice systems, including the gacaca courts of Rwanda, has contributed and continues
to contribute to the process of national reconciliation in Rwanda,
Recognizing that 7 April 2020 marks the twenty-sixth anniversary of the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
during which Hutu and others who opposed it were also killed,
1.

Reaffirms 7 April as the International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda;

2. Encourages all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant
international organizations, as well as civil society organizations, to observe the International Day of Reflection on
the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, including special observances and activities in memory of the victims
of the genocide;
3. Calls upon States to recommit to preventing and fighting against genocide and other serious crimes under
international law, and underscores the importance of taking into account lessons learned from the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi in Rwanda, during which Hutu and others who opposed it were also killed;
4. Calls upon all States to act in accordance with the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide20 so as to ensure that there is no repetition of events of the kind that occurred in Rwanda in 1994;
5. Condemns without reservation any denial of the genocide against the Tutsi ethnic group in Rwanda as a
historical event in full or in part, as established by the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda in 2006, rejects any denial of the genocide, and urges Member States to develop educational programmes
that will inculcate in future generations the lessons of the genocide in order to help to prevent future acts of genocide;
6. Condemns any advocacy of hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence,
whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media, social media or any other means;
7. Condemns without reservation all manifestations of intolerance, hate speech, incitement, harassment or
violence against persons or communities based on ethnic origin, religion or belief, wherever they occur;
8. Welcomes efforts by Member States to investigate and prosecute those accused of the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi, and calls upon all States to cooperate with the Government of Rwanda to investigate, arrest,
prosecute or extradite all remaining fugitives;
9. Calls upon States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide to consider doing so as a matter of high priority and, where necessary, to enact national
legislation in order to meet their obligations under the Convention;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure greater collaboration between existing early warning
mechanisms for the prevention of genocide and other serious international crimes, in order to help to detect, assess
and respond to sources of tension and points of risk or identify vulnerable populations;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Government of Rwanda, to encourage the
relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to take appropriate steps to support the efforts
of the Government to enhance judicial capacity-building and victim support;

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Further requests the Secretary-General to modify the title of the outreach programme to “outreach
programme on the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda and the United Nations” and to take measures to
mobilize civil society for remembrance and education in the context of the International Day of Reflection on the
1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, in order to help to prevent future acts of genocide, and to report annually
to the General Assembly on the implementation of the programme.
RESOLUTION 74/274
Adopted on 20 April 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.56 and A/74/L.56/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

74/274. International cooperation to ensure global access to medicines, vaccines and medical equipment
to face COVID-19
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 74/270 of 2 April 2020 and 74/2 of 10 October 2019,
Noting with concern the threat to human health, safety and well-being caused by the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic, which has spread all around the globe, as well as the unprecedented and multifaceted effects
of the pandemic, including the severe disruption to societies, economies, global trade and travel and the devastating
impact on the livelihoods of people,
Recognizing the competence, generosity and personal sacrifice of health-care professionals and services in the
exercise of their duties to contain the spread of the pandemic,
Reaffirming the right of every human being, without distinction of any kind, to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health,
Recognizing that the poor and the most vulnerable people are the most affected and that the impact of the
pandemic will have repercussions on development gains, hampering progress in the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, including target 3.8,21
Underscoring that equitable access to health products is a global priority and that the availability, accessibility,
acceptability and affordability of health products of assured quality are fundamental to tackling the pandemic,
Recognizing the importance of international cooperation and effective multilateralism in helping to ensure that
all States have in place effective national protective measures, access to and flow of vital medical supplies, medicines
and vaccines, in order to minimize negative effects in all affected States and to avoid relapses of the pandemic,

_______________
21

See resolution 70/1.

17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing also that the COVID-19 global pandemic requires a global response based on unity, solidarity and
multilateral cooperation,
1. Reaffirms the fundamental role of the United Nations system in coordinating the global response to control
and contain the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and in supporting Member States, and in this regard
acknowledges the crucial leading role played by the World Health Organization;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the World Health Organization and other
relevant agencies of the United Nations system, including the international financial institutions, to identify and
recommend options, including approaches to rapidly scaling manufacturing and strengthening supply chains that
promote and ensure fair, transparent, equitable, efficient and timely access to and distribution of preventive tools,
laboratory testing, reagents and supporting materials, essential medical supplies, new diagnostics, drugs and future
COVID-19 vaccines, with a view to making them available to all those in need, in particular in developing countries;
3. Encourages Member States to work in partnership with all relevant stakeholders to increase research and
development funding for vaccines and medicines, leverage digital technologies, and strengthen scientific international
cooperation necessary to combat COVID-19 and to bolster coordination, including with the private sector, towards
rapid development, manufacturing and distribution of diagnostics, antiviral medicines, personal protective equipment
and vaccines, adhering to the objectives of efficacy, safety, equity, accessibility, and affordability;
4. Calls upon Member States and other relevant stakeholders to immediately take steps to prevent, within
their respective legal frameworks, speculation and undue stockpiling that may hinder access to safe, effective and
affordable essential medicines, vaccines, personal protective equipment and medical equipment as may be required
to effectively address COVID-19;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the World Health Organization, to take the
necessary steps to effectively coordinate and follow up on the efforts of the United Nations system to promote and
ensure global access to medicines, vaccines and medical equipment needed to face COVID-19, and, in this regard, to
consider establishing, within existing resources, an inter-agency task force, and to brief the General Assembly on such
efforts, as appropriate.
RESOLUTION 74/275
Adopted on 28 May 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.66 and A/74/L.66/Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Jordan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uruguay, Zambia

74/275. International Day to Protect Education from Attack
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that everyone has the right to education, and recalling in that regard the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,22 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,23 the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees,24 the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,25 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,26 the

_______________
Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
24
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
25
Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.
26
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
22
23

18

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,27 the Convention on the Rights
of the Child28 and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,29
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”, in which it committed to providing inclusive and equitable quality education at all
levels – early childhood, primary, secondary, tertiary, technical and vocational training; all people, irrespective of sex,
age, race or ethnicity, and persons with disabilities, migrants, indigenous peoples, children and youth, especially those
in vulnerable situations, should have access to lifelong learning opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge
and skills needed to exploit opportunities and to participate fully in society,
Recalling its resolution 64/290 of 9 July 2010 on the right to education in emergency situations, in which it
condemned the targeting of civilians as such in situations of armed conflict, including schoolchildren, students and
teachers, as well as attacks on civilian objects such as educational institutions, where prohibited under international
law, recognized that such acts may constitute grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 194930 and, for States
parties, war crimes under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,31 and reminded all parties to armed
conflict of their obligations under international law to refrain from the use of civilian objects, including educational
institutions, for military purposes and child recruitment,
Recognizing the importance of ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting lifelong
learning opportunities for all,
Emphasizing the need to take steps to achieve the full realization of the right to education for all children and,
in particular, to take all feasible measures to protect schools from attacks, as well as persons entitled to protection in
relation to them in situations of armed conflict, to refrain from actions that impede children’s access to education, and
to facilitate access to education in armed conflict,
Expressing particular concern that many children in armed conflict, in particular girls, lack access to education
owing to attacks against schools, damaged or destroyed school buildings, mines and unexploded ordnance, insecurity,
the prevalence of violence, including gender-based violence, in and around schools and loss of documentation,
Noting efforts aimed at promoting and protecting the right to education and facilitating continuation of education
in armed conflict, including the efforts of Member States that are signatories to the Safe Schools Declaration,
Recalling its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the proclamation
of international years and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years
and anniversaries,
Expressing its dismay at the aggravation of attacks on educational institutions, their students and staff, in
contravention of international humanitarian law, recognizing the grave impact that such attacks have on the full
realization of the right to education, in particular of women and girls, and reiterating its condemnation in the strongest
terms of all such attacks,32
Profoundly concerned about the growing number of attacks and threats of attacks against schools, and
recognizing the grave impact of such attacks on children’s and teachers’ safety, as well as on the full realization of the
right to education, expressing its concern also that the military use of schools in contravention of applicable
international law may also affect the safety of children and teachers and the right of the child to education, and
encouraging all States to strengthen efforts to prevent the military use of schools in contravention of international law,

_______________
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
29
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
30
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
31
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
32
See resolution 70/137.
27
28

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Deeply concerned that school-related violence against girls, including sexual violence and harassment on the
way to and from and at school, such as violence perpetrated by teachers, continues to deter girls’ education and, in
many cases, the transition to and completion of secondary education, and that these risks may influence parents’
decision to allow girls to attend school,
Urging all parties to armed conflict to fulfil their applicable obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, including to respect civilians, including students and educational personnel, and
civilian objects such as educational institutions,
Calling upon all Member States, including donors, and inviting the private sector and all concerned individuals
and institutions to continue to support diverse humanitarian funding channels and to consider increasing their
contributions to education programmes defined in humanitarian appeals, including humanitarian consolidated and
flash appeals, based on and in proportion to assessed needs, as a means of ensuring adequate, timely, predictable,
flexible and needs-based resources,
Noting the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict on the
six grave violations committed against children in armed conflict,
1.

Decides to proclaim 9 September the International Day to Protect Education from Attack;

2. Reaffirms the right to education for all and the importance of ensuring safe enabling learning environments
in humanitarian emergencies, as well as quality education at all levels, including for girls, including technical and
vocational training opportunities, where possible, including through adequate funding and infrastructural investments,
for the well-being of all, in this regard recognizes that access to quality education in humanitarian emergencies can
contribute to long-term development goals and reiterates the need to protect and respect educational facilities in
accordance with international humanitarian law, strongly condemns all attacks directed against schools and the use of
schools for military purposes, when in contravention of international humanitarian law, and encourages efforts to
promote safe and protective school environments in humanitarian emergencies;
3. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, other international and regional
organizations, the private sector and civil society, including non-governmental organizations, academic institutions,
individuals and other relevant stakeholders, to observe the International Day to Protect Education from Attacks in an
appropriate manner;
4. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations
Children’s Fund to facilitate the observance of 9 September of every year as the International Day to Protect Education
from Attack, mindful of the provisions contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67;
5. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders for appropriate observance.
RESOLUTION 74/276
Adopted on 1 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.58/Rev.2, sponsored by the United Arab Emirates

74/276. Special session of the General Assembly against corruption
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/205 of 22 December 1999, 55/61 of 4 December 2000, 55/188 of 20 December
2000, 56/186 of 21 December 2001 and 57/244 of 20 December 2002, and recalling also its resolutions 58/4 of
31 October 2003, 58/205 of 23 December 2003, 59/242 of 22 December 2004, 60/207 of 22 December 2005, 61/209
20

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of 20 December 2006, 62/202 of 19 December 2007, 63/226 of 19 December 2008, 64/237 of 24 December 2009,
65/169 of 20 December 2010, 67/189 and 67/192 of 20 December 2012, 68/195 of 18 December 2013, 69/199 of
18 December 2014, 71/208 of 19 December 2016 and 73/190 of 17 December 2018, and Human Rights Council
resolutions 23/9 of 13 June 2013,33 29/11 of 2 July 201534 and 35/25 of 23 June 2017,35
Recalling also its resolution 73/191 of 17 December 2018, entitled “Special session of the General Assembly
against corruption”, in which it decided to convene in the first half of 2021 a special session of the Assembly on
challenges and measures to prevent and combat corruption and strengthen international cooperation,
Recalling further the entry into force on 14 December 2005 of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption,36 which is the most comprehensive and universal instrument on corruption, and recognizing the need to
continue to promote its ratification or accession thereto and the full and effective implementation of its obligations,
Bearing in mind that the prevention and eradication of corruption is a responsibility of all States and that they
must cooperate with one another, with the support and involvement of individuals and groups outside the public sector,
and noting with appreciation the endeavours by States to promote their active participation,
Recognizing article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties shall carry out their obligations under
the Convention in a manner consistent with the principles of sovereign equality and territorial integrity of States and
that of non‑intervention in the domestic affairs of other States, and recalling General Assembly resolution 70/1 of
25 September 2015,
Bearing in mind that nothing in the Convention shall entitle a State party to undertake in the territory of another
State the exercise of jurisdiction and performance of functions that are reserved exclusively for the authority of that
other State under its domestic law,
Noting with appreciation all relevant regional political declarations of States Members of the United Nations
against corruption,
Stressing the importance of the special session for preventing and combating corruption and strengthening
international cooperation for that purpose by, inter alia, promoting the full and effective implementation of the
obligations of the Convention,
Stressing also that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development37 addresses the need to promote peaceful and
inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions at all levels, and concerned about the seriousness of the problems and threats to the stability and
security of societies posed by corruption, which undermine the institutions and values of democracy, ethics and justice
and jeopardize sustainable development and the rule of law,
1. Decides that the special session of the General Assembly on challenges and measures to prevent and
combat corruption and strengthen international cooperation shall be convened for three days, from 26 to 28 April
2021, at United Nations Headquarters, in New York;
2.

Also decides that the organizational arrangements for the special session shall be as follows:

(a)

The special session shall consist of plenary meetings from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.;

(b) The opening of the special session shall include statements by the President of the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General, the President of the Economic and Social Council, the President of the Conference of the States
Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime;

_______________
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. V, sect. A.
35
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. V, sect. A.
36
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.
37
Resolution 70/1.
33
34

21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(c) The plenary meetings shall include statements by Member States, States and regional economic
integration organizations parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, observers to the General
Assembly and, time permitting, a limited number of representatives from relevant organizations attending the special
session, in line with subparagraphs (d) and (e) below, selected by the President of the General Assembly, in
consultation with Member States, with due regard for geographical balance and gender equity; the list of speakers
shall be established in accordance with the established practices of the Assembly,38 and the time limit for the
statements will be five minutes for individual delegations and seven minutes for statements made on behalf of a group
of States;
(d) Representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council are invited to participate in the special session in accordance with the established practice of the General
Assembly;
(e) Recalling the established practice of the General Assembly, the President of the General Assembly to draw
up a list of other relevant representatives of non‑governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic
institutions and the private sector who may attend the special session, taking into account the principles of
transparency and equitable geographical representation, with due regard for the meaningful participation of women,
in accordance with the established practice of the General Assembly, and submit the list to Member States for their
consideration on a non-objection basis;39
3. Reiterates the central role of the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption to improve the capacity of and cooperation among States parties to achieve the objectives set forth in the
United Nations Convention against Corruption36 and to promote and review its implementation;
4. Also reiterates its invitation to the Conference of the States Parties to lead the preparatory process for the
special session by addressing all organizational and substantive matters in an open-ended manner;
5. Invites all relevant United Nations system entities, including programmes, funds, specialized agencies and
regional commissions, as well as relevant intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations, to participate in
the special session;
6. Requests the extended Bureau of the Conference of the States Parties to organize all actions to be taken
by the Conference in preparation for the special session and to address all organizational and substantive matters in
an open-ended and transparent manner, including by appointing facilitators for the informal consultations on the draft
political declaration;
7. Also requests the extended Bureau of the Conference of the States Parties, in consultation with Member
States, to develop a workplan and timeline to advance consultations on the draft political declaration;
8. Affirms that the intersessional meetings of the Conference of the States Parties on the preparations for the
special session will be open to participation by all States parties and observers, in accordance with the rules of
procedure of the Conference and established practice;
9. Reiterates its request to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide substantive expertise
and technical support;
10. Requests the Conference of the States Parties to produce, in due time, a concise and action-oriented
political declaration agreed upon in advance by consensus through intergovernmental negotiations under the auspices
of the Conference for adoption by the General Assembly at its special session;

_______________
In accordance with the established practice of the General Assembly, if there are speakers from other non-governmental organizations that
are not in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, this should be considered by Member States on a non-objection basis.
39
The list of proposed as well as final names will be brought to the attention of the General Assembly. Where a name is objected to, the
objecting Member State will, on a voluntary basis, make known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly the general basis of
its objections and the Office will share any information received with any Member State upon its request.
38

22

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Also requests the Conference of the States Parties to hold a special session for the purpose of approving
the political declaration for subsequent transmittal to the General Assembly for adoption at its special session against
corruption;
12. Further requests the Conference of the States Parties to report to the General Assembly at its special
session on the preparations that have been undertaken by the Conference for the session;
13. Reiterates the importance of an inclusive preparatory process, including extensive substantive
consultations, and invites the Conference of the States Parties to hold up to three intersessional meetings, as required,
to advance such consultations, encourages organs, entities and specialized agencies of the United Nations system,
relevant international and regional organizations, civil society, academia and other relevant stakeholders to fully
contribute to the preparatory process, in accordance with the relevant rules of procedure and established practice, and
requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to collect such contributions, including specific
recommendations on the issues to be addressed by the General Assembly at its special session, and make them
available to the Conference;
14. Requests the secretariat of the Conference of the States Parties to prepare a report on creating synergies
between the work and outcomes of the special session of the General Assembly and the forthcoming Conference of
the States Parties to be held in 2021 and to present this report to the proposed intersessional meetings to be discussed
and adopted by States parties;
15. Invites all Member States, observer States and observers to the General Assembly to consider being
represented at the special session at the highest possible level;
16. Invites the President of the General Assembly to convene a high-level supporting event on the margins of
the special session on challenges and measures to prevent and combat corruption and strengthen international
cooperation;
17. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, subject to the availability of extrabudgetary
resources, to organize a youth forum to discuss ways for young people to contribute to efforts to prevent and counter
corruption, and invites a youth forum representative, selected by the President of the General Assembly, to participate
in the special session, including through the delivery of a statement on the outcome of the discussions at the youth
forum, during the opening segment of the special session;
18. Reaffirms its decision in resolution 73/191 to conduct the special session and its preparatory process from
within existing resources.
RESOLUTION 74/297
Adopted on 11 August 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of
27 March 2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.77, sponsored by Guyana (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China)

74/297. Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 71/243 on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system, including its general guidelines,
Reaffirming also its resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018 on the repositioning of the United Nations development
system in the context of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the
United Nations system,

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming further its resolutions 73/248 of 20 December 2018 and 74/238 of 19 December 2019 on the
operational activities for development of the United Nations system,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2020/23 of 22 July 2020,
Recognizing the unprecedented effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including the severe
disruption to societies and economies, and recognizing further the central role of the United Nations system in
catalysing and coordinating the global response to control and contain the spread of COVID-19,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly resolution
71/243 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system;40
2. Also takes note of the report of the Chair of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group on the
work of the Development Coordination Office,41 including on the operational, administrative and financing aspects
of the activities of the Office;
3. Encourages a continued comprehensive, evidence-based and analytical approach to the reporting to the
operational activities for development segment of the Economic and Social Council, and also encourages the
continued use of data and examples from the work of resident coordinators on the ground in all future reporting on
the implementation of the reinvigorated resident coordinator system;
4. Welcomes the progress achieved by the United Nations development system and takes note of the
challenges on the repositioning of the United Nations development system, and looks forward to the full and timely
implementation of all reform mandates as contained in its resolutions 71/243, 72/279, 73/248 and 74/238;
5. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General in formulating the recommendations to harness the
regional assets of the United Nations development system and requests the Secretary-General to continue to conduct
and rely on, in the course of the implementation process, transparent and inclusive United Nations consultations with
all countries concerned at all levels, in particular the countries of the region, through further deliberations in the
Council with input from existing processes within regional economic commissions and other United Nations regional
assets, to ensure that the longer-term reprofiling and restructuring of the regional assets of the United Nations is
addressed on a region-by-region basis and in accordance with the region’s specific needs and priorities, and reaffirms
that the regional repositioning should be conducted with the support of the regional economic commissions,
specialized agencies, funds, programmes and regional offices of the Development Coordination Office while
preserving and reaffirming their respective roles and mandates, and looks forward to further deliberations in the
operational activities for development segment, and requests the Secretary-General to continue regular follow-up,
monitoring and reporting, including to the Council’s operational activities for development segment;
6. Further welcomes the recommendations of the Secretary-General on reinforcing support in multi-country
office settings,42 and takes note of the information contained in the multi-country office review update dated 25 March
2020 circulated to Member States,43 and calls upon the Secretary-General to proceed with the implementation of the
recommendations, while continuing transparent and inclusive consultations with all countries concerned throughout
and after the implementation phase, and to conduct regular monitoring, reporting and follow-up, including to the
Council at its annual operational activities for development segment, with a view to considering the adjustments
necessary to ensure the delivery of sustainable and effective development resources and services to enable countries
served by multi-country offices to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.44

_______________
A/75/79-E/2020/55 and A/75/79/Add.1-E/2020/55/Add.1.
E/2020/54.
42
See A/75/79-E/2020/55, sect. V.
43
Circulated in the context of the third plenary briefing convened by the Deputy Secretary-General on the remaining mandates of the
repositioning of the United Nations development system, held virtually on 27 March 2020.
44
Resolution 70/1.
40
41

24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/298
Adopted on 12 August 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of
27 March 2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.83, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

74/298. Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 67/290 on the high-level political
forum on sustainable development, resolution 70/299 on the follow-up and review of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level and resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013, entitled “Format and organizational aspects of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development”, and 70/299 of 29 July 2016, entitled “Follow-up and review of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level”,
Recalling also its resolution 72/305 of 23 July 2018, entitled “Review of the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 68/1 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council” and all previous related
resolutions on the strengthening of the Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, and reaffirming also the unwavering commitment to achieving the Agenda and utilizing
it to the full to transform our world for the better by 2030,
Reaffirming also its resolution 74/4 of 15 October 2019, entitled “Political declaration of the high-level political
forum on sustainable development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly”, and the pledge to launch
a decade of action and delivery for sustainable development,
Recognizing the threats to sustainable development, including to health, safety and well-being, and to the world
economy caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and its unprecedented effects, which require a
coordinated response and global solidarity,
Recognizing also that the poorest and people living in vulnerable situations are the most affected and that the
impact of the pandemic will have repercussions on sustainable development in all countries, especially in developing
countries, by hampering progress in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Stressing that the current crisis is a reminder that the implementation of the 2030 Agenda is crucial to help to
better equip the world for future systemic shocks, and that the Sustainable Development Goals are a shared blueprint
for building back better through a people-centred, inclusive, sustainable and resilient recovery that promotes the
economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development, while leaving no one behind,
1. Recognizes the role that the Charter of the United Nations and the General Assembly have vested in the
Economic and Social Council as a principal organ for coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and
recommendations on issues of economic and social development, as well as for the implementation of the
international development goals agreed at the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields, and the central role and effective and participatory character of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development convened under the auspices of the Assembly and the Council in
overseeing the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development45 at the global level, working
coherently with the Assembly, the Council and other relevant organs and forums, in accordance with existing
mandates;
2. Decides to conduct, in conjunction, the reviews of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the review of
the implementation of General Assembly resolution 68/1 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council,
resolution 67/290 on the format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development and resolution 70/299 on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at
the global level, taking into account the provisions of the present resolution, during its seventy-fifth session;
_______________
45

Resolution 70/1.

25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Also decides that the thematic focus of the Economic and Social Council for its 2021 session and the 2021
high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under the auspices of the Council shall be
“Sustainable and resilient recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic that promotes the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development: building an inclusive and effective path for the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda in the context of the decade of action and delivery for sustainable development”;
4. Further decides that the high-level political forum for 2021, without prejudice to the integrated, indivisible
and interlinked nature of the Sustainable Development Goals, shall discuss Goals 1, 2, 3, 8, 10, 12, 13, 16 and 17
in depth;
5. Decides that the review shall take into account the different and particular impact of the COVID-19
pandemic across all Sustainable Development Goals, consider progress in implementing the 2030 Agenda in its
entirety and address the interlinkages between Goals, to promote integrated actions cutting across the three dimensions
of sustainable development that can create co-benefits, address synergies and trade-offs and meet multiple objectives
in a coherent manner, leaving no one behind;
6. Also decides that the review shall cover the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals with a 2020
timeline;
7. Further decides to define the theme of the Economic and Social Council and that of the high-level political
forum convened under the auspices of the Council as well as the remaining Sustainable Development Goals to be
reviewed in depth for the two outstanding years of the four-year cycle of the forum as soon as possible during its
seventy-fifth session, in a manner that ensures coherence over the 2020–2023 cycle and reflects the holistic nature of
the 2030 Agenda;
8. Decides to agree at its seventy-seventh session on the thematic review of progress for the next cycle of the
forum, including the yearly sequence of themes and the set of Goals to be reviewed at each session.
RESOLUTION 74/299
Adopted on 31 August 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of
27 March 2020, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.86 and A/74/L.86/Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Burundi, Central African Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Oman, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uruguay, Viet Nam

74/299. Improving global road safety
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/309 of 22 May 2003, 58/9 of 5 November 2003, 58/289 of 14 April 2004, 60/5 of
26 October 2005, 62/244 of 31 March 2008, 64/255 of 2 March 2010, 66/260 of 19 April 2012, 68/269 of 10 April
2014, 70/260 of 15 April 2016 and 72/271 of 12 April 2018, on improving global road safety,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report on improving global road safety46
and the recommendations contained therein,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030 ensuring that no one is left behind, its recognition that eradicating poverty in
all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable
requirement for sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three
_______________
46

26

A/74/304 and A/74/304/Corr.1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

dimensions – economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the
achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible and balance the
three dimensions of sustainable development, and acknowledging the importance of reaching the road safety-related
targets of the 2030 Agenda,
Recalling also the New Urban Agenda adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III),47 which, taking into account that the majority of road traffic deaths and serious
injuries take place in urban areas, gives appropriate consideration to road safety and access to safe, affordable,
accessible and sustainable public transport and non-motorized modes of transport,
Noting that the overwhelming majority of road traffic deaths and serious injuries are preventable and that,
despite some improvements in many countries, including in developing countries, they remain a major public health
and development problem that has broad social and economic consequences which, if unaddressed, may affect
progress towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recognizing that human suffering, combined with costs to some countries of up to 5 per cent of their gross
domestic product a year, makes reducing road traffic deaths and injuries both an economic and a social priority,
especially for some countries, and that investment in road safety has a positive impact on public health and the
economy,
Taking into account that road traffic deaths and injuries are also a social equity issue, as the poor and the
vulnerable are most frequently also vulnerable road users, namely, pedestrians, cyclists, users of motorized two- and
three-wheeled vehicles and passengers of unsafe public transport, who are disproportionately affected and exposed to
risks and road traffic crashes, which can lead to a cycle of poverty exacerbated by income loss, and recalling that the
aim of road safety policies should be to guarantee protection to all users,
Recognizing that road safety requires addressing broader issues of equitable access to mobility and that the
promotion of sustainable modes of transport, in particular safe public transport and safe walking and cycling, is a key
element of road safety,
Taking into account the importance of strengthening institutional capacity and continuing international
cooperation, including South-South and triangular cooperation, cooperation between countries that share roads across
borders and cooperation among regional and international organizations, to further support efforts to improve road
safety worldwide, particularly in developing countries, and providing, as appropriate, support to meet the goals of the
Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020 and those of the 2030 Agenda,
Emphasizing that, while each country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development
and the role of national policies, priorities and development strategies cannot be overemphasized in the context of
reaching the Sustainable Development Goals, international public finance plays an important role in complementing
the efforts of countries to mobilize public resources domestically, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable
countries with limited domestic resources,
Expressing its concern that the number of road traffic crashes remains unacceptably high, and that crashes
represent a leading cause of death and injury around the world, killing more than 1.35 million people and injuring as
many as 50 million people a year, with 90 per cent of those casualties occurring in developing countries, and concerned
also that road traffic crashes are the leading cause of death around the world for children and young people between
15 and 29 years of age,
Expressing its concern also that target 3.6 of Sustainable Development Goal 3 will not be met by 2020, and
noting that significant progress can be achieved through stronger national leadership, global cooperation,
implementation of evidence-based strategies and engagement with all relevant actors, including the private sector, as
well as additional innovative approaches,
_______________
47

Resolution 71/256, annex.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Expressing its concern further that the adoption and implementation of road safety measures remain inadequate
in many countries,
Acknowledging the leading role of Oman and the Russian Federation in drawing the attention of the international
community to the global road safety crisis,
Commending Member States that have taken a leadership role by adopting comprehensive legislation on key
risk factors, including the non-use of seat belts, child restraints and helmets, the drinking of alcohol and driving, and
speeding, and drawing attention to other risk factors, such as low visibility, medical conditions and medicines that
affect safe driving, fatigue and the use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic and psychoactive substances, mobile phones
and other electronic and texting devices,
Encouraging Member States to promote multi-stakeholder partnerships to address the safety of vulnerable road
users, the delivery of first aid to victims of road traffic accidents or crashes, training and education, notably in
developing and least developed countries,
Recognizing the progress made by some Member States in providing road traffic crash victims and their families
with universal access to health care in the pre‑hospital, hospital, post-hospital and rehabilitation and reintegration
phases,
Acknowledging the work of the United Nations system, in particular the leadership of the World Health
Organization, in close cooperation with the United Nations regional commissions, in establishing, implementing and
monitoring various aspects of the Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020, and the
commitment of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the United Nations Environment
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the International Labour Organization, among other entities, to
supporting those efforts as well as that of the World Bank and regional development banks to implementing road
safety projects and programmes, in particular in developing countries,
Acknowledging also the lessons learned from the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020, such as the
need to promote an integrated approach to road safety such as a safe system approach and Vision Zero, pursue longterm and sustainable safety solutions, and strengthen national intersectoral collaboration, including engagement with
non-governmental organizations and civil society and academia, as well as businesses and industry, which contribute
to and influence the social and economic development of countries,
Commending the World Health Organization for its leadership role in preventing road traffic injury and for its
role in implementing the mandate conferred upon it by the General Assembly to act, in close cooperation with the
United Nations regional commissions, as a coordinator on road safety issues within the United Nations system,48
Commending the United Nations regional commissions for their work in increasing road safety activities and
advocating increased political commitment to road safety, and in working towards setting regional and national road
traffic casualty reduction targets, in particular the work of the Economic Commission for Europe in elaborating global
road safety-related legal instruments, including international conventions and agreements, technical standards,
resolutions and good practice recommendations, as well as in servicing 59 global and regional legal instruments that
provide a commonly accepted legal and technical framework for the development of international road, rail, inland
water and combined transport,
Emphasizing the role of the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration as a consultative mechanism to facilitate
international road safety cooperation,
Commending the work of two Economic Commission for Europe groups of experts, namely, on road signs and
signals and on improving safety at level crossings, and recognizing the continuous work of the Global Forum for
Road Traffic Safety and the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations to improve vehicle and road
safety,
Noting that continuous progress of automotive and digital technologies could improve road safety, including
through the progressive development of highly and fully automated vehicles in road traffic, and in this regard noting
_______________
48

28

See resolution 58/289.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

with appreciation the adoption under the auspices of the Economic Commission for Europe of a Global Forum for
Road Traffic Safety resolution on the deployment of highly and fully automated vehicles in road traffic,
Noting with approval the road safety performance review projects of the Economic Commission for Europe,
carried out in collaboration with the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean under the United Nations Development Account and with the
Economic Commission for Africa with support from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Road Safety, as
well as the work of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on prioritizing road safety to strengthen
the national road safety management capacity of selected countries, and commending the development and
implementation of road traffic safety management systems for different types of organizations, such as the extensive
work of the International Organization for Standardization in developing the requirements for road traffic safety
management systems,49
Acknowledging a number of other important international efforts on road safety, including the development by
the International Road Transport Union of harmonized and internationally recognized standards for the vocational
training of road transport professionals, as well as the development of an updated Road Safety Manual by the World
Road Association to offer guidance to officials at various levels on measures that can enhance the safety of road
infrastructure,
Welcoming the efforts of the Special Envoy for Road Safety, with secretariat support from the Economic
Commission for Europe, in effectively mobilizing sustained high-level commitment to road safety by advocating
adherence to and raising awareness of the United Nations legal instruments on road safety, sharing good practices,
including through participation in global and regional conferences, and advocating for increased funds for global road
safety,
Welcoming also the establishment of the United Nations Road Safety Fund to support progress towards
achieving all road safety-related Sustainable Development Goals and relevant global targets, and noting with
appreciation the efforts of the United Nations organizations, in particular the Economic Commission for Europe, and
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, in making the Fund operational,
Recognizing the commitment of Member States and civil society to road safety, as demonstrated by their
participation in United Nations Global Road Safety Week, including during the fifth Week, held from 6 to 12 May 2019,
Recognizing also Member States and all stakeholders, including civil society, for their continued commitment
to road safety, as demonstrated by their observance of the World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims on
the third Sunday of November every year,
Acknowledging the efforts of Member States in contributing to international road safety by conducting research
and collecting evidence that will inform policies, as well as by encouraging the sharing of best practices that enhance
vehicle and infrastructure safety as well as human behaviour in road traffic,
Recognizing that providing basic conditions and services to address road safety is primarily a responsibility of
Governments, especially in view of the decisive role that legislative bodies can play in the adoption of comprehensive
and effective road safety policies and laws and their implementation, while recognizing nonetheless that there is a
shared responsibility to move towards a world free from road traffic fatalities and serious injuries and that addressing
road safety demands multi‑stakeholder collaboration among the public and private sectors, academia, professional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and the media,
Recalling the need, in view of the approaching end, in 2020, of the Decade of Action for Road Safety, the target
date of 2020 for the achievement of target 3.6 of Sustainable Development Goal 3 and the relevant road safety target
dates set out in the 2030 Agenda, to define a new time frame for a reduction in road traffic deaths and injuries,
Commending the leadership of the Government of the Russian Federation, the Government of Brazil and the
Government of Sweden in hosting global ministerial and high-level conferences on road safety resulting, respectively,
in the Moscow Declaration of 2009,50 the Brasilia Declaration of 2015 and the Stockholm Declaration of 2020,
_______________
49
50

See International Organization for Standardization, ISO 39001:2012.
A/64/540, annex.

29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the various international events that have recently been held with a view to promoting partnerships and
sharing know-how and best practices for improving road safety, including the International Road Safety Conference,
held in London on 3 and 4 September 2019,
1. Reiterates its invitation to Member States and the international community to intensify national, regional
and international collaboration, with a view to meeting the ambitious road safety-related targets in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development;51
2. Endorses the Stockholm Declaration, approved at the third Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety,
held in Stockholm on 19 and 20 February 2020;
3. Proclaims the period 2021–2030 as the Second Decade of Action for Road Safety, with a goal of reducing
road traffic deaths and injuries by at least 50 per cent from 2021 to 2030, and in this regard calls upon Member States
to continue action through 2030 on all the road safety-related targets of the Sustainable Development Goals, including
target 3.6, in line with the pledge of the 2019 high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under
the auspices of the General Assembly, especially taking into account the remaining decade of action to deliver the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 in their entirety;
4. Requests the World Health Organization and the United Nations regional commissions, in cooperation
with other partners in the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration and other stakeholders, to prepare a plan of action
of the Second Decade as a guiding document to support the implementation of its objectives;
5. Encourages Member States to ensure political commitment and responsibility at the highest possible level
for improving road safety, and to develop and/or implement road safety strategies and plans with the involvement of
all relevant stakeholders, including all sectors and levels of government, as appropriate;
6. Invites Member States that have not already done so to consider adopting comprehensive legislation on
key risk factors, including the non-use of seat belts, child restraints and helmets, the drinking of alcohol and driving,
and speeding, and to consider implementing appropriate, effective and evidence- and/or science-based legislation on
other risk factors related to distracted or impaired driving;
7. Reaffirms the role and importance of the United Nations legal instruments on road safety, such as the 1949
Convention on Road Traffic,52 the 1968 Convention on Road Traffic,53 the 1968 Convention on Road Signs and
Signals,54 the 1958 and 1998 agreements on technical vehicle regulations, the 1997 agreement on periodic technical
inspection of vehicles and the 1957 agreement on the transport of dangerous goods, in facilitating road safety at the
global, regional and national levels, and commends Member States that have acceded to these international legal
instruments on road safety;
8. Encourages Member States that have not yet done so to consider becoming contracting parties to the
United Nations legal instruments on road safety and, beyond accession, applying, implementing and promoting their
provisions or safety regulations;
9. Encourages Member States to make efforts to ensure the safety and protection of all road users through
safer road infrastructure by taking into account the needs of motorized and non-motorized transport, and other
vulnerable road users, especially on the highest-risk roads with high rates of crashes, through a combination of proper
planning and safety assessment, including through identification of crash-prone areas, design, building and
maintenance of roads, signal systems and other infrastructure, taking into consideration the geography of the country;
10. Invites Member States that have not already done so to consider adopting policies and measures to
implement United Nations vehicle safety regulations or equivalent national standards to ensure that all new motor
vehicles meet applicable minimum regulations for the protection of occupants and other road users, with seat belts,
airbags and active safety systems fitted as standard equipment;
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 125, No. 1671.
53
Ibid., vol. 1042, No. 15705.
54
Ibid., vol. 1091, No. 16743.
51
52

30

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Invites Member States that have not yet done so to address road safety holistically, starting with the
implementation or continuation of a road safety management system, including, as appropriate, interdepartmental
cooperation and the development of national road safety plans;
12. Encourages Member States to consider including road safety as an integral element of planning of land
use, street design, transport systems and governance, keeping in view the needs of vulnerable road users in urban and
rural areas, inter alia, through the promotion of a safe system approach, as appropriate;
13. Also encourages Member States to take measures to promote road safety knowledge and awareness
among the population through education, training and publicity campaigns, especially among youth, and to propagate
good road safety practices in the community;
14. Further encourages Member States to strengthen institutional capacity through adequate training and
capacity-building with regard to road safety laws and law enforcement, vehicle safety, infrastructure improvements,
public transport and post-crash care, and to collect, analyse and disseminate disaggregated data for effective and
evidence-based policymaking and their implementation;
15. Invites Member States to consider establishing mechanisms for the periodic assessment of vehicles in
order to ensure that all new and in-use vehicles comply with basic vehicle safety regulations;
16. Encourages Member States to provide consumer information on vehicle safety through new car
assessment programmes that are independent from vehicle manufacturers, and also encourages Member States to
share such consumer information with, inter alia, the World Health Organization and other countries, in particular
developing and least developed countries;
17. Also encourages Member States to promote environmentally sound, safe, accessible and affordable modes
of quality transport, particularly public and non‑motorized transport, as well as safe intermodal integration, as a means
of improving road safety, social equity, public health and urban planning, including the resilience of cities and urbanrural linkages, and in this regard to take into account road safety and mobility as part of the effort to achieve sustainable
development;
18. Invites Member States to encourage and incentivize the development, application and deployment of
existing and future technologies and other innovations to improve accessibility and all aspects of road safety, from
crash prevention to emergency response and trauma care, with special attention given to the safety needs of those road
users who are the most vulnerable, including pedestrians, cyclists, motorcyclists and users of public transport;
19. Calls upon businesses and industries of all sizes and sectors to contribute to the attainment of the road
safety-related Sustainable Development Goals, including by applying safe system principles to their entire value
chain, as appropriate and in line with national laws;
20. Encourages Member States to adopt, implement and enforce policies and measures to actively protect and
promote pedestrian safety and cycling mobility, with a view to also improving road safety and broader health
outcomes, particularly the prevention of injuries and non-communicable diseases;
21. Invites Member States to develop and implement appropriate social marketing campaigns to raise
awareness and commemorate the World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims on the third Sunday of
November every year;
22. Encourages Member States to strengthen pre-hospital care, including emergency health services and the
immediate post-crash response, hospital and ambulatory guidelines for trauma care and rehabilitation services, and
requests the World Health Organization to support Member States in these endeavours;
23. Invites Member States to share best practices and standards bilaterally, regionally and internationally, as
appropriate, including through the World Health Organization, upon the request of Member States, on the causes of
road traffic accidents and crashes and their prevention, which could be instrumental in addressing information gaps
and shortcomings;
24. Urges Member States to implement road safety policies for the protection of the most vulnerable among
road users, in particular children, youth, older persons and persons with disabilities, taking into account the respective
obligations of Member States under relevant United Nations legal instruments, as applicable;

31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25. Encourages Member States and private sector entities that have not yet done so to establish an effective
mechanism to reduce the number of crashes, road traffic fatalities and injuries caused by professional drivers,
including drivers of commercial vehicles, owing to job-specific hazards, including fatigue;
26. Invites Member States to fully integrate a gender perspective into all policymaking and policy
implementation related to mobility and road safety, especially regarding roads and surrounding areas and public
transport;
27. Encourages Member States to develop and implement comprehensive legislation and policies on
motorcycles, including on training, driver licensing, vehicle registration, working conditions and the use by
motorcyclists of helmets and personal protection equipment, within the existing international standards, given the
disproportionally high and increasing numbers of motorcycle deaths and injuries globally, particularly in developing
countries;
28. Invites Member States to develop public policies to decrease work-related road traffic crashes, with the
participation of employers and workers, in order to enforce international standards on safety and health at work, road
safety and adequate road and vehicle conditions, giving particular attention to the issue of professional drivers,
including the working conditions of commercial vehicle drivers;
29. Also invites Member States to provide early rehabilitation and social reintegration, including in the world
of work, to persons with injuries and disabilities caused by road traffic crashes and comprehensive support to victims
of road traffic crashes and their families;
30. Further invites Member States to continue to implement professional driver qualification frameworks,
established on the basis of internationally recognized standards, including training, certification and licensing,
restricted hours of driving and working conditions that focus on addressing the main causes of accidents or crashes
involving heavy commercial vehicles, recognizing that distraction is a significant cause of accidents or crashes;
31. Invites Member States to support, as appropriate, the activities of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Road Safety, and invites the Secretary-General to consider extending the function of the Special Envoy
for Road Safety for the Second Decade of Action for Road Safety;
32. Welcomes the measures taken by the Secretary-General, the organizations of the United Nations system
and the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat to enhance road safety through the implementation of
the United Nations system road safety strategy so as to reduce road traffic crashes and casualties resulting from such
incidents among United Nations personnel and the civilian population in host countries;
33. Requests the World Health Organization and the United Nations regional commissions, as well as other
relevant United Nations agencies, to continue the activities aimed at supporting the implementation of the road safetyrelated targets in the 2030 Agenda, while ensuring system-wide coherence;
34. Reiterates its invitation to Governments to take a leading role in implementing activities in support of the
voluntary global performance targets for road safety risk factors and service delivery mechanisms, as well as road
safety-related targets in the 2030 Agenda, while fostering multisectoral and multi‑stakeholder collaboration that
includes the efforts of academia, the private sector, professional associations and civil society, including national Red
Cross and Red Crescent societies, and encouraging further partnership activities and initiatives, such as the Global
Network for Road Safety Legislators, supported by the World Health Organization, and the Global Road Safety
Partnership, hosted by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, and those of other
non-governmental organizations, as well as victims’ organizations, youth organizations and the media;
35. Requests the United Nations system, including the regional commissions, the World Health Organization
and other relevant United Nations agencies, to support Member States, upon their request, in applying voluntary
global performance targets for road safety when appropriate;
36. Requests the World Health Organization to continue to monitor, through its global status reports on road
safety, progress towards the achievement of the goals of the Decade of Action, and to leverage as appropriate existing
efforts, including those of regional road safety observatories, to harmonize and make road safety data available and
comparable;
32

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

37. Invites all relevant stakeholders, international organizations, development banks and funding agencies,
foundations, professional associations and private sector companies to scale up funding to support the implementation
of measures required to meet the voluntary global performance targets;
38. Invites Member States to further invest in road safety at all levels, including by allocating appropriate
dedicated budgets for institutional and infrastructural improvements for road safety, as well as by supporting the
United Nations Road Safety Fund and other mechanisms, such as the World Bank Global Road Safety Facility, as
appropriate;
39. Decides to convene a high-level meeting of the General Assembly, no later than the end of 2022, on
improving global road safety with a view to addressing gaps and challenges as well as mobilizing political leadership
and promoting multisectoral and multi-stakeholder collaboration in this regard, and further decides to define the scope
and modalities of such a meeting no later than the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly;
40. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session the item entitled “Improving
global road safety”, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at that session on the
progress made in the attainment of the objectives of the Second Decade of Action.
RESOLUTION 74/300
Adopted at the 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, by a recorded vote of 84 to 13, with 78 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.89 and A/74/L.89/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Tonga,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bulgaria, Canada, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against: Belarus, Burundi, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Philippines, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Zambia

74/300. Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions on the protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons, including
its resolutions 62/153 of 18 December 2007, 62/249 of 15 May 2008, 63/307 of 9 September 2009, 64/162 of
18 December 2009, 64/296 of 7 September 2010, 65/287 of 29 June 2011, 66/165 of 19 December 2011, 66/283 of
3 July 2012, 67/268 of 13 June 2013, 68/180 of 18 December 2013, 68/274 of 5 June 2014, 69/286 of 3 June 2015,
70/165 of 17 December 2015, 70/265 of 7 June 2016, 71/290 of 1 June 2017, 72/182 of 19 December 2017, 72/280
of 12 June 2018, 73/298 of 4 June 2019 and 74/160 of 18 December 2019,

33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions on Georgia relating to the need for all parties to work
towards a comprehensive peace and the return of internally displaced persons and refugees to their places of origin,
and stressing the importance of their full and timely implementation,
Recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement55 as the key international framework for the
protection of internally displaced persons,
Concerned by forced demographic changes resulting from the conflicts in Georgia,
Concerned also by the humanitarian situation caused by armed conflict in August 2008, which resulted in the
further forced displacement of civilians,
Mindful of the urgent need to find a solution to the problems related to forced displacement in Georgia,
Underlining the importance of the discussions that commenced in Geneva on 15 October 2008 and of
continuing to address the issue of the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of internally displaced persons
and refugees on the basis of internationally recognized principles and conflict-settlement practices,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of resolution 73/298,56
1. Recognizes the right of return of all internally displaced persons and refugees and their descendants,
regardless of ethnicity, to their homes throughout Georgia, including in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia;
2. Stresses the need to respect the property rights of all internally displaced persons and refugees affected by
the conflicts in Georgia and to refrain from obtaining property in violation of those rights;
3.

Reaffirms the unacceptability of forced demographic changes;

4. Underlines the urgent need for unimpeded access for humanitarian activities to all internally displaced
persons, refugees and other persons residing in all conflict-affected areas throughout Georgia;
5. Calls upon all participants in the Geneva discussions to intensify their efforts to establish a durable peace,
to commit to enhanced confidence-building measures and to take immediate steps to ensure respect for human rights
and create favourable security conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of all
internally displaced persons and refugees to their places of origin;
6. Underlines the need for the development of a timetable to ensure the voluntary, safe, dignified and
unhindered return of all internally displaced persons and refugees affected by the conflicts in Georgia to their homes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Protracted
conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development”.
RESOLUTION 74/301
Adopted at the 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, by a recorded vote of 132 to 31, with 16 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/74/L.68/Rev.1 and A/74/L.68/Rev.1/Add.1, sponsored by Guyana (on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Turkey
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-

_______________
55
56

34

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
A/74/878.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyprus, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine

74/301. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations Declaration on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development,
Recalling also its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 on the final review and appraisal of the United Nations
New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s and support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and all its subsequent resolutions, including resolution 73/335 of 10 September 2019, entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support”,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015, entitled “Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development (Addis Ababa Action Agenda)”, which is an integral part of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of
implementation targets with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address
the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit
of global partnership and solidarity,
Welcoming the adoption by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union of the
declaration proclaiming “Silencing the guns: creating conducive conditions for Africa’s development” as the theme
for 2020,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development underscores the special challenges facing the most
vulnerable countries, including African countries, and recalling also that significant challenges remain in achieving
sustainable development in Africa and the importance of fulfilling all commitments to advance action in areas critical
to Africa’s sustainable development,
Recognizing the adoption of Agenda 2063 by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union at its twenty-fourth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January 2015, as the African Union
long-term strategy emphasizing industrialization, youth employment, improved natural resource governance and the
reduction of inequalities, and recognizing also the adoption by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the African Union of the first 10-year implementation plan (2014–2023) of Agenda 2063, which outlines key African
flagship projects, fast-track programmes, priority areas, specific targets and African strategies and policy measures at
all levels to support its implementation,

35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with appreciation the signing by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on 27 January 2018 of the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda
2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to promote the integrated and coordinated implementation,
monitoring and reporting of both Agendas through joint activities and programmes,
Recalling the adoption of its resolution 74/206 of 19 December 2019 on the promotion of international
cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and strengthen good practices on assets return to foster sustainable
development,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement57 and encouraging all its parties to fully implement the Agreement, and parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change58 that have not yet done so to deposit their
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement and other relevant major intergovernmental outcomes of United
Nations conferences and summits in economic, social and environmental fields,
Underlining the need to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for achieving sustainable development and to
build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels, and reaffirming that good governance, the rule of
law, human rights, fundamental freedoms, equal access to fair justice systems and measures to combat corruption and
curb illicit financial flows will be integral to our efforts,
Recalling the adoption of its resolution 71/254 of 23 December 2016 on the Framework for a Renewed United
Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 2017–2027,
Recalling also the adoption by the Economic and Social Council of resolution 2020/6 of 18 June 2020 on the
social dimensions of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Recalling further its resolution 70/259 of 1 April 2016, by which it proclaimed 2016–2025 the United Nations
Decade of Action on Nutrition, and recalling also its resolution 72/306 of 24 July 2018, entitled “Implementation of
the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025)”,
Recalling its resolution 66/293 of 17 September 2012, by which it established a United Nations monitoring
mechanism to review commitments made towards Africa’s development, and looking forward to the fourth biennial
report of the Secretary-General on the review of the implementation of the commitments made towards Africa’s
development, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session,
Welcoming the ongoing support of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development,59 the African (Accelerated) Agribusiness and Agro-industries Development
Initiative, the Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Plan for Africa and other programmes of the African Union aimed at
further strengthening the industrialization process in Africa,
Welcoming also the high-level events organized by the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa during the 2020
Africa Dialogue Series, on the theme “COVID-19 and silencing the guns in Africa: challenges and opportunities”,
Bearing in mind that African countries have primary responsibility for their own economic and social
development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized, bearing in
mind also the need for their development efforts to be supported by the international community and an enabling
international economic environment, reiterating the need for the international community to implement all
commitments regarding the economic and social development of Africa, and in this regard recalling the support given
by the International Conference on Financing for Development to the New Partnership,60

_______________
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
59
A/57/304, annex.
60
See Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
57
58

36

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming the convening of the intergovernmental conference held on 10 and 11 December 2018 in
Marrakech, Morocco, and recalling that it adopted the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, also
known as the Marrakech Compact on Migration,61
Reaffirming also the outcome of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation, held in Buenos Aires from 20 to 22 March 2019,62
Noting the various international events that have been held and are planned to be held between African
countries and their partners, including the seventh Tokyo International Conference on African Development, held in
Yokohama, Japan, from 28 to 30 August 2019, the first ever Russia-Africa Summit and Economic Forum, held in
Sochi, Russian Federation, on 23 and 24 October 2019, the United Kingdom-Africa Investment Summit, held
in London on 20 January 2020, and the Extraordinary China-Africa Summit on Solidarity against COVID-19, held
on 17 June 2020, and looking forward to the convening of the sixth European Union-African Union Summit, to be
held in October 2020,
Taking note with appreciation of decision Ext/Assembly/AU/Dec.1(XI) of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union adopted at its eleventh extraordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 17 and
18 November 2018, on the evolutionary trajectory of the New Partnership and the rationale behind the establishment
of the African Union Development Agency as a vehicle for the better execution of the African Union Agenda 2063
and the decision that the New Partnership Planning and Coordinating Agency shall henceforth be renamed the African
Union Development Agency-New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
1. Takes note of the seventeenth consolidated progress report of the Secretary-General on implementation
and international support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;63
2. Recognizes the efforts of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,59 and welcomes in this regard
the efforts by development partners to strengthen cooperation with the New Partnership and recognizes the progress
made, while acknowledging that much needs to be done in its implementation;
3. Also recognizes the importance of supporting Agenda 2063 and its first 10‑year implementation plan
(2014–2023) and acknowledges the programme of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, both of which are
integral to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,64 and underscores in this regard the importance of a
coherent and coordinated implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda;
4. Emphasizes that economic development, including inclusive industrial development, and policies which
seek to enhance productive capacities in Africa can generate employment and income for the poor and, therefore, be
an engine for poverty eradication and for achieving internationally agreed development goals, including the
Sustainable Development Goals and recognizes in this regard the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution
70/293 of 25 July 2016 on the Third Industrial Development Decade for Africa (2016–2025);
5. Recognizes its commitment to the full implementation of the political declaration on Africa’s development
needs, adopted at the high-level meeting on Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008;65
6. Welcomes the progress made by African countries in fulfilling their commitments in the implementation
of the New Partnership to deepen democracy, human rights, good governance and sound economic management, and
encourages African countries, with the participation of stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, to
continue their efforts towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, developing and strengthening
institutions for governance, creating an environment conducive to involving the private sector, including small and
medium-sized enterprises, in the New Partnership implementation process, developing innovative public-private
partnerships for financing infrastructure projects and attracting foreign direct investment for development;

_______________
Resolution 73/195, annex.
Resolution 73/291, annex.
63
A/74/193.
64
Resolution 70/1.
65
Resolution 63/1.
61
62

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

7. Encourages African countries to strengthen and expand local and regional infrastructure and to continue
to share best practices with a view to strengthening regional and continental integration, and in this regard notes with
appreciation the work of the high-level subcommittee of the African Union on the Presidential Infrastructure
Champion Initiative;
8. Also encourages African countries to maintain the trend of increasing both foreign and domestic
investment in infrastructure development, including through strengthened domestic resource mobilization from the
public and private sectors, and improving the efficiency of existing infrastructure investment;
9. Recalls the third Global Infrastructure Forum, held in Bali, Indonesia, on 13 October 2018, and in this
regard recalls, as outlined in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development,66 that a greater range of voices should be heard, particularly from developing countries, to identify and
address infrastructure and capacity gaps, in particular in African countries, and that it highlights opportunities for
investment and cooperation and works to ensure that investments are environmentally, socially and economically
sustainable;
10. Recognizes the need for Africa’s development partners to align their efforts in infrastructure investment
towards supporting the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa, recalls the Dakar Agenda for Action to
mobilize investment towards infrastructure development projects, and calls upon development partners to support the
implementation of the Dakar Agenda;
11. Encourages African countries to accelerate the achievement of the objective of food security and nutrition
in Africa, welcomes the commitment made by African leaders to allocate at least 10 per cent of public expenditure to
agriculture and to ensure its efficiency and effectiveness, in this regard recognizes its support for the commitments
contained in the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for Shared Prosperity
and Improved Livelihoods and for the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, and in this
regard notes the important progress made by the 44 African countries and the 4 regional economic communities that
have signed compacts under the Programme;
12. Urges continued support of measures to address the challenges of poverty eradication, hunger and
malnutrition, job creation and sustainable development in Africa, including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved
market access, support for the private sector and entrepreneurship, fulfilment of commitments on official development
assistance and increased flows of foreign direct investment, and transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms;
13. Recognizes the need for Africa’s development partners to align their efforts to implement the
commitments contained in the Declaration on Nutrition Security for Inclusive Economic Growth and Sustainable
Development in Africa, towards supporting the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and the
implementation of the national and regional investment plans of the Programme for alignment of external funding,
and recalls the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security;67
14. Calls for effective measures and targeted investments to strengthen national health systems and to ensure
access to safe drinking water and sanitation to prevent, protect against and combat outbreaks of diseases, including
the Ebola virus disease and coronavirus disease (COVID-19); invites development partners to continue to assist
African countries in their efforts to strengthen national health systems, to expand surveillance systems in the health
sector, in compliance with the International Health Regulations (2005),68 and to eliminate diseases, and in this context
calls upon development partners to support the implementation of the African Health Strategy 2016–2030 and the
transition towards universal health coverage in Africa;
15. Notes the unprecedented threat that COVID-19 presents to the continent’s hard-won development and
economic gains; welcomes efforts of African leaders in mitigating the impact of the pandemic on their countries and
citizens; expresses its highest appreciation to all partners and international organizations, including the United Nations,
the World Health Organization, the international financial institutions, the Paris Club and the Group of 20, that have
supported the continent in mitigating the effects of COVID-19; notes that there is a need for additional support to
_______________
Resolution 69/313, annex.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
68
World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.
66
67

38

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

reduce the effects of the pandemic on the continent’s achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063; and in this regard calls upon the United Nations development system, under the leadership of the
Secretary-General, and relevant international organizations and development partners to mobilize a coordinated
global response to the pandemic and its adverse social, economic and financial impact on all African societies;
16. Recalls the adoption of the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
fight against tuberculosis, as reflected in its resolution 73/3 of 10 October 2018, and the political declaration of the
third high-level meeting of the Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, as reflected
in its resolution 73/2 of 10 October 2018, and calls upon developed countries and other development partners to
continue their support, including financial and technical support, to African countries to scale up their national efforts
to fully implement, as appropriate, the actions committed to by the Heads of State and Government and their
representatives;
17. Encourages African countries to continue their efforts in investing in education, including mathematics,
vocational training, including engineering, science, technology and innovation to enhance value addition and
sustainable industrial development;
18. Recognizes the important role that African regional economic communities can play in the implementation
of the mandate of the New Partnership and of Agenda 2063 and its first 10-year implementation plan in close
cooperation with the African Union, and in this regard encourages African countries and the international community
to give regional economic communities the support necessary to strengthen their capacity;
19. Reiterates the need to support developing countries in strengthening the capacity of national statistical
offices and data systems to ensure access to high-quality, timely, reliable and disaggregated data;
20. Requests the United Nations system to continue to provide assistance to the New Partnership and to
African countries in developing projects and programmes within the scope of the priorities of the New Partnership,
reaffirms the essential role played by the New Partnership Heads of State and Government Orientation Committee,
and further requests that emphasis be placed on monitoring and evaluation in support of the New Partnership;
21. Expresses concern about the increasing challenges posed by the adverse impacts of climate change,
drought, land degradation, desertification, the loss of biodiversity and floods, and their negative consequences for the
fight against poverty, famine and hunger, which could pose serious additional challenges to the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in Africa;
22. Expresses deep concern about the continuing negative effects of desertification, land degradation and
drought on the African continent and underlines the need for short-, medium- and long-term measures, and in this
regard calls for the continued effective implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,69 including its
2018–2030 Strategic Framework;70
23. Recognizes that Africa is one of the regions that contribute the least to climate change, yet is extremely
vulnerable and exposed to the adverse impacts of climate change, and in this regard calls upon the international
community, including developed countries, to continue to support Africa to address its adaptation needs through, inter
alia, the development, transfer and deployment of technology on mutually agreed terms, capacity-building and the
provision of adequate and predictable resources, in line with existing commitments, and highlights the need for full
implementation of the agreed outcomes of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,58
including the Paris Agreement;57
24. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,71 the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,72 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,73 the United
_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
ICCD/COP(13)/21/Add.1, decision 7/COP.13, annex.
71
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
72
Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.
73
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
69
70

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,74 the United
Nations Convention against Corruption75 and the international conventions and protocols related to terrorism, and
urges States parties to those conventions and protocols to make efforts towards their effective implementation;
25. Underscores the importance of support by Africa’s partners, in particular developed countries, of efforts
by African countries to strengthen domestic resource mobilization, including through capacity-building and
strengthening of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and enhance asset recovery and return;
26. Reiterates the commitment to redouble efforts to substantially reduce illicit financial flows by 2030, with
a view to eventually eliminating them, including by combating tax evasion and corruption through strengthened
national regulation and increased international cooperation, in line with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and the
strengthening of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows;
27. Recalls the second International Expert Meeting on the Return of Stolen Assets, held in Addis Ababa from
7 to 9 May 2019, and encourages the continuation of its work in advancing efforts to strengthen the recovery and
return of stolen assets and the identification of good practices for the return of stolen assets in support of sustainable
development;
28. Reaffirms that achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls, and the full realization of their
human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable
development, reiterates the need for gender mainstreaming, including targeted actions and investments in the
formulation and implementation of all financial, economic, environmental and social policies, and recommits to
adopting and strengthening sound policies and enforceable legislation and transformative actions for the promotion
of gender equality and women’s and girls’ empowerment at all levels, to ensure women’s equal rights, access and
opportunities for participation and leadership in the economy and to eliminate gender-based violence, sexual
exploitation and abuse and discrimination in all its forms;
29. Welcomes the noteworthy progress that has been achieved in implementing the African Peer Review
Mechanism, in particular the voluntary adherence of 40 African countries to the Mechanism and the completion of
the peer review process in 21 countries, welcomes the progress in implementing the national programmes of action
resulting from those reviews, in this regard urges African States that have not yet done so to consider joining the
Mechanism process by 2023, as envisaged in the first 10-year implementation plan of Agenda 2063, encourages
further strengthening of the Mechanism process for its efficient performance, and takes note of the decisions taken by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its eleventh extraordinary session, held in
Addis Ababa on 17 and 18 November 2018, on the institutional reform of the African Peer Review Mechanism;
30. Emphasizes African ownership of the African Peer Review Mechanism process, and invites the
international community to support the efforts of African countries, at their request, in implementing their respective
national programmes of action arising from the process;
31. Notes with concern that the preliminary data indicate that the net bilateral aid flows to Africa decreased
by 4 per cent in 2018 compared with 2017 figures,76 and notes that there are no updated comparable data on bilateral
aid flows to Africa in 2019;
32. Reiterates that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments remains crucial,
including the commitment by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income
for official development assistance and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development
assistance to least developed countries, is encouraged by those few countries that have met or surpassed their
commitment to 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance and the target of 0.15 to
0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to least developed countries, and urges all
others to step up efforts to increase their official development assistance and to make additional concrete efforts
towards official development assistance targets;
_______________
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
76
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development press release, “Development aid drops in 2018, especially to neediest
countries”, 10 April 2019.
74
75

40

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

33. Notes with appreciation the aspirations embedded in Agenda 2063 of the African Union to lift huge
sections of the population out of poverty, improve incomes and catalyse economic and social transformation, and
recognizes the importance of the international community helping African countries to achieve such goals, especially
in the rural areas of the African continent;
34. Considers that innovative mechanisms of financing can make a positive contribution towards assisting
developing countries in mobilizing additional resources for financing for development on a voluntary basis and that
such financing should supplement and not be a substitute for traditional sources of financing, and, while highlighting
the considerable progress on innovative sources of financing for development achieved to date, stresses the
importance of scaling up present initiatives and developing new mechanisms, as appropriate;
35. Notes with concern Africa’s disproportionately low share of the volume of international trade, which stood
at approximately 2.45 per cent and 2.96 per cent of world merchandise exports and imports, respectively, in 2019;
36. Expresses concern at the increased debt burden of some African countries, underlines the importance of
debt crisis prevention and prudent debt management, calls for a comprehensive and sustainable solution to the external
debt problems of African countries, including the challenge of undeclared or hidden debt, and recognizes the important
role, on a case-by-case basis, of debt relief, including debt cancellation, as appropriate, the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, debt restructuring and any other mechanism;
37. Welcomes the collaboration between the African Private Sector Forum and the United Nations Global
Compact, and encourages the further enhancement of this partnership in conjunction with the African Union
Commission in support of the development of the African private sector and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, in line with the relevant executive decisions of the African Union;
38. Calls upon developing countries and countries with economies in transition to continue their efforts to
create a domestic environment conducive to encouraging entrepreneurship, promoting the formalization of informal
sector activities in Africa and attracting investments by, inter alia, achieving a transparent, stable and predictable
investment climate with proper contract enforcement and respect for property rights, embedded in sound
macroeconomic policies and institutions;
39. Notes that foreign direct investment is a major source of financing for development, that it has a critical
role in achieving inclusive economic growth and sustainable development, including through the promotion of job
creation and the eradication of poverty and hunger, and that it contributes to the active participation of the African
economies in the global economy and facilitates regional economic cooperation and integration, and in this regard
calls upon, as appropriate, developed countries to continue to devise source-country measures to encourage and
facilitate the flow of foreign direct investment through, inter alia, the provision of export credits and other lending
instruments, risk guarantees and business development services;
40. Invites all of Africa’s development partners, in particular developed countries, to support the efforts of
African countries to promote and maintain macroeconomic stability, to help African countries to attract investments
and promote policies conducive to attracting domestic and foreign investment, for example by encouraging private
financial flows and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises, especially those owned by women, to promote
investment by their private sectors in Africa, to encourage and facilitate the development and transfer of technology
to African countries, on mutually agreed terms, and to assist in strengthening human and institutional capacities for
the implementation of the New Partnership, consistent with its priorities and objectives and with a view to furthering
Africa’s development at all levels;
41. Acknowledges the progress made towards ensuring free movement of persons as well as goods and
services in Africa, and in this regard recalls with appreciation the entry into force on 30 May 2019 of the agreement
on the African Continental Free Trade Area, which aims at doubling intra-African trade by, inter alia, removing
non-tariff and tariff barriers on goods and services, and the launch of its operational phase on 7 July 2019;
42. Reiterates the need for all countries and relevant multilateral institutions to continue efforts to enhance
coherence in their trade policies towards African countries, and acknowledges the importance of efforts to fully
integrate African countries into the multilateral trading system and to build their capacity to compete through such
initiatives as Aid for Trade and, given the world economic and financial crisis, the provision of assistance to address
the adjustment challenges of trade liberalization;

41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

43. Also reiterates that we are setting out together on the path towards sustainable development, devoting
ourselves collectively to the pursuit of global development and of “win-win” cooperation which can bring huge gains
to all countries and all parts of the world;
44. Emphasizes the importance of facilitating the accession of developing countries to the World Trade
Organization, recognizing the contribution that their accession would make to the rapid and full integration of those
countries into the multilateral trading system, urges in this regard the acceleration of the accession process on a
technical and legal basis and in an expeditious and transparent manner for developing countries that have applied for
membership in the World Trade Organization, and reaffirms the importance of that organization’s decision
WT/L/508/Add.1 of 25 July 2012 on accession by the least developed countries;
45. Welcomes the various important initiatives established between African countries and their development
partners, as well as other initiatives, emphasizes the importance of coordination in such initiatives on Africa and the
need for their effective implementation, and in this regard recognizes the important role that North-South, SouthSouth and triangular cooperation can play in supporting Africa’s development efforts, particularly the implementation
of the New Partnership, while bearing in mind that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for but rather a
complement to North-South cooperation;
46. Also welcomes the efforts of the United Nations and the African Union to align the clusters of the Regional
Coordination Mechanism for Africa with the strategic frameworks of the African Union and the New Partnership for
2014–2017 and Agenda 2063, and invites development partners, including the United Nations system, to continue to
support the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa in achieving its objectives, including through the allocation
of necessary funds to support the implementation of its activities;
47. Requests the Secretary-General to promote greater coherence in the work of the United Nations system in
support of the New Partnership towards accelerated realization of Agenda 2063, on the basis of the agreed clusters of
the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa, and in this regard calls upon the United Nations system to continue
to mainstream the special needs of Africa in all its normative and operational activities;
48. Recalls the establishment of the United Nations monitoring mechanism to review commitments made
relating to Africa’s development, and invites Member States and all relevant entities of the United Nations system,
including funds, programmes, specialized agencies and regional commissions, in particular the Economic
Commission for Africa, and all relevant international and regional organizations, to continue to contribute to the
effectiveness and reliability of the review process by cooperating in the collection of data and the evaluation of
performance;
49. Stresses the crucial importance of partnership for the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, calls for coordination and sharing of experience that can boost the capacity of countries to achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in this regard notes with appreciation the sixth session of the Africa
Regional Forum on Sustainable Development held in Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe, from 25 to 27 February 2020, and
convened by the Economic Commission for Africa in collaboration with regional organizations and the United
Nations system on the theme “2020–2030: a decade to deliver a transformed and prosperous Africa through the 2030
Agenda and Agenda 2063”;
50. Reiterates its commitment to further strengthen public policies and the mobilization and effective use of
domestic resources, recognizing that domestic resources are first and foremost generated by economic growth,
supported by an enabling environment at all levels;
51. Urges the international community to continue to give due attention to Africa’s priorities, in line with
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
52. Welcomes the transformation of the New Partnership Agency into the African Union Development
Agency, with the specific mandate to provide technical support to the implementation of Agenda 2063 in synergy
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
53. Also welcomes the increasing efforts to improve the quality of official development assistance and increase
its development impact, recognizes the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council, notes
other initiatives, such as the high-level forums on aid effectiveness, which produced, inter alia, the Paris Declaration
42

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action77 and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation, which make important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made commitments to them,
including through the adoption of the fundamental principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization,
transparency, accountability and managing for results, and bears in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that
will guarantee effective assistance and that the specific situation of each country needs to be fully considered;
54. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, on an annual basis, a comprehensive
and action-oriented report on the implementation of the present resolution, based on the provision of inputs from
Governments, organizations of the United Nations system and other stakeholders in the New Partnership, and to
submit to the Assembly in 2021 an addendum on the comprehensive review of international support to the New
Partnership, including the impact of such support, lessons learned as well as recommendations on the modalities for
future engagement.
RESOLUTION 74/302
Adopted at the 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, by a recorded vote of 130 to 31, with 18 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/74/L.69/Rev.1 and A/74/L.69/Rev.1/Add.1, sponsored by Guyana (on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Turkey
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyprus, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Norway,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine

74/302. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the report of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of Conflict and the Promotion
of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa,78 its resolution 53/92 of 7 December 1998 and all
subsequent annual resolutions, including resolution 73/336 of 10 September 2019, as well as all its resolutions on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development, including resolution 73/335 of 10 September 2019, and its resolutions
59/213 of 20 December 2004, 63/310 of 14 September 2009, 65/274 of 18 April 2011 and 67/302 of 16 September
2013 on cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union,
Recalling also, in this context, Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008 on peace and security
in Africa, 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008, 1888 (2009) of 30 September 2009,
1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009, 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010, 2106 (2013) of 24 June 2013, 2122 (2013) of
18 October 2013, 2242 (2015) of 13 October 2015 and 2467 (2019) of 23 April 2019 on women and peace and
_______________
77
78

A/63/539, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/56/45).

43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

security, 2250 (2015) of 9 December 2015 and 2419 (2018) of 6 June 2018 on youth, peace and security, 1366 (2001)
of 30 August 2001 on the role of the Council in the prevention of armed conflicts, 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005,
1882 (2009) of 4 August 2009, 1998 (2011) of 12 July 2011, 2068 (2012) of 19 September 2012, 2225 (2015) of
18 June 2015 and 2427 (2018) of 9 July 2018 on children and armed conflict, 1625 (2005) of 14 September 2005 on
strengthening the effectiveness of the role of the Council in conflict prevention, particularly in Africa, 2195 (2014) of
19 December 2014 and 2379 (2017) of 21 September 2017 on threats to international peace and security, 1631 (2005)
of 17 October 2005, 2033 (2012) of 12 January 2012 and 2320 (2016) of 18 November 2016, as well as the statements
by the President of the Security Council of 16 December 201479 and 24 May 201680 on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security, and
resolutions 2167 (2014) of 28 July 2014 and 2447 (2018) of 13 December 2018 on United Nations peacekeeping
operations,
Recalling further the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document entitled “The future we want”,81
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling the 2015 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Sustainable Development Goals
and its outcome document,82 and recognizing that development, peace and security and human rights are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, and helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and
creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and
solidarity,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,83 through which world leaders reaffirmed their commitment to
addressing the special needs of Africa, and its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen the synergy between Africa’s economic and social development programmes
and its peace and security agenda,
Recognizing, in particular, the capacity of the African Union and subregional organizations to address the causes
of conflict in Africa,
Reaffirming the political declaration on Africa’s development needs adopted at the high-level meeting on
22 September 2008,84
Recalling its resolution 66/293 of 17 September 2012 establishing a monitoring mechanism to review
commitments made towards Africa’s development,

_______________
S/PRST/2014/27; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2014–31 July 2015 (S/INF/70).
S/PRST/2016/8; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2015–31 December 2016 (S/INF/71).
81
Resolution 66/288, annex.
82
Resolution 70/1.
83
Resolution 60/1.
84
Resolution 63/1.
79
80

44

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming the political declaration on the peaceful resolution of conflicts in Africa adopted at the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly held on 25 April 2013,85
Reaffirming also the importance of supporting the African Union Agenda 2063, as a strategic vision and an
action plan for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa by 2063, and acknowledging the emphasis
in Agenda 2063 on peace and security as critical enablers for sustainable development,
Stressing that the responsibility for peace and security in Africa, including the capacity to address the root causes
of conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner, lies primarily with African countries, while recognizing the
need for the provision of support by the international community and the United Nations, taking into account the
responsibilities of the Organization in this regard according to the Charter of the United Nations,
Underscoring the importance of continuing the efforts of the African Union and subregional organizations to
prevent and settle conflicts and promote human rights, democracy, the rule of law and constitutional order in Africa,
Noting that, despite the positive trends and advances in obtaining durable peace in Africa, the conditions required
for sustainable development have yet to be consolidated throughout the continent and that there is therefore an urgent
need to continue to develop African human and institutional capacities, particularly in countries emerging from
conflict,
Reaffirming the commitment to ensure that there will be no tolerance for impunity for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity or for violations of international humanitarian law and gross violations of human rights law,
and that such violations will be properly investigated and appropriately sanctioned, including by bringing the
perpetrators of any crimes to justice, through national mechanisms or, where appropriate, regional or international
mechanisms, in accordance with international law, and for that purpose encouraging Member States to strengthen
national judicial systems and institutions,
Underscoring the importance of taking into account lessons learned from the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi
in Rwanda, during which Hutu and others who opposed the genocide were also killed,
Recognizing the importance of aligning international support with Africa’s own priorities, including but not
limited to industrialization, equal access to work opportunities, youth employment, access to quality education and
high-quality and resilient infrastructure, the eradication of poverty, environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient
economies and communities, and the reduction of inequalities, aimed at the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development through action-oriented efforts,
Underlining the importance of enhancing national and regional initiatives, with international support, to address
the negative implications of the illegal exploitation of natural resources in all its aspects for peace, security and
development in Africa, and condemning the illicit trade in and proliferation of arms, especially small arms and light
weapons,
Acknowledging that the achievement of durable peace and sustainable development in countries affected by
conflict, in conflict and in post-conflict situations requires that national Governments and international partners
continue to develop coordinated approaches tailored to the peacebuilding needs and challenges faced by those
countries,
Emphasizing the importance of a comprehensive approach to sustaining peace, particularly through the
prevention of conflict and addressing its root causes, strengthening the rule of law at the international and national
levels, and promoting sustained and sustainable economic growth, poverty eradication, social development,
sustainable development, national reconciliation and unity, including through inclusive dialogue and mediation,
access to justice and transitional justice, accountability, good governance, democracy, accountable institutions, gender
equality and respect for, and protection of, human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recognizing that effective peacebuilding must involve the entire United Nations system, consistent with the
respective mandates of missions and the Charter, and in this regard emphasizing the importance of joint analysis and
_______________
85

Resolution 67/259.

45

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

effective strategic planning across the United Nations system in its long-term engagement in conflict-affected
countries, and where appropriate, in cooperation and coordination with regional and subregional organizations,
Reaffirming, in this regard, the importance of the Peacebuilding Commission as a dedicated intergovernmental
advisory body to address, within its existing mandate and in an integrated manner, the special needs of countries
affected by conflict and to assist them in laying the foundation for peace and sustainable development, taking into
consideration national priorities and the principle of national ownership,
Welcoming the work of the Peacebuilding Commission in bringing a strategic approach and coherence to
international peacebuilding efforts, and recognizing the valuable work done in all its configurations and meetings,
Reaffirming the primary responsibility of national Governments and authorities in identifying, driving and
directing priorities, strategies and activities for peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and in this regard emphasizing
that inclusivity is key to advancing national peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to ensure that the needs
of all segments of society are taken into account,
Recalling the adoption of Security Council resolution 2413 (2018) and General Assembly resolution 72/276, on
26 April 2018, reaffirming Council resolution 2282 (2016) and Assembly resolution 70/262, both of 27 April 2016,
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, affirming the importance of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, and recognizing the importance of their implementation for strengthening the Peacebuilding
Commission and enabling it to realize its full potential, in accordance with Assembly resolution 60/180 and Council
resolution 1645 (2005), both of 20 December 2005, and Assembly resolution 65/7 and Council resolution
1947 (2010), both of 29 October 2010, and in this regard welcoming the workshop on the theme “Peacebuilding and
sustaining peace in Africa: towards a coherent approach to the peace continuum”, held in Addis Ababa on 12 and
13 November 2019, which provided perspectives from Africa on the 2020 review process and the need to consolidate
the regional dimension in the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission in Africa,
Renewing its unwavering commitment to strengthening international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and reaffirming that any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed,
Recognizing that international cooperation and any measures taken by Member States to prevent and combat
terrorism, as well as to prevent violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, must fully comply with their
obligations under international law, including the Charter, in particular the purposes and principles thereof, and
relevant international conventions and protocols, as well as their obligations under international human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law,
Reaffirming that terrorism and violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Encouraging the United Nations system, the African Union and subregional organizations to enhance their
interaction with civil society, including women’s and youth associations, academia and research institutions, on issues
relevant to the promotion of peace, security and sustainable development in Africa, and welcoming the ongoing efforts
in this regard, including by the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations
contained in his report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa;86
2. Recalls the adoption of the African Union Agenda 2063 and its first 10‑year implementation plan
(2014–2023), which outlines key African flagship projects, fast-track programmes, priority areas, specific targets and
African strategies and policy measures at all levels, and acknowledges the importance of supporting the
implementation of the plan;
3. Welcomes, in this regard, the high-level events organized during the 2020 Africa Dialogue Series on the
theme “COVID-19 and silencing the guns in Africa: challenges and opportunities”, organized by the Office of the
_______________
86

46

A/74/301-S/2019/645.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Special Adviser on Africa, in close partnership with the African Union Commission, the African Union Development
Agency, the African Peer Review Mechanism, regional economic communities and the United Nations system;
4. Also welcomes the progress made by African countries, the African Union and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development, calls for intensified efforts and
a coordinated approach among national Governments, the African Union, subregional organizations, the United
Nations system and relevant partners in addressing those challenges, with a view to achieving further progress towards
the goal of a conflict-free Africa, and in this regard recognizes the important role played by civil society organizations,
including women’s organizations;
5. Stresses the importance of creating an environment conducive to national reconciliation, transitional
justice and social and economic recovery in countries emerging from conflict, and calls upon the United Nations
system, the international community and all partners to support the efforts of African countries to promote political,
social and economic inclusion;
6. Recognizes that international and regional efforts to prevent conflict and consolidate peace in Africa
should be channelled towards the sustainable development of Africa and the human and institutional capacity-building
of African countries and organizations, particularly in priority areas identified at the continental level;
7. Encourages African Governments to strengthen structures and policies in order to create an environment
conducive to the promotion of sustainable, inclusive economic growth and to attracting foreign direct investment, and
invites the international community to assist in that process by providing adequate financial and technical assistance
and by renewing its commitment to efforts aimed at combating the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of those
countries, in conformity with international law;
8. Calls upon the international community to enhance support and fulfil its commitments to take further
action in areas critical to Africa’s economic and social development, in the spirit of win-win cooperation and to create
a shared future, based upon our common humanity, and welcomes the efforts by development partners to strengthen
cooperation with the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;87
9. Recognizes the need for African countries to make continued efforts to create enabling environments for
inclusive growth in support of sustainable development and for the international community to make continued efforts
to increase the flow of new and additional resources for financing for development from all sources, public and private,
domestic and foreign, to support those development efforts by African countries, and welcomes the various important
initiatives established between African countries and their development partners in this regard;
10. Urges continued support for measures to address the challenges of poverty eradication and hunger, decent
job creation and sustainable development in Africa, including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved market access,
regional integration and intra-African trade, including through the African Continental Free Trade Area, support for
the private sector and entrepreneurship, fulfilment of commitments on official development assistance and increased
flows of foreign direct investment and transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms;
11. Recalls, in this regard, the high-level expert group meeting on the theme “Tackling the socioeconomic
root causes of conflict towards achieving the goal of a conflict-free Africa in the context of the implementation of
Africa’s transformative Agenda 2063 and the global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, held in Cairo on
16 and 17 November 2015;
12. Underlines the importance of the strategic partnerships among the United Nations, the African Union and
the regional economic communities, including in promoting an integrated and coherent implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development82 and the African Union Agenda 2063;
13. Recognizes the adverse effects of climate change and natural disasters on the sustainable development of
African Member States, including through drought, desertification, biodiversity loss, land degradation, flooding and
food insecurity, and emphasizes the need for adequate risk assessment and risk management strategies by the
respective Governments of African Member States and the United Nations;

_______________
87

A/57/304, annex.

47

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14. Underlines the need to address the economic, social and environmental impact of climate change,
desertification and land degradation in Africa, and highlights the importance of supporting efforts to strengthen the
implementation of initiatives aimed at enhancing resilience in Africa, in particular the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme and other initiatives launched under the leadership of the African Union
Commission such as the Great Green Wall and the Land Policy Initiative, as well as initiatives launched by African
countries such as the Adaptation of African Agriculture and the Security, Stability and Sustainability initiatives;
15. Welcomes, in this regard, the endorsement by African Heads of State and Government of the Inter-Basin
Water Transfer initiative, as a pan-African project to restore Lake Chad and promote its navigation and industrial and
economic development, and encourages relevant United Nations entities and development partners to support such
African-oriented initiatives for stabilization, recovery and climate resilience;
16. Recalls the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons
in Africa, which entered into force on 6 December 2012, and the Kampala Declaration on Refugees, Returnees and
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, adopted on 23 October 2009;
17. Reaffirms the need to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of women and children, and to address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and through a comprehensive and
balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in
promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their
vulnerability, and recognizes in this regard the importance of the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,
adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on addressing large movements of refugees and
migrants, held on 19 September 2016;88
18. Calls for the safeguarding of the principle of refugee protection in Africa and the resolution of the plight
of refugees, including through support for efforts aimed at addressing the causes of refugee movement and bringing
about the voluntary, dignified, safe and sustainable return and reintegration of those populations, and calls upon the
international community, including Member States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other relevant United Nations organizations, within their respective mandates, to take concrete action
to meet the protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons and stateless
persons and to contribute generously to projects and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight, facilitating durable
solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons and supporting vulnerable local host communities;
19. Reaffirms the convening of the intergovernmental conference held on 10 and 11 December 2018 in
Marrakech, Morocco, and recalls that it adopted the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, also
known as the Marrakech Compact on Migration;89
20. Recalls the adoption of its resolution 73/150 of 17 December 2018 on assistance to refugees, returnees
and displaced persons in Africa, and further recalls the decision of African Heads of State and Government to proclaim
2019 the African Year of Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to Forced
Displacement in Africa;
21. Notes the opportunities presented by Africa’s demographic structure, and stresses the importance of
addressing the socioeconomic dimension of youth unemployment as well as facilitating the enhanced participation of
youth in decision-making processes, with a view to addressing social, political and economic challenges, including
the eradication of child labour and gender stereotypes;
22. Reaffirms the important and positive contribution of youth to the efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security and the role young people play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, and as a
key aspect of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as well as in
post-conflict situations, and encourages all those involved in planning for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration to consider the needs of youth affected by armed conflict, including the problem of youth unemployment
_______________
88
89

48

Resolution 71/1.
Resolution 73/195, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

on the continent, by investing in building young people’s capabilities and skills to meet labour demands through
relevant education opportunities designed in a manner that promotes a culture of peace;
23. Expresses grave concern about the growing threat posed by terrorism, violent extremism as and when
conducive to terrorism, and foreign terrorist fighters to the peace, security and social and economic development
of Africa;
24. Recalls the initiative by the Secretary-General and his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism;90
25. Calls upon relevant United Nations entities, within their existing mandates, to intensify cooperation,
assistance and capacity-building, for African Member States, the African Union and African subregional
organizations, upon their request, in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism as and when conducive to
terrorism, through the implementation of relevant international and regional treaties and protocols, and in this regard
welcomes in particular African initiatives, namely the African Union Plan of Action on the Prevention and Combating
of Terrorism in Africa, the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism, based in Algiers, and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development Centre of Excellence in Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism
in the Horn of Africa, based in Djibouti, as well as the Community of Sahel-Saharan States Counter-Terrorism Centre,
based in Cairo;
26. Recalls the decision on the establishment of the African Union Special Fund on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism and Violent Extremism in Africa, adopted in Kigali in July 2016, and encourages the United
Nations system and Member States to support the efforts of the African Union in this regard;
27. Notes the ongoing efforts of the African Union, in collaboration with regional economic communities and
development partners, including the United Nations system, to “silence the guns in Africa by 2020”, and welcomes
the African Union summit decision, adopted in February 2020, proclaiming “Silencing the guns: creating conducive
conditions for Africa’s development” as the theme for 2020, as well as the African Union decision on the
implementation of the African Union Master Road Map of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020,
and calls upon Member States and the United Nations system, as appropriate, to intensify their support and
cooperation with African countries, the African Union and the African regional economic communities and relevant
regional mechanisms towards the timely realization of this goal;
28. Takes note of the convening of a general debate on cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security: silencing the guns in Africa by the
Security Council, and welcomes its adoption of resolution 2457 (2019) on 27 February 2019;
29. Notes that in some armed conflict situations, the illicit exploitation, trafficking and trade in natural
resources has contributed to the outbreak, escalation or continuation of such conflicts, and further notes resolutions
adopted on this issue to support the prevention of the illegal exploitation of natural resources;
30. Stresses the critical importance of a regional approach to conflict prevention, in particular with respect to
cross-border issues such as transnational organized crime, drug trafficking, disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programmes, the prevention of illegal exploitation of natural resources and trafficking
in high-value commodities and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects, and emphasizes in
this regard the central role of the African Union and subregional organizations in addressing such issues;
31. Emphasizes that the illicit flow of arms, particularly small arms and light weapons, to rebel armed groups,
terrorists and criminals contributes significantly to insecurity and violence in various parts of Africa and undermines
social cohesion, public security, socioeconomic development and the normal functioning of State institutions;
32. Underlines the link in certain circumstances between illicit financial flows, organized crime,
transnational crime, terrorism, poaching and the illicit proliferation of conventional weapons, and in this regard
urges Member States to take effective measures to holistically address all root causes of conflicts and redouble
efforts to effectively curb the illicit flow of conventional weapons into and within Africa, including by taking the
_______________
90

See A/70/674.

49

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

necessary steps at the national level to implement the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects;91
33. Calls upon the United Nations system, and invites Member States, to assist African countries emerging
from conflict, upon their request as appropriate, in their efforts to build national capacities, including through national
security sector reform strategies, transitional justice and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, including children formerly associated with armed forces or armed groups;
34. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union and subregional organizations to strengthen their
capacity in peacekeeping operations on the continent, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations and in close coordination with the United Nations, through the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, as well as the ongoing efforts to develop a continental early warning system, strengthen the readiness of
the African Standby Force and enhance mediation capacity and preventive diplomacy, including through the Panel
of the Wise;
35. Recognizes the growing and emerging challenges and risks facing United Nations peacekeeping
operations and political missions, and in this regard recalls the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations92 and the report of the Secretary-General entitled “The future of
United Nations peace operations: implementation of the recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations”,93 as well as recommendations supported by Member States in the report of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations,94 in particular on prevention, mediation and stronger global regional partnerships,
including between the United Nations and the African Union, and encourages the Security Council, as appropriate, to
consult with relevant regional organizations, particularly the African Union, especially if transitioning from a regional
to a United Nations peacekeeping operation;
36. Also recognizes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring that national ownership of the
peacebuilding process in countries under consideration is observed and that nationally identified priorities are at the
core of international and regional efforts in peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the countries under consideration,
notes the important steps taken by the Commission in engaging with a broad range of country and regional situations,
and calls for sustained regional and international commitment to the implementation of nationally identified
peacebuilding priorities;
37. Welcomes the bridging role of the Peacebuilding Commission as a dedicated intergovernmental advisory
body to bring together all the relevant actors in the United Nations system in accordance with its mandate to promote
a strategic approach and coherence in international peacebuilding efforts, and invites in this regard the Commission,
in exercising its advisory role to the General Assembly, to provide written input/advice on the engagement of the
Commission in efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of conflicts and building peace in Africa, for the
consideration by the General Assembly at upcoming sessions of the item on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa;
38. Recognizes the progress made by the Peacebuilding Commission in enhancing its relationship with
regional and subregional organizations in Africa, in particular the African Union, and in this regard recalls the signing
of a memorandum of understanding on peacebuilding between the Peacebuilding Support Office and the African
Union Commission on 18 September 2017 with a view to strengthening the collaboration between the United Nations
and the African Union to provide a framework and strengthen cooperation in support of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace efforts in Africa;
39. Recalls, in this regard, decision Assembly/AU/Dec.729(XXXII) of 11 February 2019 of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union on revitalizing and operationalizing the African Union Policy
on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development, while aligning it with the evolving international discourse on
_______________
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
92
See A/70/95-S/2015/446.
93
A/70/357-S/2015/682.
94
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/74/19).
91

50

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

peacebuilding and sustaining peace and the actual needs of countries emerging from conflict in Africa, and calls upon
the United Nations system and Member States to support the peace consolidation mechanisms and processes,
including the African Peace and Security Architecture, the African Governance Architecture, the African Union
Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development Framework and the African Union Centre for Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development, in order to fully contribute to conflict prevention, peacemaking initiatives,
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction;
40. Calls upon Member States to assist African countries in post-conflict situations, at their request, in
achieving a smooth transition from relief to development and to support relevant United Nations bodies, including
the Peacebuilding Commission, and encourage increased efforts to support ongoing regional efforts to build African
mediation and negotiation capacity;
41. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the African Union in its effort to
effectively integrate training in international humanitarian law and international human rights law, with particular
emphasis on the rights of women and children, into the training of civilian, police and military personnel of national
standby contingents at both the operational and tactical levels, as set out in article 13 of the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union;
42. Notes with concern that conflict-related sexual violence continues and may increase even as armed
conflicts draw to an end, urges further progress in the implementation of policies and guidelines relating to the
protection of and assistance to women and children in conflict and post-conflict situations in Africa, including more
systematic monitoring and reporting, notes the adoption by the General Assembly and the Security Council of relevant
resolutions, including Council resolution 2467 (2019), and encourages the entities that compose United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as other relevant parts of the United Nations system, to assist the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict in the implementation of her mandate,
including in Africa;
43. Reiterates the calls for the full, effective and meaningful participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, consistent with relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 2242 (2015) on women and peace and security, and recalls in this regard
the report of the Secretary-General containing the results of the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000),95 recognizes with appreciation all the work undertaken for the global study, and encourages follow-up
of its recommendations;
44. Recalls the ongoing efforts of African countries and the African Union, including the work of the African
Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, to ensure the protection of the rights of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations, recalls in this regard the adoption of national action plans on women, peace and security by
several African countries, the various initiatives of the African Union, the adoption and entry into force of the Protocol
to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the Solemn Declaration on
Gender Equality in Africa, the African Union Gender Policy, the African Union five-year Gender, Peace and Security
Programme, 2015–2020, and the Southern African Development Community Protocol on Gender and Development,
as well as the Framework of Cooperation concerning the Prevention and Response to Conflict-related Sexual Violence
in Africa signed by the African Union Commission and the United Nations, stresses the significance of those
instruments for all countries in Africa for strengthening the role of women in peace and conflict prevention on the
continent, and strongly urges the United Nations and all relevant parties to redouble their efforts and provide support
in this regard;
45. Notes with concern the tragic plight of children in conflict situations in Africa, in particular the
phenomenon of the recruitment and use of children by parties to armed conflicts, sexual exploitation and abuse, as
well as other violations and abuses committed against children, and in this regard takes note of efforts aimed at
promoting education and the right to education and facilitating the continuation of education in situations of armed
conflict and protracted crises, stresses the need for the protection of children in armed conflicts and for ensuring that
the protection and rights of children in armed conflicts are integrated into all peace processes, also stresses the need
for post-conflict, reintegration, rehabilitation and education, with due regard for the relevant resolutions of the General
_______________
95

S/2015/716.

51

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Assembly and the Security Council, and encourages the relevant parts of the United Nations system to assist the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict in the implementation of her
mandate, including in Africa;
46. Welcomes, in this regard, the ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure the protection of children in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations, recalls the adoption and entry into force of the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child, as well as the declaration signed on 17 September 2013 by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the Peace and Security Department of
the African Union Commission, in order to mainstream protection mechanisms in all peace and security activities of
the African Union, in close partnership with the United Nations Children’s Fund, and stresses the significance of those
instruments for all countries in Africa in protecting children affected by armed conflicts on the continent;
47. Acknowledges the particular challenges that infectious disease outbreaks, including the Ebola virus disease
and especially the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, pose in conflict-affected areas and their
effect on health crisis management, as health systems in areas of conflict are often compromised and ill‑equipped to
deal with the threat posed by infectious disease outbreaks, and strongly condemns violent attacks and threats directed
against medical personnel and facilities, which have long-term consequences for the civilian population and the
health-care systems of the countries concerned, as well as for the neighbouring regions, and have a negative impact
on sustainable development;
48. Welcomes African-led initiatives to strengthen political, economic and corporate governance, such as the
African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance and the African Peer Review Mechanism, encourages
more African countries to participate in this process, and calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to
assist African countries and regional and subregional organizations, upon their request, in their ongoing efforts to
promote democracy, constitutional order and the rule of law, to enhance good governance and to continue to fight
against impunity, as well as in the holding of free, fair, inclusive, peaceful and transparent elections;
49. Recognizes, in this regard, the important contribution of the African Peer Review Mechanism since its
inception in improving governance and supporting socioeconomic development in African countries, and takes note
of the decision adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union in January 2017 on
the revitalization of the African Peer Review Mechanism, expanding the monitoring and evaluation mandate of the
Mechanism, and invites the United Nations system and Member States to provide voluntary substantial financial and
capacity-building support to the Mechanism to advance its activities;
50. Reaffirms the importance of the role of the Interdepartmental Task Force on African Affairs and the
Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa in ensuring greater coherence and coordination of United Nations
system support to Africa, including support to the African Union, particularly in the areas of conflict prevention and
conflict resolution, human rights, governance and the rule of law, and post-conflict reconstruction and development;
51. Recalls the commitment of the African leaders to Africa’s political, social and economic integration
agenda and to the ideal of pan-Africanism and African renaissance, as well as their effort to achieve the goal of a
conflict-free Africa by 2020, as affirmed in the solemn declaration adopted on 26 May 2013 on the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the Organization of African Unity/African Union, expresses its readiness to contribute, and calls
upon all, in particular relevant United Nations entities, to help to achieve this goal;
52. Recalls the adoption of its resolution 71/254 of 23 December 2016 on the Framework for a Renewed
United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 2017–2027, and calls
upon the Secretary-General to provide, as appropriate, predictable support for full, effective and efficient
implementation of the Framework;
53. Also recalls relevant resolutions on the strengthening of cooperation and communication between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations or arrangements, and encourages enhanced coordination
and cooperation in advocacy and in the mobilization of the support of the international community for African
countries and towards the priorities of their continental and regional institutions;
54. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States, bilateral and multilateral partners and new
partners to deliver expeditiously on commitments and to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the provisions
of the political declaration on Africa’s development needs,84 as well as the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development;
52

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

55. Emphasizes the importance of deepening cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union,
based on consultations, regular meetings at all levels, shared analysis, comparative advantages and division of labour
to better address today’s challenges, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations;
56. Recalls the convening of the third United Nations-African Union annual conference at the level of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission at United Nations Headquarters on 6 May
2019, and reaffirms the commitment to continue to deepen the strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in addressing peace and security issues, achieving sustainable development and implementing
Agenda 2063 in Africa;
57. Takes note of the recommendations presented by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session on possible ways to strengthen the interdepartmental task force on African affairs,96 and
reaffirms the need to ensure further coherence and an integrated approach for United Nations support to Africa,
including in following up on the implementation of all global summit and conference outcomes related to Africa;
58. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor and report to the General Assembly on an annual
basis on persistent and emerging challenges to the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,
including the root causes of conflict and conditions to promote sustainable development, as well as on the approach
and support of the United Nations system.
RESOLUTION 74/303
Adopted at the 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.90, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

74/303. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the role and authority of the General Assembly as a principal organ of the United Nations and
the importance of its effectiveness and efficiency in fulfilling its functions under the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating that the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly is a critical component of the overall
reform of the United Nations,
Welcoming the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations in 2020 under the theme
“The future we want, the United Nations we need: reaffirming our collective commitment to multilateralism”,
Recognizing the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the work of the General Assembly
during the seventy-fourth session, and welcoming the efforts of the President of the General Assembly at its seventyfourth session to ensure the continued functioning of the General Assembly despite the limitations for its normal work
as a consequence of the pandemic,
Underlining the need to further enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the General Assembly
to address the evolving global challenges,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 73/341 of 12 September 2019 and all other previous resolutions adopted by
consensus relating to the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly, and agrees that resolution 73/341 as a
whole will form the basis for the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly during the seventy-fifth session;
2. Requests the Secretariat to continue updating regularly and equally the multilingual web page devoted to
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly in all six official languages and its substantive content within
existing resources in a cost-effective manner, including through the use of existing capabilities such as automation of
translation, while ensuring the accuracy of translation;

_______________
96

See A/67/205/Add.1-S/2012/715/Add.1.

53

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Decides to establish, at its seventy-fifth session, an ad hoc working group on the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly, open to all Member States:
(a) To identify further ways to enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly, inter
alia, by building on the progress achieved in past sessions as well as on previous resolutions, including evaluating the
status of their implementation;
(b)

To submit a report thereon to the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;

4. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake within existing resources an analysis of the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the work of the General Assembly and to provide a briefing thereon to the Ad Hoc Working
Group during the seventy-fifth session;
5. Decides that the Ad Hoc Working Group shall continue its review of the inventory of General Assembly
resolutions on revitalization annexed to the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group submitted at the seventy-third
session97 and, as a result, continue to update the inventory to be attached to the report to be submitted at the seventyfifth session of the Assembly, including the separate indication of relevant provisions that were not implemented, with
reasons therefor;
6. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session to identify proposals, in a
timely manner, through consultations with all Member States, the President of the Economic and Social Council and
the General Committee, within their respective mandates, aimed at addressing gaps, overlaps and duplication where
they are found to exist in the agenda of the Assembly as they relate to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development98
as a whole, and reaffirms the respective mandates of the Main Committees of the Assembly, and on that basis, calls
upon all of them to continue their consideration of addressing gaps, overlaps and duplication in their respective
agendas as they relate to the 2030 Agenda as a whole, and in this regard requests them to make proposals available
for discussion during the seventy-fifth session of the Assembly;
7.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General.99
RESOLUTION 74/304

Adopted at the 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.85 and
A/74/L.85/Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Canada, Chad, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Viet Nam

74/304. Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,100 in which Heads of State and Government resolved to strengthen
further cooperation between the United Nations and national parliaments through their world organization, the InterParliamentary Union, in all fields of the work of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolution 57/32 of 19 November 2002, in which the Inter‑Parliamentary Union was invited
to participate in the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer, and recalling further its resolution
_______________
A/73/956.
Resolution 70/1.
99
A/74/704.
100
Resolution 60/1.
97
98

54

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

72/278 of 22 May 2018, in which the Assembly, inter alia, decided to strengthen the modalities of the cooperation
between United Nations entities and the global parliamentary community,
Taking into consideration the Cooperation Agreement between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union of 1996,101 which laid the foundation for cooperation between the two organizations, and taking note of the
revised Cooperation Agreement of 2016,
Taking note of the resolutions adopted by the Inter-Parliamentary Union, as well as the many activities
undertaken by that organization in support of the United Nations,
Noting the outcomes of the World Conferences of Speakers of Parliament held in 2000, 2005, 2010 and 2015,
which affirm the commitment of national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to support the work of the
United Nations and continue efforts to bridge the democracy gap in international relations,
Recognizing that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic requires a global response based on unity,
solidarity and renewed multilateral cooperation that is people-centred, and acknowledging the important role of the
United Nations system and the key leadership role of the World Health Organization in this regard, and that national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union play an important role in the response and recovery efforts,
Welcoming the annual parliamentary hearings at the United Nations, as well as other specialized parliamentary
meetings organized by the Inter-Parliamentary Union in cooperation with the United Nations to correspond to major
United Nations conferences and events,
Recognizing the work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in mobilizing parliamentary action towards the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,102 the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,103 the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,104 the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change105 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,106
Recognizing also the growing role of the Inter-Parliamentary Union Standing Committee on United Nations
Affairs in providing a platform for regular interaction between parliamentarians and United Nations officials,
including on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, reviewing implementation of international
commitments, facilitating closer ties between the United Nations country teams and national parliaments and helping
to shape parliamentary input to major United Nations processes,
Recognizing further the work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in the areas of democracy and the rule of law,
human rights, gender equality, the empowerment of all women and girls and eliminating violence against women and
girls, youth empowerment, peace and security, disarmament, non-proliferation, humanitarian assistance, sustainable
development, poverty eradication, food security and nutrition, climate change, health and interfaith and inter-ethnic
dialogue, as well as countering and preventing terrorism and violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism,
Deeply concerned about all acts of sexual and gender-based violence, including sexual harassment, in political
and in public life, as well as in parliaments and in leadership positions, and recognizing the work of the InterParliamentary Union in combating such violence,
Highlighting the importance of women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in parliaments, including in
leadership positions, and the importance for parliaments to mainstream a gender perspective in their work,
Recognizing and affirming that the global fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and all their abhorrent and contemporary forms and manifestations is a matter of priority for the
international community, as well as noting the launch of the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech in June 2019,

_______________
A/51/402, annex.
Resolution 70/1.
103
Resolution 69/313, annex.
104
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
105
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
106
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
101
102

55

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Bearing in mind that the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations is an opportunity to reaffirm its
collective commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and reinvigorate
multilateralism, and recognizing the role and the contributions of national parliaments, those of regional organizations
and of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to promote and strengthen multilateralism,
Recalling that in 2020 the international community commemorates the seventy‑fifth anniversary of the end of
the Second World War, and emphasizing in this regard the role of parliaments in supporting efforts to mitigate and
resolve conflicts,
Mindful that technological change includes new and powerful tools that can help to realize the vision of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and that the spread of information and communications technologies and
global interconnectedness has great potential to accelerate human development and bridge the digital divide, and
recognizing that national parliaments, among others, play an important role in addressing the impact, opportunities
and challenges of rapid technological change,
Noting the work carried out upon the request of Member States by agencies and programmes of the United
Nations system, including the United Nations Sustainable Development Group, in support of national parliaments
around the world,
Acknowledging the role and responsibility of national parliaments in regard to national plans and strategies, as
well as in ensuring greater transparency and accountability at both the national and the global levels,
1. Welcomes the actions taken by the Inter-Parliamentary Union to pursue a more systematic engagement
with the United Nations, and encourages both organizations to enhance their cooperation in meeting their common
objectives;
2. Encourages the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to continue to work closely in various
fields, including the three dimensions of sustainable development: the economic, social and environmental,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, countering and preventing terrorism and violent extremism as and when
conducive to terrorism, international law, human rights and fundamental freedoms, combating racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, promoting gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls, youth empowerment, democracy and good governance, poverty eradication, information and
communications technologies, health, international migration, climate change, biodiversity, disaster risk reduction,
capacity-building and financing for development;
3. Also encourages the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to strengthen cooperation by
engaging parliamentarians in efforts to maintain support for the implementation of relevant United Nations
agreements and resolutions;
4. Encourages the continued active involvement of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in promoting the
enhanced contribution of parliaments at the national, regional and global levels, including through multi-stakeholder
partnerships, in support of the accelerated implementation and achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
by 2030;
5. Calls upon Member States, including their national parliaments, supported upon their request by the
United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, and other relevant stakeholders to coordinate, as appropriate, so
that their responses to the COVID-19 pandemic are people-centred and provide access, without discrimination of any
kind, to safe, effective, affordable and quality essential medicines, vaccines, testing and diagnostics, personal
protective equipment and medical equipment as may be required to effectively address COVID-19;
6. Welcomes the efforts of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to promote universal health coverage and to address
public health emergencies, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and invites the World Health Organization, as the United
Nations specialized agency for health, and other relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
system to enhance cooperation with the Inter‑Parliamentary Union in this regard;
7. Notes the preparations currently under way for the fifth World Conference of Speakers of Parliament, to
be organized by the Inter-Parliamentary Union in close cooperation with the United Nations, entitled “Parliamentary
leadership for more effective multilateralism that delivers peace and sustainable development for the people and
planet”, which will provide contributions to the high‑level meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations in September 2020;
56

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Welcomes the practice of including parliamentarians as members of national delegations to major United
Nations meetings and events, as appropriate, and invites Member States to continue this practice in a more regular
and systematic manner;
9. Invites Member States to further consider ways to work regularly with the Inter-Parliamentary Union in
facilitating a parliamentary component to major United Nations conferences so as to help to inform such deliberations
from a parliamentary perspective;
10. Encourages Member States to consider applying the practice of the joint United Nations-InterParliamentary Union parliamentary hearing to other parliamentary meetings convened in conjunction with major
United Nations conferences and processes, such as the parliamentary meeting organized on the occasion of the annual
session of the Commission on the Status of Women, with a view to including the outcome of these parliamentary
meetings as a formal contribution to the respective United Nations processes;
11. Welcomes the enhanced contribution of parliaments and the Inter‑Parliamentary Union to the work of the
Human Rights Council and the human rights treaty bodies, and acknowledges the crucial role that parliaments play
in translating international commitments into national policies and laws;
12. Encourages the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and other relevant bodies of the United Nations system to work closely with national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union in accordance with their respective mandates and, upon request, in such areas as gender
equality and the empowerment of women, including in conflict prevention and peace processes, institutional gender
mainstreaming, support to parliaments in promoting gender-sensitive legislation, increasing the representation of
women in parliaments, combating violence against women, including women in politics, and implementing relevant
United Nations resolutions;
13. Welcomes the contributions of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to the work of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development through the participation of parliamentarians, in convening a parliamentary event on the
work of parliaments to institutionalize the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as through its efforts to encourage
parliaments to engage in the voluntary national reviews of participating countries;
14. Invites the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to continue
and enhance their cooperation in supporting Governments in facilitating the orderly, safe, regular and responsible
migration and mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration
policies, and recalls the contribution of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in the preparatory process for the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration;107
15. Encourages the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to develop closer cooperation with
parliaments at the national and regional levels, including in terms of strengthening parliamentary capacities, inter alia,
in regard to the allocation of budgetary resources for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,102 as appropriate, in reinforcing the rule of law and helping to align national legislation with
international commitments, and to facilitate, within existing resources, greater South-South and triangular cooperation
between parliaments and parliamentarians;
16. Recognizes that the contributions of young people are important for the full and successful implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and urges Member States and United Nations entities, in
consultation with youth and youth-led and youth-focused organizations, to explore and promote concrete new avenues
for the full, effective, structured and sustainable participation of young people and youth-led organizations in relevant
decision-making processes and monitoring, in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life, including in
designing and implementing policies, programmes and initiatives, in particular when implementing the 2030 Agenda;
17. Takes note of the Common Principles for Support to Parliaments pioneered by the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and the United Nations Development Programme and endorsed by 136 national parliaments and
8 parliamentary assemblies with a view to further strengthening the capacity of parliaments to perform their functions;
_______________
107

Resolution 73/195, annex.

57

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

18. Calls upon United Nations country teams to develop, within their mandates and at the request of national
authorities, a more structured and integrated manner of working with national parliaments, through appropriate
mechanisms, inter alia, by involving parliaments in consultations on national development strategies and on
development aid effectiveness, where applicable;
19. Calls upon United Nations entities to avail themselves more systematically of the unique expertise of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union and its member parliaments in strengthening parliamentary institutions, particularly in
countries emerging from conflict and/or in transition to democracy;
20. Calls for regular annual exchanges and meetings at both the political and the operational levels between
senior officials of the United Nations and of the Inter‑Parliamentary Union, with a view to building greater coherence
in the work of the two organizations and helping to forge a more robust strategic partnership between them;
21. Encourages the United Nations system to reflect more systematically the role and contribution of
parliaments in its reports and draft strategic plans;
22. Welcomes the decision to observe 30 June of each year as the International Day of Parliamentarism, and
invites all Member States, national parliaments, organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant
international organizations, civil society, including non-governmental organizations, and all other relevant
stakeholders to observe the Day and to promote awareness of it, while stressing that the cost of all activities that may
arise from the observance of the Day by the United Nations should be met from voluntary contributions;
23. Acknowledges the preparations under way by the Inter-Parliamentary Union, in cooperation with the
United Nations, to organize, in May 2022 in the Russian Federation, the world conference on interfaith and interethnic dialogue with the participation of Heads of State, parliaments and representatives of world religions;
24. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,108 and requests that he submit to the General Assembly
at its seventy-sixth session a report under the item entitled “Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter‑Parliamentary Union” with a special focus on the implementation of the shared global
objectives of United Nations entities and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, including best practices and contributions of
Member States, national parliaments, the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to increase the
representation of women in parliaments.
RESOLUTION 74/305
Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2020, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.91 and
A/74/L.91/Add.1, sponsored by: Azerbaijan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Fiji, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Kenya (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Maldives,
Myanmar, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Turkey, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)

74/305. Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in developing
countries, particularly in Africa, by 2030
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,109 including the resolve of Member States to
eliminate malaria by 2030, and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development,110
Recalling that the period 2001–2010 was proclaimed by the General Assembly as the Decade to Roll Back Malaria
in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa,111 and that combating HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other
diseases is included in the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,

_______________
A/74/759.
Resolution 70/1.
110
Resolution 69/313, annex.
111
See resolution 55/284.
108
109

58

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also its resolution 73/337 of 12 September 2019 and all previous resolutions concerning the struggle
against malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
Recalling further World Health Assembly resolutions 60.18 of 23 May 2007 and 64.17 of 24 May 2011, urging
a broad range of national and international actions to scale up malaria control programmes,112 resolution 61.18 of
24 May 2008 on monitoring the achievement of health-related Millennium Development Goals113 and resolution 68.2
of 22 May 2015 on the global technical strategy and targets for malaria 2016–2030,114
Recalling with appreciation the Catalytic Framework to End AIDS and Tuberculosis and Eliminate Malaria in
Africa by 2030, adopted by the African Union at its twenty-seventh summit, held in Kigali from 10 to 18 July 2016,
Recalling the adoption of the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
antimicrobial resistance,115 and in this regard noting the impact of antimicrobial resistance,
Recalling also the commitment made by African leaders to end the epidemic of malaria by ensuring universal
and equitable access to quality health care and by improving health systems and health financing, contained in the
Common African Position on the post-2015 development agenda,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Economic and Social Council relating to the struggle against
malaria and diarrhoeal diseases, in particular resolution 1998/36 of 30 July 1998,
Recalling declarations and decisions on health issues, in particular those related to malaria, adopted by the
Organization of African Unity and the African Union, including the Abuja Declaration on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Other Related Infectious Diseases, containing the pledge to allocate at least 15 per cent of national budgets to the
health sector, the Abuja call for accelerated action towards universal access to HIV and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
services in Africa, issued by the Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its special summit on HIV
and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, held in Abuja from 2 to 4 May 2006, the decision of the Assembly of the African
Union at its fifteenth ordinary session, held in Kampala from 25 to 27 July 2010, to extend the Abuja call to 2015 to
coincide with the Millennium Development Goals, and the declaration of the special summit of the African Union on
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, held in Abuja from 12 to 16 July 2013,
Recognizing the leadership provided by the African Leaders Malaria Alliance and the continued commitment
to help to eliminate malaria by 2030, and encouraging the members of the Alliance to continue to provide political
leadership at the highest level in the fight against malaria in Africa,
Recalling the decision of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its thirty-first
ordinary session, held in Nouakchott on 1 and 2 July 2018, to endorse the “Zero malaria starts with me” campaign,
which is a continent-wide public outreach campaign modelled after the successful Senegalese campaign to engage
every person across every sector in every country in malaria control and elimination,
Recalling also the decision of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its
twenty-ninth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 3 and 4 July 2017, in which it endorsed the 2 million
community health workers initiative and requested the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the World
Health Organization and other partners, such as the Group of 20, to support and facilitate its implementation,
Recalling further the meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of State and Government held in London in April
2018, at which member countries committed to halve malaria in the Commonwealth countries by 2023, including the
pledge by stakeholders to raise 4 billion United States dollars in new commitments to malaria control and elimination,
Welcoming the leadership and commitment of the Asia Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance to eliminate malaria in
the Asia-Pacific region by 2030, and encouraging the members of the Alliance to continue to provide political
leadership at the highest level in the fight against malaria in the region,

_______________
See World Health Organization, documents WHASS1/2006-WHA60/2007/REC/1 and WHA64/2011/REC/1.
See World Health Organization, document WHA61/2008/REC/1.
114
See World Health Organization, document WHA68/2015/REC/1.
115
Resolution 71/3.
112
113

59

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the launch in January 2017 of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention to establish early
warning and response surveillance systems, respond to emergencies, build capacity and provide technical expertise
to address health emergencies in a timely and effective manner,
Reaffirming the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 of the World Health Organization, adopted
by the World Health Assembly in May 2015,114 and the Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016–2030 plan of
the RBM Partnership to End Malaria, launched at the third International Conference on Financing for Development,
held in Addis Ababa from 13 to 16 July 2015, which together provide the framework for achieving a reduction in
global malaria incidence and mortality rates by at least 90 per cent by 2030, in line with the 2030 Agenda,
Reaffirming also the World Health Organization framework for action for an emergency response to artemisinin
resistance in the Greater Mekong subregion of South-East Asia, launched in April 2013,
Reaffirming further the Declaration of Alma-Ata, adopted at the International Conference on Primary Health
Care, held in Alma-Ata from 6 to 12 September 1978, and its central role in launching the vision of the World Health
Organization on health for all,
Recalling the linkages among efforts being made to reach the targets set at the Extraordinary Summit of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held in Abuja on 24 and 25 April 2000, as necessary
and important for the attainment of the “Roll Back Malaria” goal116 and the targets of the Millennium Development
Goals by 2010 and 2015, respectively, and welcoming in this regard the commitment of Member States to respond to
the specific needs of Africa,
Acknowledging the remarkable progress seen in global malaria control between 2000 and 2015, during which
period mortality decreased in South-East Asia by 44 per cent, in Africa by 37 per cent and in the Americas by
27 per cent, but noting with concern the trend, in recent years, of stalling mortality rates in some countries, in particular
those with a high burden of malaria, and that the global malaria community needs to increase its focus on supporting
countries where malaria elimination will be hardest,
Recognizing that continued scale-up of integrated community case management of malaria, pneumonia and
diarrhoea in children under 5 years of age in the highest burden countries, and a strengthening of integrated delivery
systems for malaria prevention tools, would be a cost-effective solution to help in bridging systems gaps until health
systems are further strengthened,117 while also helping to reach populations at highest risk of malaria,
Recalling that the target for malaria reduction under Millennium Development Goal 6 had been achieved, with
the incidence rate decreasing by 18 per cent globally, from 76 to 63 cases per 1,000 population at risk, between 2000
and 2015,
Recognizing the important gains in reversing the malaria burden in Africa, including a 42 per cent decline in
malaria case incidence and a 66 per cent decline in malaria death rates between 2000 and 2015,118
Acknowledging the progress made in parts of Africa in reversing the high burden of malaria through political
engagement and sustainable national malaria control programmes, as well as the success achieved in respect of the
2015 goals concerning malaria control set by the World Health Assembly, the RBM Partnership to End Malaria and
the Abuja Declaration on Roll Back Malaria in Africa,116
Acknowledging also the progress made in Latin America in reducing the incidence of malaria, with 15 out of
21 countries reducing the incidence by 75 per cent by 2015, and in significantly decreasing the number of malaria
deaths by 79 per cent since 2000, owing to the commitment of countries to improving access to medicines and health
services and to sustained efforts in prevention programmes,
Recognizing that, despite the fact that increased global and national investments in malaria control have yielded
significant results in decreasing the burden of malaria in many countries, and that some countries are moving towards
the elimination of malaria, many countries continue to have unacceptably high burdens of malaria and, in order to
reach the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, must rapidly
_______________
See A/55/240/Add.1, annex.
See A/71/881, para. 39.
118
See World Health Organization, World Malaria Report 2016.
116
117

60

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

increase malaria prevention and control efforts, which rely heavily on medicines and insecticides whose utility is
continuously threatened by the development of resistance to antimalarial agents, as well as resistance of mosquitoes
to insecticides and their shift to outdoor biting and resting,
Aware that recent successes in prevention and control are fragile and can be maintained only with sufficient and
sustained national and international investment to fund global malaria control efforts fully,
Regretting the high number of people still without access to medicines, and underscoring that improving access
to medicines could save millions of lives every year,
Recognizing the serious challenges relating to substandard and falsified medical products, poor malaria
diagnostics and poor quality of vector control products,
Expressing concern about the continued morbidity, mortality and debility attributed to malaria, and recalling
that more efforts are needed as countries implement the Sustainable Development Goals and focus on targets set out
in the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 and the Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016–2030
plan to reduce malaria mortality rates by 90 per cent by 2030,
Aware that a concerted and coordinated global effort will be needed to substantially reduce malaria transmission,
morbidity and mortality by 2030 and achieve the targets set in the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030,
Recognizing that progress can be accelerated through a multi-pronged response by expanding currently
available life-saving interventions, making malaria a higher political priority and considering malaria control as an
integrated part of the health system, increasing accountability, strengthening regional and cross-border collaboration,
and ensuring that the development and use of new tools and approaches are maximized,
Gravely concerned about the health burden of malaria worldwide, with 228 million cases and 405,000 deaths
reported in 2018 alone,119 in particular in sub‑Saharan Africa, where an estimated 94 per cent of the deaths occur,
affecting mostly young children,
Taking note of the World Malaria Report 2019, which highlights, among other things, the need to increase the
coverage of malaria interventions for pregnant women and children in Africa, and that the amount invested for malaria
control and elimination efforts in 2018 fell short of the 5 billion dollars estimated to be required globally to stay on
track towards the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 milestones,
Gravely concerned that globally, children account for nearly 70 per cent of malaria-related deaths each year,
and noting that in 2018, an estimated 11 million pregnant women were infected with malaria in areas of moderate and
high disease transmission in sub-Saharan Africa (about 29 per cent of all pregnancies in the region) and as a result,
nearly 900,000 children were born with a low birthweight – a leading cause of child mortality,119
Acknowledging the “High burden to high impact” initiative as a country-led approach to reignite the pace of
progress and get back on track to achieve the targets of the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 in highburden countries,
Gravely concerned about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on health systems and
malaria, with a World Health Organization modelling analysis predicting a possibility of malaria deaths doubling in
2020 in sub-Saharan Africa as a result of severe disruptions to insecticide-treated net campaigns and a lack of access
to antimalarial medicines,
Welcoming the guidance issued by the World Health Organization regarding support to countries in their efforts
to safely maintain malaria services during the COVID-19 pandemic, including the RBM partnership to End Malaria
operational support to countries aimed at sustaining the planned campaigns for long-lasting insecticidal nets, seasonal
malaria chemoprevention and indoor residual spraying while practising social distancing for COVID-19, and
addressing stock-outs and bottlenecks relating to case management,
Emphasizing the importance of strengthening health systems to effectively sustain malaria control and
elimination efforts, recognizing the existing opportunities to control the vector-borne diseases and to further advance
_______________
119

See World Health Organization, World Malaria Report 2019.

61

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals (target 3.3) by incorporating an integrated approach in
delivering health services for prevention and eliminating the transmission of malaria and neglected tropical diseases,
and enable appropriate responses to other health issues and emergencies, including investment in entomology and
vector control for human resources and infrastructures,
Recognizing the critical need to strengthen malaria surveillance and data quality in all regions where malaria is
endemic in order to accurately measure progress, combat resurgence and target resources, particularly in the face of
growing resistance to treatment and preventive measures, and recognizing also that additional financing is needed to
strengthen national and regional surveillance systems and to support the sharing and analysis of best practices to
address urgent programmatic challenges, improve monitoring and evaluation, and conduct regular financial planning
and gap analyses,
Acknowledging that the expansion of malaria interventions can be used as an entry point for strengthening health
systems more broadly, including maternal and child health services and laboratory services, and for building stronger
health information and disease surveillance systems, which will further support the effective case management of
malaria,
Commending the efforts of the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the RBM
Partnership to End Malaria, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the World Bank and other
partners to fight malaria over the years,
Noting that the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria is a primary multilateral funder for malaria
control and elimination and that continued progress on malaria elimination will rely on, among other things, the
successful replenishment of the Global Fund and continued prioritization of malaria at the country level to sustain and
scale up malaria interventions to achieve the 2030 targets,
Noting also that existing bilateral donors have made a significant contribution to the progress on malaria control
and elimination, and recognizing the need for other donor countries to increase their investments, including official
development assistance, in anti-malaria efforts,
Recognizing the commitment of countries in which malaria is endemic to fight the disease, and recognizing also
the need for those countries to further increase the domestic resources they make available to combat the disease,
1. Welcomes the report of the World Health Organization transmitted by the Secretary-General,120 and calls
for support for the implementation of the recommendations contained therein;
2. Calls for increased support for the implementation of international commitments and goals pertaining to
the fight against malaria, including Goal 3, target 3.3, of the Sustainable Development Goals,109 as well as the related
targets outlined in the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 of the World Health Organization;114
3. Encourages malaria-endemic countries to increase the domestic resources they make available to combat
the disease and to review and strengthen national strategic plans in line with technical recommendations of the World
Health Organization and embed those firmly in national health sector and development plans;
4. Also encourages malaria-endemic countries to adopt a multisectoral approach to malaria control, taking a
whole-of-government approach to fully address its social, environmental and economic determinants and building on
synergies with other development priorities, including progressively achieving universal health coverage, and
recognizes that the roll-out of End Malaria councils and funds in several countries provides one example of how
countries are operationalizing this approach;
5. Further encourages malaria-endemic countries to scale up coverage of malaria prevention, diagnosis and
treatment, leverage existing channels for integrated service delivery where possible and strengthen systems to respond
to the needs of local communities;
6. Calls upon Member States, with the support of development partners, to provide universal access to
existing life-saving tools for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of malaria, in particular to the package of core
_______________
120

62

A/74/792.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

interventions recommended by the World Health Organization,121 and to ensure equity in access to health-care
services for all people at risk of contracting malaria, especially for those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations
and hard-to-reach populations, including by strengthening cross-collaboration;122
7. Encourages Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, international
institutions, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and civil society to continue to observe World Malaria
Day on 25 April, in order to raise public awareness of and knowledge about the prevention, control and treatment of
malaria as well as the importance of meeting the Sustainable Development Goals, and stresses the importance of
engaging local communities in this regard;
8. Acknowledges the urgent need to optimize existing health financing in general, including support for
malaria control through the use of surveillance to increase programmatic impact and efficiency, while also recognizing
that funding should increase substantially if the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 milestone for 2020
of 6.4 billion United States dollars per year is to be achieved;
9. Also acknowledges the commitments of financial support provided through multilateral and bilateral
channels, and recognizes the need for a substantial increase in financial support to meet the targets of the Global Technical
Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030, from an annual investment of 3.1 billion dollars in 2017 to 8.7 billion dollars by 2030;114
10. Welcomes the commitments of financial support, while recognizing the need for additional funding to
achieve malaria elimination targets, for malaria interventions and for research and development of preventive,
diagnostic and control tools from the international community, through funding from multilateral and bilateral sources
and from the private sector, as well as by making predictable financing available through appropriate and effective
aid modalities and in-country health financing mechanisms aligned with national priorities, which are key to
strengthening health systems, including malaria surveillance, and promoting universal and equitable access to highquality malaria prevention, diagnostic and treatment services, and noting in this regard that a high level of external
assistance per person at risk of contracting malaria is associated with a decrease in the incidence of the disease;
11. Urges the international community, United Nations agencies and private organizations and foundations to
support the implementation of the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030, including through support for
the complementary Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016–2030 plan and for programmes and activities at
the country level in order to achieve internationally agreed targets on malaria;
12. Calls upon the international community to continue to support the RBM Partnership to End Malaria and
partner organizations, including the World Health Organization, the World Bank and the United Nations Children’s
Fund, as vital complementary sources of support for the efforts of malaria-endemic countries to combat the disease;
13. Urges the international community to work in a spirit of cooperation towards effective, increased,
harmonized, predictable and sustained bilateral and multilateral assistance and research to combat malaria, including
support for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, in order to assist States, in particular malariaendemic countries, to implement sound national plans, in particular health plans and sanitation plans, including
malaria control and elimination strategies which may include evidence-based, cost-effective and context-appropriate
environmental management solutions, and integrated management of childhood illnesses, in a sustained and equitable
way that, inter alia, contributes to strengthening health system development approaches at the district level;
14. Calls upon the international community to assist malaria-endemic countries to strengthen their health
systems, medicine production and human resources for health to achieve universal health coverage;
15. Appeals to the malaria partners to resolve the financial, supply chain and delivery bottlenecks that are
responsible for stock-outs of long-lasting insecticidal nets, insecticides for indoor residual spraying, rapid diagnostic
tests and artemisinin-based combination therapies at the national level, whenever they occur, including through the
strengthening of malaria programme management at the country level;
16. Welcomes the contribution to the mobilization of additional and predictable resources for development by
voluntary innovative financing initiatives taken by groups of Member States, and in this regard notes the contributions
_______________
The package of core interventions, including quality-assured vector control, chemoprevention and diagnostic testing and treatment, can
dramatically reduce morbidity and mortality (see para. 36 of the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030).
122
The call in the Global Malaria Programme of the World Health Organization for universal access to prevention, diagnosis and treatment,
and for equity in access to services, are also key pillars of its Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030.
121

63

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of the International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID, the International Finance Facility for Immunization, the
advance market commitments for vaccines and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and expresses support for the work of the
Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Development and its special task force on innovative financing for health;
17. Urges malaria-endemic countries to work towards financial sustainability, to increase national resources
allocated to malaria control and to create favourable conditions for working with the private sector in order to improve
access to good-quality malaria services, as well as to build on synergies with other development priorities, including
the strengthening of health systems and engagement with development partners on implementing an effective vector
control response,123 as a contribution to the achievement of universal health coverage;
18. Urges Member States to assess and respond to the needs for integrated human resources at all levels of
the health system in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, to take action, as appropriate, to effectively
govern the recruitment, training and retention of skilled health personnel, and to give particular focus to the availability
of skilled personnel at all levels to meet technical and operational needs as increased funding for malaria control
programmes becomes available;
19. Stresses the importance of improved community-based systems to control malaria, bearing in mind that
families are often the starting point for effective health care for a child with a fever, and encourages malaria-endemic
countries to extend the reach of public health services by training and deploying community health workers,
particularly in rural and remote areas, and to expand integrated community case management of malaria, pneumonia
and diarrhoea, with a focus on children under 5 years of age;114
20. Affirms that close collaboration with community leaders and implementing partners, including
non-governmental organizations, health workers and volunteers, is an essential factor for success in combating
malaria, and calls upon Member States to introduce integrated, people-centred community services, in coordination
with health-care providers in the public and private sectors, and to continue efforts to collaborate with non-governmental
partners, health workers and volunteers in implementing community-based approaches to reach populations in remote
and hard-to-reach areas;114
21. Calls upon Member States to promote access to medicines, and emphasizes that access to affordable and
quality medicines and medical care in the event of sickness, as well as in the prevention, treatment and control of
diseases, is central to the realization of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health;
22. Urges the international community, inter alia, to support the work of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria to enable it to meet its financial needs and, through country-led initiatives with adequate
international support, to intensify access to affordable, safe and effective antimalarial treatments, including
artemisinin-based combination therapies, intermittent preventive therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and
infants, adequate diagnostic facilities, long-lasting insecticidal nets, including, where appropriate, through the free
distribution of such nets and, where appropriate, to insecticides for indoor residual spraying for malaria control, taking
into account relevant international rules, including the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants124
standards and guidelines;
23. Urges relevant international organizations, in particular the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, to enhance the assistance efforts of national Governments to provide universal access to
malaria control interventions to address all at-risk populations, in particular children and pregnant women, in malariaendemic countries, particularly in Africa, as rapidly as possible, with due regard to ensuring the proper use of those
interventions, including long-lasting insecticidal nets, and sustainability through full community participation and
implementation through the health system;
24. Calls upon Member States, in particular malaria-endemic countries, with the support of the international
community, to establish and/or strengthen national policies, operational plans and research, with a view to scaling up
efforts to achieve internationally agreed malaria targets, in accordance with the technical recommendations of the
World Health Organization;
_______________
123
124

64

See A/72/822, para. 44.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2256, No. 40214.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25. Commends those African countries that have implemented the recommendations of the Abuja Summit in
2000 to reduce or waive taxes and tariffs for nets and other products needed for malaria control,116 and encourages
other countries to do the same;
26. Calls upon United Nations agencies and their partners to continue to provide the technical support
necessary to build and enhance the capacity of Member States to implement the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria
2016–2030, together with the Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016–2030 plan, to meet the internationally
agreed goals;
27. Expresses deep concern about emerging drug and insecticide resistance in several regions of the world,
calls upon Member States, with support from the World Health Organization and other partners, to implement the
Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistance Containment and the Global Plan for Insecticide Resistance Management in
Malaria Vectors and to strengthen and implement surveillance systems for monitoring and assessing changing patterns
of drug and insecticide resistance, calls upon the World Health Organization to support Member States in the
development of their national insecticide resistance management strategies and to coordinate support at the
international level for countries to ensure that drug efficacy and insecticide resistance testing is fully operational in
order to enhance the use of artemisinin-based combination therapies and insecticides, and stresses that the data
gathered should be utilized to inform local decisions and for further research and development of safe and effective
therapies and new vector control tools;
28. Urges all Member States to prohibit the marketing and use of oral artemisinin-based monotherapies and
to replace them with oral artemisinin-based combination therapies, as recommended by the World Health
Organization, and to develop the financial, legislative and regulatory mechanisms necessary to introduce artemisininbased combination therapies at affordable prices in both public and private facilities;
29. Recognizes the importance of the development of safe, affordable and cost-effective vaccines, new
medicines and diagnostics to prevent and treat malaria and the need for further and accelerated research, including on
safe, effective and high-quality therapies, using rigorous standards, including by providing support to the Special
Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases,125 through effective global partnerships, such as, inter
alia, the various malaria vaccine initiatives and the Medicines for Malaria Venture, where necessary stimulated by
new incentives to secure their development, and through effective and timely support for the pre-qualification of new
antimalarials and their combinations;
30. Also recognizes the importance of innovation in addressing the challenges to eliminating malaria,
including the role of the World Intellectual Property Organization, in particular its Re: Search platform;
31. Calls upon the international community, including through existing partnerships, to increase investment
in and efforts towards research to optimize current tools, develop and validate new, safe and affordable malaria-related
medicines, products and technologies, such as vaccines, rapid diagnostic tests, insecticides and their delivery modes,
to prevent and treat malaria, especially for at-risk children and pregnant women, and test opportunities for integration
in order to enhance effectiveness and delay the onset of resistance;
32. Calls upon malaria-endemic countries to assure favourable conditions for research institutions, including
the allocation of adequate resources and the development of national policies and legal frameworks, where
appropriate, with a view to, inter alia, informing policy formulation and strategic interventions on malaria;
33. Reaffirms the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), the Doha Declaration on
the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of
30 August 2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, and the latest amendment to article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement, which came into effect in January 2017,
which provides flexibilities for the protection of public health, and in particular to promote access to medicines for all
and to encourage the provision of assistance to developing countries in this regard, and calls for the broad and timely
acceptance of the amendment to article 31 of the Agreement, as proposed by the General Council of the World Trade
_______________
A joint programme of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and the World
Health Organization.
125

65

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Organization in its decision of 6 December 2005, while recognizing that the protection of intellectual property is
important for the development of new medicine;
34. Recognizes the importance in the struggle against malaria of the World Health Organization Global
Strategy and Plan of Action on Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual Property, adopted by the World Health
Assembly on 24 May 2008;113
35. Calls upon malaria-endemic countries, development partners and the international community to support
the timely replacement of long-lasting insecticidal nets in accordance with the recommendations of the World Health
Organization on the service lives of the nets, in order to prevent the risk of malaria resurgence and a reversal of the
gains made to date and to make further progress in standardizing nets to reduce the cost of their production;
36. Notes the essential contribution of the scientific community and the private sector, and stresses that new
products such as improved diagnostic tools, more effective medicines and vaccines, new insecticides and more
durable insecticide-treated bednets are all fundamental to ensuring sustained progress in efforts to combat the
disease;126
37. Calls upon the international community to support ways to expand access to affordable, effective and safe
products and treatments, such as vector control measures, including indoor residual spraying, long-lasting insecticidal
nets, including through the free distribution of such nets, adequate diagnostic facilities, intermittent preventive
therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and infants, and artemisinin-based combination therapy for
populations at risk of falciparum malaria infection in endemic countries, particularly in Africa, including through
additional funds and innovative mechanisms, inter alia, for the financing and scaling up of artemisinin production and
procurement, as appropriate, to meet the increased need;
38. Recognizes the impact of the RBM Partnership to End Malaria, and welcomes the increased level of
public-private partnerships for malaria control and prevention, including the financial and in-kind contributions of
private sector partners and companies operating in Africa, as well as the increased engagement of non‑governmental
service providers, including the establishment of End Malaria funds;
39. Encourages the producers of long-lasting insecticidal nets and insecticides to accelerate technology
transfer to developing countries, and invites the World Bank and regional development funds to consider supporting
malaria-endemic countries in establishing factories to scale up production of long-lasting insecticidal nets and
insecticides, as well as antimalarial medicines and diagnostics, where appropriate;
40. Calls upon Member States and the international community, especially malaria-endemic countries, in
accordance with existing guidelines and recommendations of the World Health Organization and the requirements of
the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, including those related to DDT, to become fully
knowledgeable about the technical policies and strategies of the World Health Organization and the provisions of the
Stockholm Convention, including for indoor residual spraying, long-lasting insecticidal nets and case management,
intermittent preventive therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and infants, monitoring of in vivo resistance
studies to artemisinin-based combination therapies and monitoring and managing insecticide resistance and outdoor
malaria transmission, as well as to increase capacity for the registration and uptake of new vector control tools, the
safe, effective and judicious use of indoor residual spraying and other forms of vector control, including quality control
measures, in accordance with international rules, standards and guidelines;
41. Requests the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and donor agencies to
provide support to those countries that still use DDT for indoor residual spraying so as to ensure that it is implemented
in accordance with international rules, standards and guidelines, and to provide all possible support to malariaendemic countries to manage the intervention effectively and prevent all contamination, in particular of agricultural
products with DDT and other insecticides used for indoor residual spraying;
42. Recognizes the importance of a multisectoral strategy to advance global control efforts, invites malariaendemic countries to consider adopting and implementing the Multisectoral Action Framework for Malaria,
developed by the RBM Partnership to End Malaria and the United Nations Development Programme, and encourages
_______________
126

66

See A/73/853, para. 48.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

regional and intersectoral collaboration, both public and private, at all levels, especially in education, health,
agriculture, economic development and the environment, to advance malaria control objectives;
43. Also recognizes the need to strengthen malaria surveillance and data quality in all endemic regions, which
is important to the follow-up and review of the progress in implementing target 3.3 pertaining to Sustainable
Development Goal 3 and a key pillar of the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030, to enable Member
States to direct financial resources to populations most in need and to respond effectively to disease outbreaks,
particularly in the face of growing resistance to treatment and preventive measures;
44. Calls upon Member States and the international community to strengthen mechanisms for country-based
coordination of technical assistance to achieve alignment of the best approaches to implement World Health
Organization technical guidance and to mobilize support for the sharing and analysis of best practices to address
urgent programmatic challenges, to improve monitoring and evaluation and to conduct regular financial planning and
gap analysis;
45. Encourages sharing, across regions, of knowledge, experience and lessons learned with regard to the
control and elimination of malaria, particularly between the Africa, Asia-Pacific and Latin America regions;
46. Calls upon the international community to support the strengthening of health systems, national pesticide
and/or pharmaceutical policies and national drug and pesticide regulatory authorities, to monitor and fight against the
trade in substandard and falsified medical products, such as substandard antimalarial medicines, pesticides and/or
nets, and prevent their distribution and use, and to support coordinated efforts, inter alia, by providing technical
assistance for compliance with existing commitments and international regulations on the use of pesticides and to
improve surveillance, monitoring and evaluation systems and their alignment with national plans and systems so as
to better track and report changes in coverage, the need for scaling up recommended interventions and the subsequent
reductions in the burden of malaria;
47. Encourages Member States, the international community and all relevant actors, including the private
sector, to promote the coordinated implementation and enhance the quality of malaria-related activities, in accordance
with national policies and operational plans that are consistent with the technical recommendations of the World
Health Organization and recent efforts and initiatives, including, where appropriate, the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action, adopted at the Third High-level Forum on Aid Effectiveness, held in
Accra from 2 to 4 September 2008,127 and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, which
make important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made commitments to them, and the Buenos
Aires outcome document of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation;128
48. Recognizes the need for political commitment and financial support to sustain and expand the
achievements in the struggle against malaria and to meet the international malaria targets through prevention and
malaria control efforts to end the epidemic, while acknowledging the remarkable progress in combating malaria to date;
49. Calls upon all Member States to ensure that malaria and other essential services are sustained during the
COVID-19 pandemic and, on the basis of lessons learned, to work towards build resilient and sustainable health
systems;
50. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the Director General of the World Health
Organization and in consultation with Member States, to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/306
Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2020, by a recorded vote of 169 to 2, with 2 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.92, submitted by the President of the General Assembly and as amended in A/74/L.93
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,

_______________
127
128

A/63/539, annex.
Resolution 73/291, annex.

67

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Hungary, Ukraine

74/306. Comprehensive and coordinated response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is one of the greatest global challenges in the
history of the United Nations, and noting with deep concern its impact on health and the loss of life, mental health
and well-being, as well as the negative impact on global humanitarian needs, the enjoyment of human rights and
across all spheres of society, including on livelihoods, food security and nutrition, and education, the exacerbation of
poverty and hunger, disruption to economies, trade, societies and environments, and the exacerbation of economic
and social inequalities within and among countries, which is reversing hard-won development gains and hampering
progress towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development129 and all its Goals and targets,
Expressing solidarity with all people and countries affected by the pandemic, and condolences and sympathy to
the families of the victims of COVID-19 and those whose lives and livelihoods have been affected by the pandemic,
Determined to address the COVID-19 pandemic through a global response based on unity, solidarity and
renewed multilateral cooperation among States, peoples and generations that enhances the ability and resolve of States
and other relevant stakeholders to fully implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well as the
duty of States to cooperate with one another in accordance with the Charter, and recalling the importance of a timely
implementation in this decade of action and delivery for sustainable development of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development,130 the Beijing Declaration131 and Platform for Action,132 the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development133 and the outcomes of their review conferences, the Copenhagen
Declaration and Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development,134 the Paris Agreement,135 the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,136 the Bangkok Principles for the implementation of the
health aspects of the Sendai Framework, the New Urban Agenda,137 the political declaration of the high-level meeting
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
131
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
132
Ibid., annex II.
133
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
134
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
135
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
136
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
137
Resolution 71/256, annex.
129
130

68

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

on universal health coverage,138 the Declarations of Alma-Ata and Astana on primary health care, the political
declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on antimicrobial resistance,139 the Rome Declaration
of the Second International Conference on Nutrition140 and the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition, the
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast Track to Accelerating the Fight against HIV and to Ending the
AIDS Epidemic by 2030,141 the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the fight
against tuberculosis,142 the political declaration of the third high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, the political declaration of the Sustainable Development Goals
Summit143 and other relevant instruments, agreements, United Nations outcomes and programmes of action,
including the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of Action,144 the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway145 and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014–2024,146
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,147 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,148 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,148 the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,149 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination,150 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,151 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities,152 the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families,153 as well as the Declaration on the Right to Development,154 the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples155 and other human rights instruments, and emphasizing that States need to ensure that
all human rights are respected, protected and fulfilled while combating the pandemic and that their responses to the
COVID-19 pandemic respect and are in full compliance with their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, while emphasizing that all human rights are
universal, indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming the right of every human being, without distinction of any kind, to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health,
Recognizing the need to tackle health inequities and inequalities within and among countries through political
commitment, policies and international cooperation, including those that address social, economic and environmental
determinants of health,
Recalling that the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation are derived from the right to an adequate
standard of living and are inextricably related to the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health, as well as the right to life and human dignity,

_______________
Resolution 74/2.
Resolution 71/3.
140
World Health Organization, document EB136/8, annex I.
141
Resolution 70/266, annex.
142
Resolution 73/3.
143
Resolution 74/4, annex.
144
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chaps. I and II.
145
Resolution 69/15, annex.
146
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
147
Resolution 217 A (III).
148
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
149
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
150
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
151
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
152
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
153
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
154
Resolution 41/128, annex.
155
Resolution 61/295, annex.
138
139

69

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the primary responsibility of Governments to adopt and implement responses to the COVID-19
pandemic that are specific to their national context, and that emergency measures, policies and strategies put in place
by countries to address and mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 must be targeted, necessary, transparent,
non‑discriminatory, time-bound, proportionate and in accordance with their obligations under applicable international
human rights law, and reaffirming the obligation of States in this regard, in accordance with article 4 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Reaffirming its resolutions 74/270 of 2 April 2020, entitled “Global solidarity to fight the coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19)” and 74/274 of 20 April 2020, entitled “International cooperation to ensure global access to
medicines, vaccines and medical equipment to face COVID-19”, and World Health Assembly resolution 73.1 of
19 May 2020, entitled “COVID-19 response”,
Recognizing the fundamental role of the United Nations system in catalysing and coordinating the
comprehensive global response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the central efforts of Member States therein, recalling
the constitutional mandate of the World Health Organization to act, inter alia, as the directing and coordinating
authority on international health work, and recognizing its key leadership role within the broader United Nations
response and the importance of strengthened multilateral cooperation in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic and its
extensive negative impacts,
Welcoming the initiation, at the earliest appropriate moment, and in consultation with Member States, of a
stepwise process of impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, including using existing mechanisms, as
appropriate, to review experience gained and lessons learned from the World Health Organization-coordinated
international health response to COVID-19 and to make recommendations to improve capacity for global pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response requested by the World Health Assembly,
Expressing appreciation for the leadership of the Secretary-General, and recognizing all efforts and measures
proposed by him concerning the response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including his appeal for an
immediate global ceasefire, his appeal for peace at home and in homes around the world and his special appeal to
religious leaders to join forces, work for peace and focus on the world’s common battle to defeat COVID-19, as well
as the establishment of the United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund, the World Health Organization
Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan, the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19 and the United
Nations Framework for the Immediate Socioeconomic Response to COVID-19, and noting the issuance of all relevant
United Nations reports and policy briefs on the impacts of COVID-19, including the policy brief on COVID-19 and
human rights,
Recognizing the vital role of United Nations peacekeeping operations in contributing to the maintenance of
international peace and security, expressing deep appreciation for the United Nations personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including personnel from troop- and police-contributing countries, for their extraordinary
efforts in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences, stressing the importance of their health and wellbeing, and extending its condolences to those Member States whose peacekeepers have died as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic, and to the families of those peacekeepers,
Recognizing also the critical role of and efforts made by health workers, 70 per cent of whom are women, and
other front-line and essential workers, including humanitarian personnel, around the world aimed at addressing the
pandemic through measures to protect the health, safety and well-being of people, and emphasizing the importance
of providing health and other essential workers with the necessary protection and support,
Recognizing further the important role that civil society, including non‑governmental organizations and
women’s and community-based organizations, youth-led organizations and all other stakeholders such as volunteers
and national human rights institutions where they exist, as well as the academic and scientific community and the
private sector play in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences,
Recognizing with deep concern the special challenges facing developing countries, the most vulnerable
countries and, in particular, African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island
developing States, countries in conflict and post-conflict situations and countries affected by humanitarian
emergencies, as well as the specific challenges facing middle-income countries and noting as well the challenges
faced by developing countries graduating to higher income per capita status, and underlining the need to give
particular attention to their concerns and specific challenges,

70

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that countries dependent on commodities, remittances or tourism have been particularly affected
by the initial measures taken to contain the spread of COVID-19,
Deeply concerned that the COVID-19 pandemic, owing to its severe disruptions to societies, economies,
employment, global trade, supply chains and travel, and agricultural, industrial and commercial systems, is having a
devastating impact on sustainable development and humanitarian needs, including on poverty eradication,
livelihoods, ending hunger, food security and nutrition, education, environmentally sound waste management and
access to health care, especially for the poor and people in vulnerable situations and in countries in special situations
and those countries most affected, and is making the prospect of achieving all Sustainable Development Goals more
difficult, including eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions by 2030, ending hunger and achieving food
security and improved nutrition,
Noting with concern that the pandemic and related global economic and commodity price shocks could
significantly increase the number of countries in or at risk of debt distress, and deeply concerned about the impact of
high debt levels on countries’ abilities to withstand the impact of the COVID-19 shock and to invest in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recognizing that the COVID-19 pandemic has a disproportionately heavy impact on women, older persons,
youth and children, as well as the poor, vulnerable and marginalized segments of the population, and that responses
to the COVID-19 pandemic need to take into account multiple and intersecting forms of violence, discrimination,
stigmatization, exclusion and inequalities,
Deeply concerned that the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the social and economic
situation of women and girls and their access to education and essential health services, the increased demand for paid
and unpaid care work and the reported surge of sexual and gender-based violence, including domestic violence and
violence in digital contexts, during confinement, are deepening already existing inequalities and risk reversing the
progress in achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls made in recent decades,
Noting with appreciation approaches adopted in many local, national, regional and global responses that are
comprehensive, innovative, participatory, transparent, inclusive, coordinated, context-specific, whole-of-government,
whole-of-society and people-centred, disability-inclusive, gender-sensitive, age-responsive, conflict-sensitive,
prevention-oriented and fully respect human rights,
Expressing deep concern about the rise in discrimination, hate speech, stigmatization, racism and xenophobia
related to the pandemic, and stressing the need to counter them as part of the COVID-19 response,
Expressing concern about the spread of disinformation and propaganda, including on the Internet, which can be
designed and implemented so as to mislead, to violate human rights, including the right to privacy and to freedom of
expression, and to incite violence, hatred, discrimination or hostility, and emphasizing the important contribution of
journalists and media workers in countering this trend,
Multilateralism and solidarity
1. Reaffirms its commitment to international cooperation, multilateralism and solidarity at all levels and as
the only way for the world to effectively respond to global crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic and their
consequences, and acknowledges the key leadership role of the World Health Organization and the fundamental role
of the United Nations system in catalysing and coordinating the comprehensive global response to the COVID-19
pandemic and the central efforts of Member States therein;
2. Calls for intensified international cooperation and solidarity to contain, mitigate and overcome the
pandemic and its consequences through responses that are people-centred, gender-responsive, with full respect for
human rights, multidimensional, coordinated, inclusive, innovative, swift and decisive at all levels, including by
supporting the exchange of information, scientific knowledge and best practices through, inter alia, the development
of new interoperable data tools and the strengthening of platforms to inform mitigation and response actions and
continuously monitor the impact of the pandemic, especially to assist people in vulnerable situations and the poorest
and most vulnerable countries, to build a more equitable, inclusive, sustainable and resilient future and to get back on
track to realize the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;129
3. Supports the Secretary-General’s appeal for an immediate global ceasefire, including to help to create
corridors for life-saving aid, open windows for diplomacy of dialogue and bring hope to places and people among the
71

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

most vulnerable to COVID-19, notes with concern the impact of the pandemic on conflict-affected States as well as
those at risk of conflict, and that conditions of violence and instability in conflict situations can exacerbate the
pandemic, and that inversely the pandemic can exacerbate the adverse humanitarian impact of conflict situations, and
supports the continued work of United Nations peacekeeping operations in delivering their mandates and supporting
national authorities in their response to the COVID-19 pandemic, within their mandates and capacities, in
collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and other United Nations entities in the country, and in this regard takes
note of Security Council resolution 2532 (2020) of 1 July 2020;
4. Calls upon Member States, who have the primary responsibility to counter discrimination and hate speech,
and all relevant actors, including political and religious leaders, to promote inclusion and unity in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic and to prevent, speak out and take strong action against racism, xenophobia, hate speech,
violence, discrimination, including on the basis of age, and stigmatization;
5. Calls upon States to ensure that all human rights are respected, protected and fulfilled while combating
the pandemic and that their responses to the COVID‑19 pandemic are in full compliance with their human rights
obligations and commitments;
Jointly protecting
6. Calls upon Member States to put in place a whole-of-government and whole-of-society response,
outlining both immediate and long-term actions, with a view to sustainably strengthening their health system and
social care and support systems, and preparedness and response capacities, engaging with communities and
collaborating with relevant stakeholders, and also calls upon Member States to maintain the continued functioning of
the health system and strengthening of primary health care in all relevant aspects necessary for an effective public
health response to the COVID-19 pandemic and other ongoing epidemics, and the uninterrupted and safe provision
of population- and individual-level services, for, inter alia, communicable diseases, including by ensuring the
continuation of undisrupted vaccination programmes, neglected tropical disease prevention and control,
non-communicable diseases, mental health and mother and child health, and to promote access to safe and affordable
drinking water and adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and safe, sufficient and nutritious food and
the enjoyment of a diversified, balanced and healthy diet, recognizing in this regard the importance of increased
domestic financing and development assistance where needed in the context of achieving universal health coverage;
7. Calls upon States to take all measures necessary to ensure the right of women and girls to the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of health, including sexual and reproductive health, and reproductive rights, in
accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,133 the
Beijing Platform for Action132 and the outcome documents of their review conferences, and to develop sustainable
health systems and social services, with a view to ensuring universal access to such systems and services without
discrimination;
8. Calls upon Member States to strengthen efforts to address communicable diseases, including HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria and hepatitis, as part of universal health coverage and to ensure that the fragile gains are sustained
and expanded by advancing comprehensive approaches and integrated service delivery and ensuring that no one is
left behind;
9. Also calls upon Member States to further strengthen efforts to address non‑communicable diseases as part
of universal health coverage, recognizing that people living with non-communicable diseases are at a higher risk of
developing severe COVID-19 symptoms and are among the most impacted by the pandemic;
10. Encourages Member States to address mental health in their response to and recovery from the pandemic
by ensuring widespread availability of emergency mental health and psychosocial support;
11. Calls upon international organizations and other relevant stakeholders to support all countries, upon their
request, in the implementation and review of their multisectoral national action plans and in strengthening their health
systems to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, and in maintaining the safe provision of all other essential public
health functions and services;
12. Urges Member States to enable all countries to have unhindered, timely access to quality, safe, efficacious
and affordable diagnosis, therapeutics, medicines and vaccines, and essential health technologies, and their
components, as well as equipment, for the COVID-19 response;
72

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

13. Recognizes the role of extensive immunization against COVID-19 as a global public good for health in
preventing, containing and stopping transmission in order to bring the pandemic to an end, once safe, quality,
efficacious, effective, accessible and affordable vaccines are available;
14. Calls upon Member States, with support from the United Nations system, to coordinate efforts to develop
a science- and evidence-based, cooperative and comprehensive approach to allocating scarce resources for combating
the COVID-19 pandemic based on public health needs;
15. Encourages Member States to work in partnership with all relevant stakeholders to increase research and
development funding for vaccines and medicines, leverage digital technologies, and strengthen scientific international
cooperation necessary to combat COVID-19 and to bolster coordination, including with the private sector, towards
rapid development, manufacturing and distribution of diagnostics, therapeutics, medicines, including antiviral
medicines and medical science-based treatment protocols, and vaccines, and personal protective equipment, and
explore ways to consider integrating, as appropriate, safe and evidence-based traditional and complementary medicine
services, according to national context and priorities, adhering to the objectives of efficacy, safety, equity, accessibility,
and affordability, while taking into account and supporting existing mechanisms, tools and initiatives, such as the
Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, and relevant pledging appeals;
16. Reaffirms the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS Agreement) as amended, and also reaffirms the 2001 World Trade Organization Doha Declaration on
the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which recognizes that intellectual property rights should be interpreted and
implemented in a manner supportive of the right of Member States to protect public health and, in particular, to
promote access to medicines for all, and notes the need for appropriate incentives in the development of new health
products;
17. Calls upon Member States to increase the availability of high-quality, timely and reliable data
disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability, geographic location and other
characteristics relevant in national contexts to inform COVID-19 responses, while respecting the right to privacy;
18. Calls upon Member States and other relevant stakeholders to keep food and agriculture supply chains
functioning, ensure the continued trade in and movement of food and livestock, products and inputs essential for
agricultural and food production to markets, minimize food loss and waste, support workers and farmers, including
women farmers, in agriculture and food supply chains to continue their essential work, including cross-border, in a
safe manner, mobilize and allocate adequate resources and enhance institutional capacities for an accelerated
implementation of sustainable agriculture and food systems, provide continued access to adequate, safe, affordable
and nutritious food, and provide adequate social safety nets and assistance to minimize the negative effects of loss of
livelihoods and increasing food prices on food insecurity and malnutrition, and underlines that the pandemic is
exacerbating existing high levels of acute food insecurity and humanitarian needs;
19. Reaffirms the need to ensure the safe, timely and unhindered access of humanitarian and medical
personnel responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as their means of transport, supplies and equipment, and
to support, facilitate and enable transportation and logistical supply lines, in order to allow such personnel to efficiently
and safely perform their task of assisting affected civilian populations, and in this regard also reaffirms the need to
take the measures necessary to respect and protect such personnel, hospitals and other medical facilities, as well as
their means of transportation, supplies and equipment; and recalls its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 on the
strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian emergency assistance of the United Nations and all subsequent
General Assembly resolutions on the subject, including its resolution 74/118 of 16 December 2019;
20. Strongly urges States to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral economic, financial or
trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full
achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
21. Calls upon Member States to ensure protection for those most affected, women, children, youth,
persons with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples, refugees and internally
displaced persons and migrants, and the poor, vulnerable and marginalized segments of the population, and prevent
all forms of discrimination, especially in the context of timely, universal, inclusive, equitable and non-discriminatory
access to safe, quality, effective and affordable health care and services and medical supplies and equipment,
including diagnostics, therapeutics, medicine and vaccines, and to leave no one behind, with an endeavour to reach
the furthest behind first, founded on the dignity of the human person and reflecting the principles of equality and
non-discrimination;
73

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

22. Also calls upon Member States to prevent the harmful effects of the pandemic on children by mitigating
the damaging socioeconomic impacts, including by ensuring the continuity of child-centred services on an equal
access basis, upholding the right of the child to education and supporting education that is inclusive, equitable and of
quality by implementing appropriate measures, including by supporting families in ensuring the return of children, in
particular girls and children in vulnerable situations, to school, when it is safe to do so, in the immediate aftermath of
the pandemic, and while in confinement, to support school systems, teachers and families in ensuring a reliable source
of daily nutrition and using accessible and inclusive distance-learning solutions to close the digital divide, while
protecting children from violence, abuse and exploitation in digital contexts, and recalling that no child shall be
subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her privacy and family;
23. Calls upon Member States and other stakeholders to prevent, monitor and address the disproportionate
effects of the pandemic on older persons, including the particular risks that they face in accessing social protection
and health services, and to ensure that health-care decisions affecting older persons respect their dignity and promote
their human rights, including the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health;
24. Also calls upon Member States and other stakeholders to include persons with disabilities in all stages of
policymaking and decision-making related to COVID-19 response and recovery, as well to eliminate barriers and
discrimination against persons with disabilities, in particular women and girls and those in vulnerable situations, in
accessing support and health-care services on an equal basis with others, and to prevent, monitor and address the
disproportionate effects of the pandemic on persons with disabilities, including the lack of accessible communications,
support and services, as well as the unique challenges and barriers that they will face following the end of the
pandemic;
25. Calls upon Member States to take all the measures necessary to address the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on migrant workers, and to continue to support them and their families in response to the economic and
social challenges that they face;
26. Also calls upon Member States to integrate prevention, mitigation and response efforts and reinforce plans
and structures to counter the increase of sexual and gender-based violence, including domestic violence and violence
in digital contexts, and harmful practices such as child, early and forced marriage as part of their COVID-19 responses,
including by maintaining and designating protection shelters, hotlines and help desks, health and support services as
well as legal protection and support as essential services for all women and girls;
27. Further calls upon Member States to adopt measures to recognize, reduce and redistribute women’s and
girls’ disproportionate share of unpaid care and domestic work and the feminization of poverty, which is exacerbated
by the COVID‑19 pandemic, including through poverty eradication measures, labour policies, public services and
gender-responsive social protection programmes;
28. Acknowledges the critical role that women are playing in COVID-19 response efforts, and urges Member
States to ensure full, equal and meaningful participation in decision-making and equal access to leadership and
representation in all spheres of society for women, having in mind the need for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, as well as for older persons and youth, and for the poor, vulnerable and
marginalized segments of the population, and to fully respect, protect and fulfil existing commitments and obligations
with respect to the equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, as part of their COVID-19
response;
29. Takes note of the United Nations communications response initiative, and re-emphasizes the importance,
in the context of public health, of ensuring public access to information and protecting fundamental freedoms, in
accordance with the international human rights obligations of States and national legislation, recognizing therefore
the important contribution of the promotion and protection of the safety of journalists in this regard, and recognizes
the importance of the free flow of information and knowledge, while taking steps to counter the spread of
misinformation and disinformation online and offline, including through the dissemination of accurate, clear and
evidence- and science-based information, bearing in mind the right to freedom of opinion and expression and the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds;

74

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recovering together
30. Calls upon Member States and other relevant stakeholders to advance, with determination, bold and
concerted actions to address the immediate social and economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, while striving
to get back on track to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by designing recovery strategies out of the crisis
to accelerate progress towards the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as
helping to reduce the risk of future shocks;
31. Calls upon Member States to design recovery strategies based on risk-informed, sustainable financing
policies, supported by integrated national financing frameworks in accordance with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,130 to enact the policies necessary to address the
economic crisis and depression, begin economic recovery and minimize the negative effects on livelihoods, including
targeted measures for poverty eradication, social protection for formal and informal sector workers, increased access
to finance and capacity-building for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, financial inclusion mechanisms,
strong fiscal stimulus packages and supportive monetary policies, and calls upon donors and other stakeholders to
support countries that lack the capacity to implement such measures, in particular least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well as low- and middle-income countries;
32. Welcomes the steps taken by the Group of 20 and the Paris Club to provide a time-bound suspension of
debt service payments for the poorest countries and by international financial institutions to provide liquidity and other
support measures to ease the debt burden of developing countries, and encourages all relevant actors, including private
and commercial creditors, to address risks of debt vulnerabilities, through existing channels, in developing countries
due to the pandemic;
33. Stresses the important role that official development assistance plays in complementing the efforts of
countries to mobilize public resources domestically, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable countries, and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals;
34. Invites Member States, as appropriate, to consider the experience achieved by the international community
in countering the COVID-19 pandemic through enhancing the effective implementation of relevant international
conventions and multilateral instruments on transport and transit with the aim of promoting global sustainable
transport;
35. Emphasizes that the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted the normal functioning of open markets, global
supply chain connectivity and the flow of essential goods, and that these disruptions hinder the fight against poverty,
hunger and inequality, ultimately undermining efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
reaffirms that emergency measures must be targeted, proportionate, transparent and temporary, that they must not
create unnecessary barriers to trade or disruption to global supply chains, and that they must be consistent with World
Trade Organization rules, and calls upon Member States to reaffirm the critical importance of connected global supply
chains in ensuring the unimpeded flow of vital medical and food supplies and other essential goods and services across
borders, by air, by land and by sea;
36. Encourages donors to leverage the global Aid for Trade agenda to enable developing countries, in
particular least developed countries, to benefit from the opportunities afforded by global value chains and foreign
investment in their sustainable recovery efforts;
37. Emphasizes the need to strengthen development cooperation and to increase access to concessional
finance, especially in the context of the global pandemic, and calls upon donors that have not done so to intensify their
efforts to fulfil their respective official development assistance commitments, particularly to least developed countries;
38. Also emphasizes that illicit financial flows, in particular those caused by tax evasion, corruption and
transnational organized crime, reduce the availability of vital resources for responding to and recovering from the
COVID-19 pandemic and financing the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and calls
upon Member States to recommit to addressing the challenges of preventing and combating illicit financial flows and
strengthening international cooperation and good practices on assets return and recovery, including by more effective
measures to implement existing obligations under the United Nations Convention against Corruption156 and the
_______________
156

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.

75

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,157 and to implement
effective, inclusive and sustainable measures to prevent and combat corruption within the framework of the 2030
Agenda;
39. Calls upon Member States and international financial institutions to provide more liquidity in the financial
system, especially in all developing countries, and supports the continued examination of the broader use of special
drawing rights to enhance the resilience of the international monetary system;
40. Calls upon Member States and all relevant stakeholders to promote research and capacity-building
initiatives, as well as to enhance cooperation on and access to science, innovation, technologies, technical assistance
and knowledge-sharing, including through improved coordination among existing mechanisms, especially with
developing countries, in a collaborative, coordinated and transparent manner and on mutually agreed terms in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic and towards advancing the Sustainable Development Goals;
Building back better
41. Reaffirms its full commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as the blueprint for
building back better after the pandemic, and calls upon Member States to ensure that efforts to implement the 2030
Agenda for all, by reaching all its Goals and targets, are strengthened and accelerated in this decade of action for
building more sustainable, peaceful, just, equitable, inclusive and resilient societies where no one is left behind and to
make sustainable long-term investments to eradicate poverty in all its forms, as well as address inequalities and human
rights abuses or violations, which have greatly exacerbated vulnerabilities and increased the negative effects of the
pandemic and address climate change and the environmental crisis in order to build a better future for all;
42. Recognizes that the COVID-19 pandemic has tested the capacity of institutions, reaffirms its commitment
to promote good governance at all levels and to develop effective, accountable and transparent institutions and more
responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making processes, and calls upon Member States,
with support from the United Nations system, to ensure a risk-informed response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its
consequences, including by redoubling efforts to resolve or prevent conflict and to support post-conflict countries;
43. Emphasizes that the crisis provides an opportunity to consider the international debt architecture and the
international financial system, with a view to its strengthening;
44. Calls upon Member States to build, strengthen and promote health systems, including primary health care,
that are strong, resilient, functional, well governed, responsive, accountable, integrated, community-based, peoplecentred and capable of quality service delivery, supported by a competent health workforce, adequate health
infrastructure and essential public health functions and capacities, enabling legislative and regulatory frameworks, as
well as sufficient and sustainable funding, calls upon donors and other relevant stakeholders to support countries that
lack the capacity to implement such measures, recognizes the value of an integrated One Health approach that fosters
cooperation between the human health, animal health and plant health, as well as environmental and other relevant
sectors, and underlines the urgent need for continued close work between the long-standing Tripartite, together with
other relevant parts of the United Nations system and relevant stakeholders in this regard;
45. Also calls upon Member States to develop recovery plans that promote sustainable development and drive
transformative change towards more inclusive and just societies, including by empowering and engaging all women
and girls, especially those in vulnerable situations;
46. Stresses that the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to reduce the risk of the economic, social
and environmental impacts of disasters, many of which are exacerbated by climate change, desertification and
biodiversity loss, and emphasizes the need to support and invest in adaptation and action at all levels to enhance efforts
to build resilience through, inter alia, disaster risk reduction, community empowerment and participation and the
sustainable management of ecosystems and the protection and sustainable use of biodiversity, including wildlife, to
reduce the likelihood of zoonotic infections and the impacts and costs of disasters;
47. Urges Member States to adopt a climate- and environment-responsive approach to COVID-19 recovery
efforts, including by aligning investments and domestic policies with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
_______________
157

76

Ibid., vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and the Paris Agreement135 and the ultimate objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change,158 reversing biodiversity loss, and strengthening approaches that reduce emissions and enhance both
resilience and efficiency, such as increasing the global share of renewable energy, promoting pathways towards
climate-resilient development, developing more ambitious national plans and, for parties to the Paris Agreement,
communicating or updating their nationally determined contributions in 2020, immediately curbing greenhouse gas
emissions and achieving sustainable consumption and production patterns, taking climate change and biodiversity
into account in fiscal planning, budgeting, public investment management and procurement practices, and emphasizes
in this regard that mitigation of and adaptation to climate change represent an immediate and urgent global priority,
and stresses the importance of mobilizing means of implementation from all sources, including adequate financial
support, inter alia, for mitigation and adaptation, taking into account the specific needs and special circumstances of
developing countries, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change;
48. Recognizes that substantial digital divides and data inequalities exist within and among countries and
regions, and between developed and all developing countries, and that many developing countries lack affordable
access to information and communications technologies, and urges Member States and other relevant stakeholders to
accelerate the catalytic role that digital technologies play in reducing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
education, health, communication, commerce and business continuity and to take concerted action to further digital
governance and economy, scientific research, emerging technologies and new data sources and to build resilient,
inclusive and integrated data and statistical systems, under the leadership of national statistical offices, that can respond
to the increased and urgent data demands in times of disaster and ensure a path towards the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals;
Partnerships, commitments and the way forward
49. Encourages the continued implementation of current reforms of the United Nations development system,
and affirms that a reinvigorated resident coordinator system allows for better, more integrated and coherent support
to countries and that a strategic, flexible, country-owned, results- and action-oriented United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework, as well as its transparency and accountability, will help to support countries’
response to and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic while safeguarding and accelerating progress toward
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals;
50. Encourages the United Nations development system and the United Nations country teams, in close
cooperation with international financial institutions and other relevant international stakeholders, to support countries’
responses to the pandemic and its consequences based on countries’ programme needs and priorities, including by
building on the United Nations Framework for the Immediate Socioeconomic Response to COVID-19, and helping
to develop preparedness capacities to prevent, detect and respond to ongoing and future public health threats, including
the regional challenges of a cross-border nature;
51. Urges the strengthening of international cooperation at all levels, including North-South, South-South and
triangular cooperation, bearing in mind that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement
to, North-South cooperation, as well as public-private partnerships to contain, mitigate and defeat the pandemic and
its consequences, including by exchanging information, scientific knowledge and best practices and intensifying the
contributions of such partnerships to the full, effective and accelerated implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
52. Encourages Member States to engage all relevant stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector
and academia, as appropriate, through the establishment of participatory and transparent multi-stakeholder platforms
and partnerships, to provide input to the development, implementation and evaluation of health- and social-related
policies and reviewing progress for the achievement of national objectives for universal health coverage;
53. Encourages Member States and other stakeholders, including the private sector and international financial
institutions, to mobilize a large-scale, coordinated and comprehensive global response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and its consequences, taking note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Shared responsibility, global
_______________
158

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.

77

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

solidarity: responding to the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19”, in which the need for a multilateral response
amounting to at least 10 per cent of global gross domestic product is highlighted;
54. Urges Member States and other stakeholders to mobilize resources to support United Nations appeals to
respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences, while underlining the importance of rapid and flexible
funding and for these efforts not to replace or divert resources away from other emergencies or ongoing work to safeguard
progress in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, and supports the Central Emergency Relief Fund and countrybased pooled funds, which have already played a key role in the humanitarian response, and will continue to do so;
55. Urges Member States and all relevant actors to align investments with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including investments supporting progress towards compliance with the International Health
Regulations (2005),159 universal health coverage and reduction of inequalities, to help to ensure a sustainable and
inclusive recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as pandemic preparedness and the prevention and detection
of and response to any future global health threats, including outbreaks and antimicrobial resistance;
56. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to work with all relevant stakeholders and mobilize the United
Nations network of partnerships to support Member States, upon their request, and other actors in national, regional
and international responses to the COVID-19 pandemic;
57. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide regular updates to the General Assembly on the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences and to report thereon to the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
58. Decides to follow up on the implementation of the present resolution under the item entitled “Global health
and foreign policy” of the agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 74/307
Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2020, by a recorded vote of 122 to none, with 31 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/74/L.57 and A/74/L.57/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Eswatini,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic

_______________
159

78

World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

74/307. United response against global health threats: combating COVID‑19
The General Assembly,
Expressing grave concern and deep sadness at the global crisis triggered by the novel disease COVID-19
pandemic and its unprecedented negative health, economic and social impacts on the international community,
Acknowledging that the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic is a powerful reminder of our interconnectedness
and vulnerabilities, as the virus respects no borders, and that combating this pandemic calls for an open, transparent,
robust, coordinated, large-scale, science-based and inclusive global response in the spirit of solidarity,
Noting the importance of utilizing all available policy tools to safeguard the global economy, financial markets,
trade and global supply chains in order to minimize the economic damage from the pandemic, restore global growth
and maintain market stability,
Recognizing the essential role of the United Nations as the body that can effectively bring together a global
response to control and contain the spread of COVID-19 and address the critical interlinkages between health, trade,
finance and economic and social development, and acknowledging that the disease will negatively impact endeavours
aimed at achieving the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030,
Recognizing also the great effort undertaken by people around the world to follow the measures recommended
by the World Health Organization and national authorities in order to control and fight the spread of the pandemic,
Expressing deep concern about the serious risks posed to all countries, in particular developing and least
developed countries, and notably African countries and small island developing States, where health systems and
economies may be less able to cope with the challenge, as well as the particular risk faced by refugees and displaced
persons,
Commending the United Nations for its recommitment to the timely implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development160 and its determination to lead a recovery that is inclusive and sustainable,
Emphasizing the urgent need for initiatives, on a voluntary basis, that focus on preventing threats from emerging
pandemics and on building an effective global defence against outbreaks of deadly infectious diseases should such
threats emerge,
Welcoming the initiative taken by the Secretary-General, noting the initiatives by the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank Group, and acknowledging the role of the World Health Organization,
Recalling the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, held in New York on 23 September 2019, and
reaffirming its political declaration, entitled “Universal health coverage: moving together to build a healthier world”161
as a means of strengthening health systems, and recalling also its resolution 74/270 of 2 April 2020, entitled “Global
solidarity to fight the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)”,
Expressing profound gratitude to all front-line health-care workers as the fight against the pandemic continues,
and emphasizing the importance of providing them with the necessary protection and support,
Welcoming the outcomes of the virtual Extraordinary Summit of the Group of 20, chaired by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, President of the Group for 2020, on 26 March 2020, and the call therein for effective and coordinated
action to fight this global health crisis,
1. Calls for intensified international cooperation and multilateral efforts in handling disease outbreaks,
including by sharing timely, accurate and transparent information, exchanging epidemiological and clinical data,
sharing materials necessary for research and development, and implementing the International Health Regulations
(IHR 2005)162 and relevant guidance;

_______________
Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 74/2.
162
World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.
160
161

79

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Emphasizes the need for the United Nations system, as well as relevant regional and international
organizations and financial institutions, to collaborate in order to ensure that the adverse social, economic,
humanitarian and financial impacts of COVID-19 are addressed in a timely and non-discriminatory manner;
3. Also emphasizes the need for full respect for human rights, and stresses further that there is no place for
any form of discrimination, racism and xenophobia in the response to the pandemic;
4. Stresses the necessity of urgent short-term actions to step up the global efforts to fight global health crises
and pandemics and maintain economic stability, including by taking the following steps:
(a)

Swift delivery of medical supplies, especially diagnostic tools, treatments, medicines and vaccines;

(b) Increasing research and development funding for vaccines and medicines, leveraging digital technologies
and strengthening scientific international cooperation;
(c) Expanding manufacturing capacity to meet the increasing needs for medical supplies and ensuring that
these are made widely available, at an affordable price, on an equitable basis, where they are most needed and as
quickly as possible;
(d) Engaging with the front-line international organizations, notably the United Nations, the World Health
Organization, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank Group and multilateral and regional development
banks, to deploy robust, coherent, coordinated and rapid financial packages to strengthen global financial safety nets;
5. Reaffirms the necessity to support economies, protect workers, businesses, especially micro-, small and
medium-sized enterprises, and the sectors most affected, and shield the vulnerable through adequate social protection,
and in this context welcomes the statement by the leaders of the Group of 20 on injecting 5 trillion United States
dollars into the global economy, as part of targeted fiscal policy, economic measures and guarantee schemes to
counteract the social, economic and financial impacts of the pandemic;
6. Calls upon the international community, regional and international organizations and relevant
stakeholders to give high priority to people, particularly the elderly, women and girls, displaced persons and refugees
and persons with disabilities, and areas that are most vulnerable, particularly developing and least developed countries,
in order to mitigate any drawback towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, and highlights the need to
address risks of debt vulnerabilities in developing countries, including least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries, small island developing States and African countries, as well as middle-income countries, due
to the pandemic;
7. Calls upon Member States to enhance coordination on public health and financial measures as well as
cooperation at the national, regional and international levels to confront and combat this pandemic;
8. Stresses the need to give appropriate consideration to the issue of halting and reversing the global threats
posed by epidemics through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;160
9. Urges Member States, in conjunction with the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank Group and other regional and international organizations, working
within their existing mandates, to embark on sustainable pandemic preparedness, response and recovery planning,
taking into account strengthening the capacity of health sector institutions in developing countries;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the United Nations system in support of global action towards
sustainable recovery, including through the work of the United Nations resident coordinators and United Nations
country teams, especially in the most vulnerable countries;
11. Decides to remain seized of the matter, and requests the Secretary-General to coordinate and follow up on
the various relevant initiatives and to report to the General Assembly on the implementation of the present resolution
in a timely manner.

80

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
number

74/277.

Title

Page

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects ..................................... 82

81

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 74/277
Adopted on 18 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/411/Add.1, para. 6)1

74/277. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 73/293 of 20 May 2019,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through its
peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the field of peacekeeping
and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations make to peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations expressed by Member States, in particular troop- and police-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the effectiveness of the
work of the Special Committee,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;2

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee contained in
chapter V of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take all steps necessary
to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in years to come or that participate in the future in the Special Committee for three consecutive years as
observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chair of the Special Committee, become members at the following
session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its efforts for a
comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects and shall review the
implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United
Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.

_______________
1
2

82

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/74/19).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
number

74/249.

Title

Page

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors............................................. 84
Resolution B .................................................................................................................................................... 84

74/254.

Seconded active-duty military and police personnel .............................................................................................. 85
Resolution B .................................................................................................................................................... 85

74/260.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti ...................................................................... 86
Resolution B .................................................................................................................................................... 86

74/261.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur ............................................................ 87
Resolution C .................................................................................................................................................... 87

74/278.

Closed peacekeeping missions............................................................................................................................ 91

74/279.

Triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement to Member States
for contingent-owned equipment ........................................................................................................................ 92

74/280.

Support account for peacekeeping operations ....................................................................................................... 92

74/281.

Financing of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda.............................................................................. 100

74/282.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy .......................................................................... 102

74/283.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei......................................................................... 103

74/284.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic ............................................................................................................................ 107

74/285.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus............................................................................ 111

74/286.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo........... 115

74/287.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti ............................................................................. 120

74/288.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo .......................................................... 121

74/289.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia............................................................................................. 124

74/290.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali..................................... 125

74/291.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.......................................................................... 129

74/292.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon .................................................................................. 133

74/293.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan..................................................................................... 137

74/294.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara .................................................... 141

74/295.

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)..................................................... 145

74/296.

Global service delivery model .......................................................................................................................... 148

______
* Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chair or another officer of the Bureau of the
Committee.

83

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/249 B
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/603/Add.1, para. 6)

74/249. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 73/268 B of 3 July 2019 and 74/249 A of 27 December 2019,
Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements for the 12-month period from 1 July
2018 to 30 June 2019 and the report of the Board of Auditors on United Nations peacekeeping operations,2 the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United
Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 20193 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,4
1. Takes note of the audit opinions and findings, and endorses the recommendations, contained in the report
of the Board of Auditors;2
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;4
3.

Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of its report and the streamlined format thereof;

4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of
the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended
30 June 2019;3
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the recommendations of the Board
of Auditors and the related recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt and timely manner;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to indicate an expected time frame for the implementation
of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the priorities for their implementation, including the office
holders to be held accountable and measures taken in that regard;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide, in his next report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations, a full explanation
for the delays in the implementation of all outstanding recommendations of the Board, the root causes of the recurring
issues and the measures to be taken.

_______________
Resolution 74/249, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 74/249 A.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. II (A/74/5 (Vol. II)).
3
A/74/709.
4
A/74/806.
1

84

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/254 B
Adopted on 6 August 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/615/Add.1, para. 8)

74/254. Seconded active-duty military and police personnel
B5
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 67/287 of 28 June 2013, 68/252 of 27 December 2013, 71/263 of 23 December 2016
and 74/254 A of 27 December 2019 and its decision 74/540 B of 13 April 2020,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on seconded active-duty military and police personnel6
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,7
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;6

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,7 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Regrets that a permanent solution to the secondment issue has not yet been found, thus compelling the
General Assembly to resort to prolonging exceptional measures;
4. Recalls that the selection of staff members, including seconded active-duty military and police
personnel, should be made in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and requests
the Secretary-General to enable the participation of all Member States in seconding active-duty military and
police personnel;
5. Takes note of paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and, with a view to identifying
solutions to conflicts between national legislation and the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,8 decides
to authorize the Secretary-General to extend the exceptional measures regarding seconded active-duty military and
police personnel until 31 July 2021, unless a permanent solution is implemented before that date;
6. Urges the Secretary-General to ensure accountability and impartiality of the seconded active-duty military
and police personnel through applicable and relevant standards and supervision;
7. Recalls paragraph 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
increase outreach and engagement with Member States and to explore all viable options to resolve issues involving
the engagement of seconded active-duty military and police personnel, in particular the conflicts between national
legislation and the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, and to report on the development of the matter
and present his proposals for its consideration at the first part of its resumed seventy-fifth session.

_______________
Resolution 74/254, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 74/254 A.
6
A/74/700.
7
A/74/769.
8
ST/SGB/2018/1.
5

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/260 B
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/608/Add.1, para. 6)

74/260. Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
B9
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti10 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11
Recalling Security Council resolution 2350 (2017) of 13 April 2017, by which the Council established the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, as a follow-on peacekeeping mission in Haiti, for an initial period
of six months from 16 October 2017 until 15 April 2018, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2466 (2019) of 12 April 2019, by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Mission for a final period of six months, until 15 October 2019,
Recalling also its resolution 72/260 A of 24 December 2017 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 74/260 A of 27 December 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti as at
30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 21.1 million United States dollars,
representing some 8.0 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 109 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take all possible measures to obtain outstanding assessed contributions
from Member States;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other
relevant resolutions;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;10

_______________
Resolution 74/260, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 74/260 A.
10
A/74/667.
11
A/74/791.
9

86

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Also takes note of the amount of 3,144,600 dollars comprising the unencumbered balance of 189,300
dollars in respect of the financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, as well as the other revenue and adjustments
in the amount of 2,955,300 dollars in respect of the same period, and decides to defer action thereon until it considers
the final performance report of the Mission;
8. Further takes note of the amount of 275,400 dollars representing the increase in estimated staff assessment
revenue in respect of the financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, and decides to defer action thereon until
it considers the final performance report of the Mission;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 74/261 C
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/607/Add.1, para. 6)

74/261. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
C12
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019,13 the note by the SecretaryGeneral on the financing of the Operation for the period from 1 July to 31 December 202014 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15
Recalling Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, by which the Council established the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for an initial period of 12 months from 31 July 2007, and
the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was
resolution 2525 (2020) of 3 June 2020, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until
31 December 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 62/232 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the Operation and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 74/261 B of 31 March 2020,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Noting the hybrid nature of the Operation, and in that regard stressing the importance of ensuring full
coordination of efforts between the African Union and the United Nations at the strategic level, unity of command at
the operational level and clear delegation of authority and accountability lines,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
_______________
For resolution 74/261 A, see section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49
(A/74/49), vol. I; for resolution 74/261 B, see section I of the present volume.
13
A/74/627.
14
A/74/810.
15
A/74/833.
12

87

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
as at 30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 281.5 million United States dollars,
representing some 1.7 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 31 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Operation of mandated tasks
and the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the
identification of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
88

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the
Operation has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose
options for improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Underlines the important contribution that programmatic activities make to the implementation of the
mandates of the Operation, including for the prevention and resolution of conflicts, and that all such activities must
be directly linked to the mandates of the Operation;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Operation is responsible and accountable for the use of
its programmatic funds, in line with relevant guidance and bearing in mind the specific context in which the Operation
operates, and to include, in his next budget submission and performance report, detailed information on the
programmatic activities of the Operation, including on how those activities have contributed to the implementation of
mission mandates, on the linkage to the mandates, on the implementing entities and on the performance by the
Operation of appropriate oversight;
20. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
21. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Operation personnel, in particular uniformed personnel,
and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the
General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Operation;
22. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
24. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and
to propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
27. Further requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
28. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;

89

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

30. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Operation is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
31. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Operation for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;13
Estimates for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2020
32. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Operation in an amount not exceeding
240,182,900 dollars for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2020;
Financing of the commitment authority for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2020
33. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 240,182,900 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
34. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 33 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 6,919,200 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Operation for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2020;
Estimates for the support account for peacekeeping operations, the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy, and the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda, for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
35. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur the amount of 17,600,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, comprising 13,729,100
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations, 2,314,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi, Italy, and 1,557,500 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the estimates for the support account for peacekeeping operations, the United Nations Logistics
Base and the Regional Service Centre
36. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 8,800,450 dollars for the period from 1 July to
31 December 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
37. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 36 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 745,900 dollars, comprising the prorated share of 551,700 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 112,700 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 81,500 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
38. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 8,800,450 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 1,466,742 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
39. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 38 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 745,900 dollars, comprising the prorated share of 551,700 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 112,700 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 81,500 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
40. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 33 above, their respective share of the
90

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 12,256,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
41. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 12,256,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 40 above;
42. Decides that the increase of 2,002,500 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 12,256,300 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 40 and 41 above;
43. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs
5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
44. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
45. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”.
RESOLUTION 74/278
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/910, para. 17)

74/278. Closed peacekeeping missions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/293 of 30 June 2011 and its decision 73/547 C of 3 July 2019,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping
missions16 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,17
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;16

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,17 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Stresses that all Member States should fulfil their financial obligations as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations on time, in full and without conditions;
4.
in full;
5.

Urges all Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions
Takes note of paragraphs 10 and 11 (b) of the report of the Advisory Committee;18

6. Recalls regulations 5.3, 5.4, 5.5 and 5.10 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,19
regrets that claims payable to troop- and police-contributing countries and outstanding dues to Member States from
closed peacekeeping operation budgets have not been settled, and emphasizes its commitment to resolve this issue;

_______________
A/66/665, A/67/739, A/68/666, A/69/659, A/70/552, A/71/652, A/72/649, A/73/604 and A/74/574.
A/66/713, A/66/713/Corr.1, A/67/837, A/68/837, A/69/827, A/70/829, A/71/856, A/72/838, A/73/888 and A/74/772.
18
A/74/772.
19
ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2013/4/Amend.1.
16
17

91

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take every measure necessary to reimburse troop- and
police-contributing countries before the closure of any peacekeeping mission, and to avoid the current practice of
delaying reimbursements to troop- and police-contributing countries;
8. Notes that the use of unreturned balances to cover temporary liquidity needs of the Organization in 2018
and 2019 is not an established mechanism, and emphasizes that this practice is not sustainable;
9. Decides to consider at the second part of its resumed seventy-fifth session the financial position of closed
peacekeeping missions, under the agenda item entitled “Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping operations”.
RESOLUTION 74/279
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/910, para. 17)

74/279. Triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement to Member States for contingentowned equipment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 71/296 of 30 June 2017,
Having considered the letter dated 10 February 2020 from the Chair of the 2020 Working Group on ContingentOwned Equipment to the Chair of the Fifth Committee transmitting the report of the Working Group,20 the report of
the Secretary-General on the triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement to Member States for
contingent-owned equipment21 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,22
1. Takes note of the report of the 2020 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment20 and the report of
the Secretary-General;21
2. Acknowledges with appreciation the work of the Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment and
the guidance and advice provided by the Secretariat during its substantive 2020 session;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation.
RESOLUTION 74/280
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/910, para. 17)

74/280. Support account for peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A of 23 December
1993, 48/226 C of 29 July 1994, 49/250 of 20 July 1995 and 50/221 B of 7 June 1996, section I of its resolution
55/238 of 23 December 2000, its resolutions 55/271 of 14 June 2001, 56/241 of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of 27 June
2002, 57/318 of 18 June 2003, 58/298 of 18 June 2004, 59/301 of 22 June 2005, 60/268 of 30 June 2006, 61/279 of
29 June 2007, 62/250 of 20 June 2008, 63/287 of 30 June 2009, 64/271 of 24 June 2010, 65/290 of 30 June 2011,
66/265 of 21 June 2012, 67/287 of 28 June 2013, 68/283 of 30 June 2014, 69/308 of 25 June 2015, 70/287 of 17 June
_______________
A/74/689.
A/74/698.
22
A/74/754.
20
21

92

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2016, 71/295 of 30 June 2017, 72/288 of 5 July 2018, 73/308 of 3 July 2019 and its other relevant resolutions, as well
as its decisions 49/469 of 23 December 1994, 50/473 of 23 December 1995, 72/558 of 5 July 2018 and 73/555 of
3 July 2019,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 201923 and on the budget for the support account
for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021,24 the report of the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee on the proposed budget of the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account
for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 202125 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,26
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations being able to respond and deploy rapidly to a peacekeeping
operation upon the adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security Council, within 30 days for traditional
peacekeeping operations and 90 days for complex peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all phases of peacekeeping operations, including the
liquidation and termination phases,
Mindful that the level of the support account should broadly correspond to the mandate, number, size and
complexity of peacekeeping missions,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget for the support account for peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 202124 and the report of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee on the proposed budget of the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;25
2. Reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human and financial resources and
policies with a view to ensuring the full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and
activities and the implementation of policies in this regard;
3. Also reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly
entrusted with responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters;
4.

Further reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

5. Reaffirms that the support account funds shall be used for the sole purpose of financing human resources
and non-human resources requirements for backstopping and supporting peacekeeping operations at Headquarters,
and that any changes in this limitation require the prior approval of the General Assembly;
6. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the backstopping of peacekeeping operations, as well as
the need for full justification for that funding in support account budget submissions;
7. Further reaffirms the need for effective and efficient administration and financial management of
peacekeeping operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to identify measures to increase the productivity
and efficiency of the support account;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other
relevant resolutions;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,26 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

_______________
A/74/622.
A/74/743.
25
A/74/716.
26
A/74/809.
23
24

93

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Decides to maintain, for the financial period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, the funding mechanism
for the support account used in the current period, from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020, as approved in paragraph 3 of
its resolution 50/221 B;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;23
Budget estimates for the financial period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
12. Approves the support account requirements in the amount of 355,694,200 United States dollars for the
financial period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of the amount of 13,381,300 dollars for the enterprise
resource planning project, 868,500 dollars for the global service delivery model project, 3,881,600 dollars for
peacekeeping capability readiness and 18,053,700 dollars for Umoja maintenance and support costs, including
1,355 continuing posts and 2 new temporary posts, as well as the abolishment, redeployment, reassignment and
reclassification of posts, as set out in annex I to the present resolution, and 62 continuing and 6 new general temporary
assistance positions and 50 person-months, as set out in annex II, as well as related post and non-post requirements;
Financing of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial periods from 1 July 2018
to 30 June 2019 and from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
13. Decides that the requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial period
from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The total amount of 1,916,800 dollars, comprising investment revenue of 691,500 dollars, other
miscellaneous revenue of 26,200 dollars and the cancellation of prior-period obligations of 1,199,100 dollars in
respect of the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, to be applied to the resources required for the financial period
from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;
(b) The amount of 3,802,200 dollars, representing the excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping
Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, to be applied to the resources required for the
financial period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;
(c) The balance of 349,975,200 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active peacekeeping
operations for the financial period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;
(d) The net estimated staff assessment income of 28,128,200 dollars, comprising the amount of 26,817,100
dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021 and the increase of 1,311,100 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2019, to be offset against the balance referred to in subparagraph (c) above, to be
prorated among the budgets of the individual active peacekeeping operations.
Annex I
A
Posts to be established under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period
from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
Posts
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

GS (OL)

Finance and Budget
Assistanta

New

Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance
Office of Programme Planning,
Finance and Budget

Field Operations Finance
Division
Subtotal

94

1
1

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Posts
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

P‑4

Administrative
Officer

New

Secretariat of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
1
Subtotal

1

Total

2

Note: The specific assignment and location of each of the new posts is set out in the report of the Secretary-General on the budget for the
support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021 (A/74/743) and referenced in the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/74/809).
a

Post establishment effective as of 1 January 2021.

Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other level).

B
Redeployment, reassignment, reclassification and abolishment of posts under the support account
for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
Redeployment
Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance/Office of Programme Planning, Finance and Budget,
Finance Division
Redeployment of the Trust Fund Management Section from the Programme Planning and Budget Division
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/Entebbe
Redeployment of 2 posts (1 P-4 Resident Auditor, 1 P-3 Resident Auditor) from the Resident Audit Office of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (as of 1 April 2021)
Reassignment and downward reclassification
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Inspection and Evaluations Division/Entebbe
Reassignment and reclassification of 1 post (1 FS Audit Assistant to be reassigned and reclassified as 1 NGS
Programme Assistant) from the Internal Audit Division/ Resident Audit Office of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Abolishment
Department of Peace Operations/Single regional political-operational structure/ Americas Division (United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti)
Abolishment of 4 posts (1 P-5 Senior Political Affairs Officer, 2 P-4 Political Affairs Officers, 1 P-2 Associate Political
Affairs Officer)
Department of Operational Support/Office of Support Operations/Capacity Development and Operational Training
Service
Abolishment of 1 post (1 GS (OL) Information Management Assistant)
Department of Operational Support/Office of Supply Chain Management/Uniformed Capabilities Support Division
Abolishment of 1 post (1 P-3 Finance Officer)

95

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Department of Operational Support/Office of Supply Chain Management/ Logistics Division
Abolishment of 1 post (1 GS (OL) Administrative Assistant)
Department of Operational Support/Office of Supply Chain Management/ Procurement Division
Abolishment of 1 post (1 GS (OL) Team Assistant)
Department of Operational Support/Division for Special Activities/Office of the Director
Abolishment of 1 post (1 P-4 Administrative Officer)
Office of Information and Communications Technology/Operations Support Division
Abolishment of 1 post (1 GS (OL) Information Systems Assistant)
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/Resident Audit Office of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Abolishment of 3 posts (1 P-5 Chief Resident Auditor, 1 P-4 Resident Auditor, 1 FS Audit Assistant) (as of 1 April 2021)
______
Abbreviations: FS, Field Service; GS (OL), General Service (Other level); NGS, national General Service.

Annex II
General temporary assistance positions to be established under the support account for peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
Position
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

1

P-4

Human Resources
Officer

Continuation

–

3 months,
P‑3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

3 months,
GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

Department of Peace Operations
Office of the Under-SecretaryGeneral/ Office of the Director for
Coordination and Shared Services

Executive Office

Office of Rule of Law and Security
Institutions

Justice and Corrections
Service

1

P-4

Judicial Affairs
Officer

Continuation

Policy, Evaluation and Training
Division

Policy and Best Practices
Service

1

P-3

Political Affairs
Officer (Action for
Peacekeeping)

Continuation

Integrated Training Service

1

P-3

Training Officer

New

Subtotal

4

–

4 months,
FS

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

4 months,
NGS

Leave replacement

Continuation

United Nations Office to the African Union
Administrative Support Section

Subtotal

96

–

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Position
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

Department of Operational Support
Office of Support Operations

Office of Supply Chain
Management

Division of Administration,
New York

Health-Care Management
and Occupational Safety and
Health Division

1

P-4

Medical Officer

Continuation

1

P-4

Mental Health
Officer (posttraumatic stress
disorder)

New

Human Resources Services
Division

10

P-3

Human Resources
Officer
(occupational
groups)

Continuation

3

GS (OL)

Human Resources
Assistant
(occupational
groups)

Continuation

2

P‑3

Finance and
Budget Officer

Continuation

1

P-4

Finance and
Budget Officer
(post-traumatic
stress disorder)

New

1

GS (OL)

Finance and
Budget Assistant
(post-traumatic
stress disorder)

New

Enabling and Outreach
Service

1

GS (OL)

Procurement
Assistant

Continuation

Headquarters Client Support
Service

–

6 months,
P-4

Leave replacement

New

Subtotal

20

–

4 months,
P-3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

4 months,
GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

Management Evaluation
Unit

1

P-3

Legal Officer

Continuation

Finance Division

1

P-4

Finance Officer
(accounting
policy)

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Benefits Assistant
(insurance)

Continuation

1

P-4

Programme
Officer (gender
parity)

Continuation

1

P-3

Human Resources
Officer (mobility)

Continuation

Uniformed Capabilities
Support Division

Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance
Office of the Under-SecretaryGeneral

Office of Programme Planning,
Finance and Budget

Office of Human Resources

Business Partner Service

Global Strategy and Policy
Division

97

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Position
Department/office

Business Transformation and
Accountability Division

Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

Administrative Law
Division/ Conduct and
Discipline Service

1

P-3

Programme
Officer

Continuation

Administrative Law
Division/ Appeals
Management Section

1

P-4

Legal Officer

New

1

P-3

Legal Officer

New

Analytics and Project
Management Service

1

P-4

Management and
Programme
Analyst

Continuation

1

P‑4

Project Manager
(rations
management
system)

Continuation

1

P‑3

Information
Systems Officer
(fuel management
system)

Continuation

1

P‑3

Information
Systems Officer
(customer
relationship
management for
the troopcontribution
management
project)

Continuation

–

4 months,
P‑3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

6 months,
GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

1

P‑4

Investigator
(sexual
harassment)

Continuation

2

P‑3

Investigator
(sexual
harassment)

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Administrative
Assistant

Continuation

1

P‑4

Investigator
(sexual
harassment)

Continuation

2

P‑3

Investigator
(sexual
harassment)

Continuation

Subtotal

9

Office of Information and Communications Technology
Enterprise Solutions Service

Enterprise applications
centre – Asia (Bangkok
office)

Enterprise applications
centre – Asia (New York
office)

Subtotal

3

Office of Internal Oversight Services
Executive Office

Investigations Division

New York

Nairobi

98

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Position
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

1

NGS

Administrative
Assistant

Continuation

2

P‑3

Resident
Investigator

Continuation

United Nations Mission in
South Sudan

1

NGS

Administrative
Assistant

Continuation

United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in
Mali

1

P‑5

Chief Resident
Investigator

Continuation

1

P‑4

Resident
Investigator

Continuation

2

P‑3

Resident
Investigator

Continuation

1

NGS

Administrative
Assistant

Continuation

United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the
Congo

1

P‑3

Resident
Investigator

Continuation

United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic

2

P‑3

Resident
Investigator

Continuation

United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in
Mali

1

P‑4

Resident Auditor

Continuation

1

P‑3

Resident Auditor

Continuation

United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic

3

P‑4

Resident Auditor

Continuation

2

P‑3

Resident Auditor

Continuation

Subtotal

26

6 months,
GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

P‑4

Conflict
Resolution Officer

Continuation

3 months,
P‑4

Leave replacement

Continuation

Entebbe

Internal Audit Division

Executive Office of the Secretary-General
–
Subtotal

–

Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services
Regional Ombudsman’s Office in Entebbe

2
Subtotal

2

Office of Legal Affairs
General Legal Division

Administration of Justice
Cluster
Subtotal

–
–

99

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Position
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

–

1.5
months,
P‑3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

1.5
months,
GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

1

P‑3

Administrative
Officer

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Human Resources
Assistant

Continuation

Department of Global Communications
Executive Office

Subtotal

–

Department of Safety and Security
Office of the Under-SecretaryGeneral

Executive Office

Subtotal

2

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Field Engagement Division

Peace Missions Support
Section (Addis Ababa)

1

P-3

Human Rights
Officer (United
Nations Office to
the African Union)

Continuation

Thematic Engagement, Special
Procedures and Right to
Development Division

Methodology, Education
and Training Section (New
York)

1

P-4

Human Rights
Officer (sexual
exploitation and
abuse)

Continuation

Subtotal

2

Total

68

Positions
and 50 personmonths (positions
of less than 12
months’
duration)a

Note: The specific assignment and location of each of the general temporary assistance positions is set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021 (A/74/743) and
referenced in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/74/809).
Abbreviations: FS, Field Service; GS (OL), General Service (Other level); NGS, national General Service.
a

Person-months are indicated in the column entitled “Level”.

RESOLUTION 74/281
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/910, para. 17)

74/281. Financing of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 69/307 of 25 June 2015, 70/289 of 17 June 2016, 71/293 of 30 June 2017, 72/286 of
5 July 2018 and 73/309 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decisions 72/558 of 5 July 2018 and 73/555 of 3 July 2019,

100

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the Regional Service Centre in
Entebbe, Uganda,27 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,28
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307, and 70/286
of 17 June 2016, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of their relevant provisions;
2.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;27

3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,28 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
4. Acknowledges the support of the Government of Uganda in facilitating the work of the United Nations at
the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
5.

Decides to upgrade the post of Chief of the Regional Service Centre to the D-2 level;

6. Continues to encourage the Secretary-General to enable support mechanisms to facilitate military air
transportation services provided by Member States intended to service multiple peacekeeping missions in the region
from Entebbe;
7. Welcomes the complementarity of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe and the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and encourages the Secretary-General to seek enhanced synergies between the two
support entities in their respective mandates;
8. Notes the ongoing study of the Strategic Air Operations Centre, the Transportation and Movements
Integrated Control Centre and the Global Procurement Support Section in the context of an integrated supply chain
management approach, and looks forward to receiving the results of the study for its consideration at the seventy-fifth
session;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Regional Service
Centre for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;29
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
10. Approves the amount of 37,159,200 United States dollars for the maintenance of the Regional Service
Centre for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;
Financing of the budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
11. Decides that the requirements for the Regional Service Centre for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June
2021 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 165,400 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2019, to be applied against the resources required for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;
(b) The amount of 35,581,400 dollars, to be prorated among the budgets of the active client peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;
(c) The amount of 1,412,400 dollars, with respect to the share of client special political missions, to be funded
under section 3, Political affairs, as may be approved by the General Assembly in the context of the proposed
programme budget for 2021;

_______________
A/74/594 and A/74/717.
A/74/737/Add.3.
29
A/74/594.
27
28

101

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(d) The estimated staff assessment income of 3,723,300 dollars, comprising the amount of 3,530,200 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021 and the increase of 193,100 dollars in respect of the period from
1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, to be offset against the balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated
among the budgets of the individual active client peacekeeping operations;
12. Also decides to consider at its seventy-fifth session the question of the financing of the Regional Service
Centre.
RESOLUTION 74/282
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/910, para. 17)

74/282. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994 and its resolution 62/231 of
22 December 2007,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/310 of 3 July 2019, as
well as its decision 73/555 of 3 July 2019,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002 concerning the establishment of the strategic deployment
stocks and its subsequent resolutions on the status of the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, the latest
of which was resolution 73/310,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base30
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,31
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by the Government of Italy to the United Nations Logistics
Base at Brindisi, Italy, and by the Government of Spain to the secondary active telecommunications facility in
Valencia, Spain;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,31 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other
relevant resolutions;
4. Takes note of paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to establish one post of
Engineering Assistant, water and wastewater environmental engineering specialist (national General Service) in the
Environmental Technical Support Unit;
5. Recalls paragraph 10 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to abolish one post of Property
Management Assistant (G-7) and to establish one post of Property Management Officer (P-3) in the Property
Management Cell, Central Service;
6. Also recalls paragraph 4 of its resolution 72/287 of 5 July 2018, and looks forward to considering a
proposal on the revised concept of operations for strategic deployment stocks that takes into account the
_______________
30
31

102

A/74/620 and A/74/730.
A/74/737/Add.6.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

observations and recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, and stresses the need for further
analysis on enhanced effectiveness, expected efficiencies and location issues;
7. Notes the ongoing study of the Strategic Air Operations Centre, the Transportation and Movements
Integrated Control Centre and the Global Procurement Support Section in the context of an integrated supply chain
management approach, and looks forward to receiving the results of the study for its consideration at the seventy-fifth
session;
8. Welcomes the complementarity of the United Nations Logistics Base and the Regional Service Centre in
Entebbe, Uganda, and encourages the Secretary-General to seek enhanced synergies between the two support entities
in their respective mandates;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the United Nations
Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;32
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
10. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations Logistics Base amounting to 62,058,200 United States
dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;
Financing of the budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
11. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2020 to
30 June 2021 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 3,064,300 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2019, to be applied against the resources required for the period from 1 July 2020 to
30 June 2021;
(b) The balance of 58,993,900 dollars, to be prorated among the budgets of the active peacekeeping operations
for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021;
(c) The estimated staff assessment income of 5,745,000 dollars, comprising the amount of 6,142,000 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021 and the decrease of 397,000 dollars in respect of the period from
1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, to be offset against the balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated
among the budgets of the individual active peacekeeping operations;
12. Also decides to consider at its seventy-fifth session the question of the financing of the United Nations
Logistics Base.
RESOLUTION 74/283
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/911, para. 6)

74/283. Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei33 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,34

_______________
A/74/620.
A/74/579 and A/74/723.
34
A/74/737/Add.2.
32
33

103

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1990 (2011) of 27 June 2011, by which the Council established the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei for a period of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2519 (2020) of 14 May 2020, by which
the Council extended until 15 November 2020 the mandate of the Force as set out in paragraph 2 of resolution
1990 (2011) and the mandate modification set forth in resolution 2024 (2011) of 14 December 2011 and paragraph 1
of resolution 2075 (2012) of 16 November 2012,
Recalling also its resolution 66/241 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/311 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of
3 July 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei as at
30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 46.4 million United States dollars,
representing some 1.9 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 95 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,34 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
104

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Force of mandated tasks and
the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the identification
of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Force
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Underlines the important contribution that programmatic activities make to the implementation of the
mandates of the Force, including for the prevention and resolution of conflicts, and that all such activities must be
directly linked to the mandates of the Force;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Force is responsible and accountable for the use of its
programmatic funds, in line with relevant guidance and bearing in mind the specific context in which the Force
operates, and to include, in his next budget submission and performance report, detailed information on the
programmatic activities of the Force, including on how those activities have contributed to the implementation of
mission mandates, on the linkage to the mandates, on the implementing entities and on the performance by the Force
of appropriate oversight;
20. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of
his next report on cross-cutting issues;
21. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Force personnel, in particular uniformed personnel, and
requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the General
Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Force;
22. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
105

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
24. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period, except for that in
paragraph 26;
26. Decides to abolish one post of Transport Assistant (national General Service);
27. Requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and to
propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
29. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
31. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
32. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;35
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
33. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei the
amount of 283,114,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 263,783,900 dollars for
the maintenance of the Force, 15,078,200 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations, 2,541,700
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and 1,710,500 dollars for the Regional Service Centre
in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
34. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 106,167,862 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 15 November 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
35. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 34 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,863,524 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 1,249,125 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 454,462 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 92,812 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 67,125 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
36. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 176,946,438 dollars for the period from
16 November 2020 to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 23,592,858 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
_______________
35

106

A/74/579.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
37. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 36 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 3,105,876 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,081,875 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 757,438 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account, the prorated share of 154,688 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 111,875 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
38. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 34 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 7,369,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
39. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 7,369,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 38 above;
40. Decides that the increase of 50,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 7,369,700 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 38 and 39 above;
41. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
42. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices established
by the General Assembly;
43. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei”.
RESOLUTION 74/284
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/912, para. 6)

74/284. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic36 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37
Recalling Security Council resolution 2149 (2014) of 10 April 2014, by which the Council established the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic as from 10 April
2014 for an initial period until 30 April 2015, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
_______________
36
37

A/74/621 and A/74/756.
A/74/737/Add.10.

107

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2499 (2019) of 15 November 2019, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 November 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 68/299 of 30 June 2014 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/312 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of
3 July 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic as at 30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
188.5 million United States dollars, representing some 3.5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only 93 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States,
in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Mission of mandated tasks
and the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the
identification of the resources required for each mandated task;

108

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Mission
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Underlines the important contribution that programmatic activities make to the implementation of the
mandates of the Mission, including for the prevention and resolution of conflicts, and that all such activities must be
directly linked to the mandates of the Mission;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mission is responsible and accountable for the use of its
programmatic funds, in line with relevant guidance and bearing in mind the specific context in which the Mission
operates, and to include, in his next budget submission and performance report, detailed information on the
programmatic activities of the Mission, including on how those activities have contributed to the implementation of
mission mandates, on the linkage to the mandates, on the implementing entities and on the performance by the Mission
of appropriate oversight;
20. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping mission staff has the capacity
to provide technical oversight of the use of unmanned aerial and aircraft systems technologies;
22. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Mission personnel, in particular uniformed personnel,
and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the
General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Mission;
23. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;

109

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
25. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period, except for those in
paragraph 27;
27. Decides to abolish six posts and positions that have been vacant for more than two years, comprising one
position of Plumber (national General Service), two posts of Administrative Assistant (national General Service), one
post of Transport Assistant (national General Service), one post of Supply Assistant (national General Service) and
one post of Judicial Affairs Officer (National Professional Officer);
28. Requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and to
propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
29. Also requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
30. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
31. Notes that elections are a key milestone in peace processes, stresses the crucial importance of providing
adequate and timely support for electoral processes in host countries of peacekeeping missions, in accordance with
the mandate, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to include an update on United Nations support for
electoral activities in the context of his next overview report;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
33. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
34. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;38
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
35. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic the amount of 1,006,428,200 dollars for the period from 1 July
2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 937,711,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 53,600,600 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations, 9,035,200 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy, and 6,080,700 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
36. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 377,410,600 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 15 November 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
37. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 36 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 7,759,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
_______________
38

110

A/74/621.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

of 5,575,600 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,615,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 330,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 238,700 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
38. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 629,017,600 dollars for the period from
16 November 2020 to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 83,869,013 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
39. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 38 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 12,932,700 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 9,292,700 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,692,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 549,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 397,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
40. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraphs 36 and 38 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 54,982,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
41. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 54,982,000 dollars, in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 40 above;
42. Decides that the decrease of 895,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 54,982,000 dollars referred to
in paragraphs 40 and 41 above;
43. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
44. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
45. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic”.
RESOLUTION 74/285
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/913, para. 6)

74/285. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus39 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,40

_______________
39
40

A/74/598 and A/74/693.
A/74/737/Add.4.

111

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2506 (2020) of 30 January 2020, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Force until 31 July 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent
resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/314 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision
73/555 of 3 July 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force by certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to cover all the costs of the Force, including those incurred
by troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and regretting the absence of an adequate response to
appeals for voluntary contributions, including that contained in the letter dated 17 May 1994 from the SecretaryGeneral to all Member States,41
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus as at 30 April
2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 18.1 million United States dollars, representing some
2.6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 83 Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,40 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
_______________
41

112

S/1994/647.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Force of mandated tasks and
the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the identification
of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on the its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Force
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
19. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Force personnel, in particular uniformed personnel, and
requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the General
Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Force;
20. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
22. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;

113

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period;
24. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and
to propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
25. Further requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
26. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of resolutions
59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
29. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;42
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
30. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus the
amount of 55,206,800 dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 51,750,100 dollars for the
maintenance of the Force, 2,958,100 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 498,600 dollars
for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
31. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net appropriation, equivalent to 17,435,900 dollars,
will be funded through voluntary contributions from the Government of Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars
from the Government of Greece;
32. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 2,605,908 dollars for the period from 1 to
31 July 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
33. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1995, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 32 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 241,583 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 217,725 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 19,808 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 4,050 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
34. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 28,664,992 dollars for the period from
1 August 2020 to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 2,605,908 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
35. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 34 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,657,417 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,394,975 dollars
_______________
42

114

A/74/598.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

approved for the Force, the prorated share of 217,892 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 44,550 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base;
36. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall
be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraphs 32 and 34 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 661,333 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
37. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 661,333 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 36 above;
38. Decides that the decrease of 82,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 661,333 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 36 and 37 above;
39. Also decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2019,
that one third of the net unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 600,407 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be returned to the Government of Cyprus;
40. Further decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2019,
that the prorated share of the net unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 218,690 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be returned to the Government of Greece;
41. Decides to continue to maintain as separate the account established for the Force for the period prior to
16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to that account, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue his efforts in appealing for voluntary contributions to the account;
42. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and
6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
43. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices established
by the General Assembly;
44. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTION 74/286
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/914, para. 6)

74/286. Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo43 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,44

_______________
43
44

A/74/617 and A/74/738.
A/74/737/Add.12.

115

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1925 (2010) of 28 May 2010, by which the Council decided that, as from
1 July 2010, the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would bear the title
“United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, and recalling also the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 2502 (2019) of 19 December 2019, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until
20 December 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/315 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555
of 3 July 2019,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235
of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as at 30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
266,482,094 United States dollars, representing some 1.2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only 79 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States,
in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,44 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the
116

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

public domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services,
so as to further increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the
United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Mission of mandated tasks
and the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the
identification of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Mission
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Underlines the important contribution that programmatic activities make to the implementation of the
mandates of the Mission, including for the prevention and resolution of conflicts, and that all such activities must be
directly linked to the mandates of the Mission;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mission is responsible and accountable for the use of its
programmatic funds, in line with relevant guidance and bearing in mind the specific context in which the Mission
operates, and to include, in his next budget submission and performance report, detailed information on the
programmatic activities of the Mission, including on how those activities have contributed to the implementation of
mission mandates, on the linkage to the mandates, on the implementing entities and on the performance by the Mission
of appropriate oversight;
20. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping mission staff has the capacity
to provide technical oversight of the use of unmanned aerial and aircraft systems technologies;

117

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Mission personnel, in particular uniformed personnel,
and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the
General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Mission;
23. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
25. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period, except for those in
paragraph 27;
27. Decides to abolish the following National Professional Officer posts: one post of Associate Security
Coordination Officer, one post of Medical Officer, one post of Assistant Engineer, one post of Assistant Finance and
Budget Officer, one post of Assistant Supply Officer and one post of Associate Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Officer;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and to
propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
29. Also requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
30. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
32. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
33. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;45
34. Decides to reduce the commitment authority in the amount of 80,000,000 dollars, previously approved
for the same period under the terms of its resolution 72/293 of 5 July 2018, as well as its decision 72/558 of 5 July
2018, by the amount of 62,300 dollars to the amount of 79,937,700 dollars, as a result of which the total resources
approved for the maintenance and operation of the Mission for the period will amount to 1,194,557,200 dollars, equal
to the expenditure incurred by the Mission during the period;
35. Also decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo an additional amount of 79,937,700 dollars for the period from
1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 for the maintenance of the Mission, taking into account the amount of 1,114,619,500
dollars previously approved for the Mission under the terms of its resolution 72/293, as well as its decision 72/558;

_______________
45

118

A/74/617.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
36. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 64,956,800 dollars, representing the difference
between the amount of 1,114,619,500 dollars already appropriated under the terms of resolution 72/293 and decision
72/558 for the maintenance of the Mission and the actual expenditure of 1,194,557,200 dollars for the period from
1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, less the amount of 14,980,900 dollars, representing other revenue in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December
2015 and 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its
resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015, and for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
37. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 36 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,362,900 dollars, representing the increase in the estimated staff
assessment income for the Mission in respect of the financial periods ended 30 June 2018 and 30 June 2019;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
38. Decides to appropriate to the special account the amount of 1,154,140,500 dollars for the period from
1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 1,075,338,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 61,467,500 dollars
for the support account for peacekeeping operations, 10,361,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy, and 6,973,100 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
39. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 547,030,977 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 20 December 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
40. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 39 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 15,675,791 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 12,510,128 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,341,567 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 478,238 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 345,858 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
41. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 607,109,523 dollars for the period from
21 December 2020 to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 96,178,375 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
42. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 41 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 17,397,409 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 13,884,072 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,598,733 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 530,762 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 383,842 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
43. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
44. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
45. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.

119

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/287
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/915, para. 6)

74/287. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti46 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,47
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of 29 February 2004, by which the Council declared its
readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support continuation of a peaceful and constitutional
political process and the maintenance of a secure and stable environment in Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of 30 April 2004, by which the Council established the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial period of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2350 (2017) of 13 April
2017, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission for a final period of six months until
15 October 2017,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/316 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of 3 July 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti as at 30 April
2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 7.3 million United States dollars, representing some
0.1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 174 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,47 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
Final disposition of the assets of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the final disposition of the assets of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti;46
5. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to draw on lessons learned and best practices for future
drawdowns and closures;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.

_______________
46
47

120

A/74/729.
A/74/829.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/288
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/916, para. 6)

74/288. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo48 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,49
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/318 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of
3 July 2019,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Mindful also of the need to ensure coordination and cooperation with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
as at 30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 32.7 million United States dollars,
representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 89 Member States have
paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;

_______________
48
49

A/74/578 and A/74/692.
A/74/737/Add.5.

121

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,49 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Mission of mandated tasks
and the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the
identification of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Mission
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
19. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Mission personnel, in particular uniformed personnel,
122

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the
General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Mission;
20. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
21. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period;
23. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and
to propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
24. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
27. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;50
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
28. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo the amount of 42,487,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 39,827,300
dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 2,276,600 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
383,800 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
29. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 42,487,700 dollars for the period from 1 July
2020 to 30 June 2021, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
30. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 29 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 4,142,500 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 3,922,100 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 183,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 37,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
31. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 29 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 149,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
_______________
50

A/74/578.

123

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
32. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
revenue in the amount of 149,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in accordance with
the scheme set out in paragraph 31 above;
33. Also decides that the increase of 84,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 149,300 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 31 and 32 above;
34. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
35. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
36. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.
RESOLUTION 74/289
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/917, para. 6)

74/289. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia51 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,52
Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003, by which the Council declared its
readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the transitional government and to assist in the
implementation of a comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of 19 September 2003, by which the Council established
the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of 12 months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2333 (2016) of 23 December 2016, by which
the Council extended the mandate of the Mission for a final period until 30 March 2018 and requested the SecretaryGeneral to complete by 30 April 2018 the withdrawal of all uniformed and civilian components, other than those
required to complete the liquidation of the Mission,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December 2003 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/319 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of
3 July 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

_______________
51
52

124

A/74/726.
A/74/828.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Liberia as at 30 April 2020,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 9.1 million United States dollars, representing some
0.1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 161 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,52 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
Final disposition of the assets of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the final disposition of the assets of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia;51
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify and address on time and in full all the
residual activities, including unforeseen liabilities identified after the closure of the Mission, and stresses the
importance of raising the awareness of contractors regarding the settlement of any residual claims;
6. Welcomes the effort of the Secretary-General to reduce the overall environmental footprint of the Mission,
in cooperation with Liberian authorities, and stresses the necessity to further ensure that all relevant measures are
taken in line with the respective regulations and rules in order to ensure an environmentally responsible closure of the
Mission;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia”.
RESOLUTION 74/290
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/918, para. 6)

74/290. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali53 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,54
Recalling Security Council resolution 2100 (2013) of 25 April 2013, by which the Council established the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali as from 25 April 2013 and decided that
authority would be transferred from the African-led International Support Mission in Mali to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali on 1 July 2013 for an initial period of 12 months, and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
2480 (2019) of 28 June 2019, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 30 June 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 67/286 of 28 June 2013 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/320 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of
3 July 2019,

_______________
53
54

A/74/626 and A/74/745.
A/74/737/Add.11.

125

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali as at 30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 194.5 million United
States dollars, representing some 2.8 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that
only 105 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular
those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,54 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Mission of mandated tasks
and the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the
identification of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;

126

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Mission
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Underlines the important contribution that programmatic activities make to the implementation of the
mandates of the Mission, including for the prevention and resolution of conflicts, and that all such activities must be
directly linked to the mandates of the Mission;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mission is responsible and accountable for the use of its
programmatic funds, in line with relevant guidance and bearing in mind the specific context in which the Mission
operates, and to include, in his next budget submission and performance report, detailed information on the
programmatic activities of the Mission, including on how those activities have contributed to the implementation of
mission mandates, on the linkage to the mandates, on the implementing entities and on the performance by the Mission
of appropriate oversight;
20. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping mission staff has the capacity
to provide technical oversight of the use of unmanned aerial and aircraft systems technologies;
22. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Mission personnel, in particular uniformed personnel,
and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the
General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Mission;
23. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
25. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;

127

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period, except for those in
paragraph 27;
27. Decides to abolish one post of Field Language Assistant and one post of Security Assistant;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and to
propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with a clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
29. Also requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
30. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
31. Notes that elections are a key milestone in peace processes, stresses the crucial importance of providing
adequate and timely support for electoral processes in the host countries of peacekeeping missions, in accordance
with the mandate, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to include an update on United Nations support
for electoral activities in the context of his next overview report;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
33. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
34. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;55
35. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali the amount of 30,948,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, previously
authorized by the Advisory Committee for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 under the terms of section VI
of its resolution 64/269, in addition to the amount of 1,074,718,900 dollars previously approved for the same period
under the terms of its resolution 72/297 of 5 July 2018, as well as its decision 72/558 of 5 July 2018;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
36. Decides, taking into account the amount of 1,074,718,900 dollars previously apportioned under the terms
of its resolution 72/297 and its decision 72/558 for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, to apportion among
Member States the additional amount of 30,948,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the same period,
in accordance with the levels updated in its resolutions 70/246 of 23 December 2015 and 73/272 of 22 December
2018, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015,
and for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
37. Also decides that there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for
in paragraph 36 above, the amount of 24,542,500 dollars, representing other revenue in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2019;
38. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 36 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,779,400 dollars, representing the additional staff assessment
income for the Mission in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019;

_______________
55

128

A/74/626.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
39. Decides to appropriate to the special account the amount of 1,270,104,400 dollars for the period from
1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 1,183,384,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 67,643,400 dollars
for the support account for peacekeeping operations, 11,402,400 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy, and 7,673,900 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
40. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 1,270,104,400 dollars for the period from
1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 105,842,033 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
41. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 40 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 24,715,200 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 17,365,300 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 5,436,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 1,110,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 803,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
42. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
43. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
44. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali”.
RESOLUTION 74/291
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/919, para. 6)

74/291. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force56 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2503 (2019) of 19 December 2019, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Force until 30 June 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the United Nations
Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 73/321 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of 3 July 2019,

_______________
56
57

A/74/596 and A/74/697.
A/74/737/Add.7.

129

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force with the
financial resources necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force as at
30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 20.1 million United States dollars,
representing some 0.9 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 89 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Force of mandated tasks and
the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the identification
of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
130

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Force
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of
his next report on cross-cutting issues;
19. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Force personnel, in particular uniformed personnel, and
requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report to the General Assembly
in the context of the next budget submission for the Force;
20. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
22. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period;
24. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and
to propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
25. Further requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
26. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;

131

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

27. Welcomes the progress made in settling death and disability compensation claims, and requests the
Secretary-General to take steps that will facilitate a timely settlement of any future claims;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to take the steps necessary to ensure that any outstanding balance in
respect of contingent-owned equipment is settled expeditiously;
29. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
30. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
31. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;58
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
32. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force the
amount of 67,574,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 63,343,200 dollars for the
maintenance of the Force, 3,620,800 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 610,300 dollars
for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
33. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 33,787,150 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
34. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 33 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 965,850 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 790,650 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 145,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 29,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
35. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 33,787,150 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 5,631,192 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
36. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 35 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 965,850 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 790,650 dollars approved
for the Force, the prorated share of 145,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 29,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
37. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall
be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraphs 33 and 35 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 2,178,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;

_______________
58

132

A/74/596.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

38. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the total amount of 2,178,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 37 above;
39. Decides that the increase of 128,000 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 2,178,300 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 37 and 38 above;
40. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and
6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
41. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices established
by the General Assembly;
42. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item entitled “United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force”.
RESOLUTION 74/292
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/920, para. 6)

74/292. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon59 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,60
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Force, the latest of which was resolution 2485 (2019) of 29 August 2019, by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force until 31 August 2020,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/322 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of 3 July 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;

_______________
59
60

A/74/675 and A/74/713.
A/74/737/Add.9.

133

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as at 30 April
2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 106.1 million United States dollars, representing
some 1.1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 100 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,60 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Force of mandated tasks and
the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the identification
of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting
134

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

national authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident
Coordinator and other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Force
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
19. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Force personnel, in particular uniformed personnel, and
requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the General
Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Force;
20. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
22. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period;
24. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and
to propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
25. Further requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
26. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
29. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019,61
_______________
61

A/74/675.

135

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
30. Takes into account the special circumstances created by the COVID-19 pandemic, and authorizes the
Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021 in an amount not
exceeding 480,649,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Force;
Financing of the commitment authority for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
31. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 80,108,200 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 August 2020 in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
32. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 31 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,301,400 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Force for the period from 1 July to 31 August 2020;
33. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 400,540,900 dollars for the period from
1 September 2020 to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 40,054,090 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
34. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 33 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 11,507,300 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the Force
for the period from 1 September 2020 to 30 June 2021;
Estimates for the support account for peacekeeping operations and the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi, Italy, for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
35. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon the amount
of 32,105,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, comprising 27,474,400 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 4,631,200 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the estimates for the support account for peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
Logistics Base
36. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 5,351,000 dollars for the period from 1 July to
31 August 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
37. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 36 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 443,200 dollars, comprising the prorated share of 368,000 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 75,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
38. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 26,754,600 dollars for the period from
1 September 2020 to 30 June 2021, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271, subject to a decision of the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
39. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 38 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,216,000 dollars, comprising the prorated share of 1,840,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 375,800 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
40. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall
be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraphs 36 and 38 above, their respective share of the
136

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 8,543,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
41. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the total amount of 8,543,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 40 above;
42. Decides that the increase of 909,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 8,543,400 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 40 and 41 above;
43. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and
6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
44. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices established
by the General Assembly;
45. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item entitled “United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon”;
46. Also decides to revert to the financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as soon as possible
during its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/293
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/921, para. 6)

74/293. Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan62 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,63
Recalling Security Council resolution 1996 (2011) of 8 July 2011, by which the Council established, as from
9 July 2011, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2514 (2020) of 12 March 2020, by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 March 2021,
Recalling also its resolution 66/243 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/323 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of
3 July 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,

_______________
62
63

A/74/597 and A/74/742.
A/74/737/Add.13.

137

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan as at 30 April 2020,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 369.8 million United States dollars, representing some
4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 61 Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,63 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Mission of mandated tasks
and the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the
identification of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
138

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Mission
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Underlines the important contribution that programmatic activities make to the implementation of the
mandates of the Mission, including for the prevention and resolution of conflicts, and that all such activities must be
directly linked to the mandates of the Mission;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mission is responsible and accountable for the use of its
programmatic funds, in line with relevant guidance and bearing in mind the specific context in which the Mission
operates, and to include, in his next budget submission and performance report, detailed information on the
programmatic activities of the Mission, including on how those activities have contributed to the implementation of
mission mandates, on the linkage to the mandates, on the implementing entities and on the performance by the Mission
of appropriate oversight;
20. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
21. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Mission personnel, in particular uniformed personnel,
and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the
General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Mission;
22. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
24. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and
to propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
27. Further requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
28. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
139

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
30. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
31. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;64
32. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Mission in South Sudan the amount
of 25,146,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, previously authorized by the Advisory Committee for the
period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 under the terms of section VI of its resolution 64/269, in addition to the
amount of 1,124,960,400 dollars previously approved for the same period under the terms of its resolution 72/300 of
5 July 2018 and its decision 72/558 of 5 July 2018;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
33. Decides, taking into account the amount of 1,124,960,400 dollars previously apportioned under the terms
of its resolution 72/300 and its decision 72/558 for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, to apportion among
Member States the additional amount of 25,146,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the same period,
in accordance with the levels updated in its resolutions 70/246 of 23 December 2015 and 73/272 of 22 December
2018, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015,
and for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
34. Also decides that there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for
in paragraph 33 above, the amount of 19,619,400 dollars, representing other revenue in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2019;
35. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 33 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 5,527,300 dollars, representing a portion of the increase in the
estimated staff assessment income for the Mission in respect of the financial periods ended 30 June 2018 and
30 June 2019;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
36. Decides to appropriate to the special account the amount of 1,264,877,800 dollars for the period from
1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 1,178,515,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 67,365,000 dollars
for the support account for peacekeeping operations, 11,355,500 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy, and 7,642,200 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
37. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 894,255,003 dollars for the period from 1 July
2020 to 15 March 2021, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale
of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
38. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 37 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 23,585,232 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 18,410,212 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 3,827,852 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
_______________
64

140

A/74/597.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

for the support account, the prorated share of 781,789 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 565,379 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
39. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 370,622,797 dollars for the period from
16 March to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 105,406,483 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
40. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 39 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 9,774,868 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 7,630,088 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,586,448 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 324,011 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 234,321 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
41. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 37 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 3,254,100 dollars, representing the remaining part of the increase in the estimated staff
assessment income for the Mission in respect of the financial periods ended 30 June 2018 and 30 June 2019;
42. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
43. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
44. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan”.
RESOLUTION 74/294
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/922, para. 6)

74/294. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara65 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,66
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2494 (2019) of 30 October 2019, by which
the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 31 October 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/324 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of
3 July 2019,

_______________
65
66

A/74/645 and A/74/708.
A/74/737/Add.1.

141

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara as at 30 April 2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 47.2 million United States dollars,
representing some 3.5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 103 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,66 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
11. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Mission of mandated tasks
and the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the
identification of the resources required for each mandated task;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including on its correlation with
mission planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource
requests for implementation of the System;
142

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
14. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
15. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Mission
has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options for
improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
17. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
18. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regard to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
19. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Mission personnel, in particular uniformed personnel,
and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon to the
General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Mission;
20. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such projects, and requests the Secretary-General to
enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
22. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period;
24. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and
to propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
25. Further requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
26. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
143

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

27. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
29. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;67
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
30. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara the amount of 61,740,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of
57,524,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 3,288,200 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping
operations, 554,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and 373,000 dollars for the
Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
31. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 20,580,067 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 October 2020 in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
32. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 31 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 961,633 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 842,533 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 88,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 18,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 13,000 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
33. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 41,160,133 dollars for the period from
1 November 2020 to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 5,145,017 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
34. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 33 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,923,267 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,685,067 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 176,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 36,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 26,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
35. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 31 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 896,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
36. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 896,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 35 above;
_______________
67

144

A/74/645.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

37. Decides that the increase of 199,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 896,200 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 35 and 36 above;
38. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
39. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
40. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.
RESOLUTION 74/295
Adopted on 30 June 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/923, para. 6)

74/295. Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia68 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69
Recalling Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of 16 January 2009, in which the Council expressed its intent
to establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia as a follow-on force to the African Union Mission
in Somalia, subject to a further decision of the Council by 1 June 2009, and requested the Secretary-General, in order
for the forces of the Mission to be incorporated into a United Nations peacekeeping operation, to provide a United
Nations logistical support package to the Mission, including equipment and services,
Recalling also the subsequent resolutions of the Security Council by which the logistical support package for
the Mission was extended, the latest of which was resolution 2520 (2020) of 29 May 2020, by which the Council
extended the logistical support package until 28 February 2021,
Recalling further its resolution 63/275 A of 7 April 2009 on the financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 1863 (2009) and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/325 of
3 July 2019, as well as its decision 73/555 of 3 July 2019,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the United Nations trust fund
established to support the African Union Mission in Somalia,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Support Office in Somalia as at 30 April
2020, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 234.2 million United States dollars, representing
some 4.6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 110 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;

_______________
68
69

A/74/599 and A/74/722.
A/74/737/Add.8.

145

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to establish clear frameworks and guidelines to determine the solicitation
procedure, whether invitation to bid or request for proposal, to be utilized for, inter alia, acquiring different types of
goods and services, including aviation services, and to update the United Nations Procurement Manual accordingly;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure that the Organization conforms to best
practices in public procurement with respect to transparency, including by placing additional information in the public
domain on the outcome of procurement exercises conducted, including in the area of aviation services, so as to further
increase the transparency of the procurement operations of the Organization, and to update the United Nations
Procurement Manual accordingly;
5. Notes the ongoing development of impact-based performance indicators as part of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General in his next
report to provide information on how the indicators will measure the performance by the Support Office of mandated
tasks, the impact of resource allocation on that performance, as well as how the indicators will contribute to the
identification of the resources required for each mandated task;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report an execution plan for, and analysis of, the
implementation of the new Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, including its correlation with mission
planning and budget formulation, in order to facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of resource requests for
implementation of the System;
7. Emphasizes the importance of the accountability system of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to strengthen risk management and internal controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets,
in order to facilitate mandate implementation and increase transparency, and to report thereon in his next report;
8. Also emphasizes the importance of overall budgetary performance in peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the recommendations of the relevant oversight bodies, while
giving due regard to the guidance and recommendations of the General Assembly, and to report thereon in the context
of the performance reports;
9. Notes with grave concern the threat to life, health, safety and security caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the importance of ensuring the safety, security and health of peacekeeping personnel,
maintaining the continuity of critical mandate delivery, including protection of civilians, minimizing the risk of
mission activities causing the virus to spread and, where appropriate and within mandates, supporting national
authorities, upon their request, in their response to COVID-19, in collaboration with the Resident Coordinator and
other United Nations entities in the country;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next performance report information on how the Support
Office has responded and on lessons learned from past and present epidemics and pandemics, and to propose options
for improving future preparedness for epidemics and pandemics, including for business continuity;
11. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the multi-year environmental strategy to reduce the
footprint of peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to enhance measures for the implementation
of the strategy in all peacekeeping missions, in line with the five pillars of the strategy, in accordance with particular
conditions on the ground and in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
12. Expresses concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse reported in peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse with regards to all civilian, military and police personnel, and to report thereon in the context of his next
report on cross-cutting issues;
13. Recognizes the increasing security challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers, reaffirms its
commitment to the improvement of the safety and security of Support Office personnel, in particular uniformed

146

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

personnel, and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the measures in this regard and to report thereon
to the General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Support Office;
14. Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276, further recognizes the important role
played by quick-impact projects in supporting the implementation of mission mandates, stresses the need for the
timely, responsible and accountable implementation of all such planned projects, and requests the Secretary-General
to enhance their impact while addressing underlying challenges;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for greater nationalization of functions when
formulating budget submissions, commensurate with mission mandates and requirements;
16. Reiterates its concern about the high number of vacancies in civilian staffing, and further reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously, and decides not to
abolish the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer during the current budget period;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to review the posts that have been vacant for 24 months or longer and to
propose in his next budget submission either their retention, with clear justification of need, or their abolishment;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comparative assessment of the services provided by
respective entities for mine action activities and to provide the results in the context of his next report;
20. Recognizes the important role played by regional and subregional actors for peacekeeping operations, and
in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to deepen the partnership, cooperation and coordination of the United
Nations with regional and subregional actors, in accordance with relevant mandates, and to provide information on
such deepened engagement in the context of his next report;
21. Notes that elections are a key milestone in peace processes, stresses the crucial importance of providing
adequate and timely support for electoral processes in host countries of peacekeeping missions, in accordance with
the mandate, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to include an update on United Nations support for
electoral activities in the context of his next overview report;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other
relevant resolutions;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
23. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Support Office for the
period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;70
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
24. Decides to appropriate to the special account for the United Nations Support Office in Somalia the amount
of 590,957,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, inclusive of 550,608,600 dollars for the
maintenance of the Support Office, 31,473,300 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations, 5,305,300
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and 3,570,500 dollars for the Regional Service Centre
in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021
25. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 393,971,800 dollars for the period from
1 July 2020 to 28 February 2021, at a monthly rate of 49,246,475 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
_______________
70

A/74/599.

147

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set
out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
26. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 25 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 7,172,467 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 4,892,600 dollars approved for the Support Office, the prorated share of 1,686,400 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 344,400 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 249,067 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
27. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 196,985,900 dollars for the period from
1 March to 30 June 2021, at a monthly rate of 49,246,475 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020 and 2021, as set out in its resolution 73/271,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Support Office;
28. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 27 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,586,233 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
2,446,300 dollars approved for the Support Office, the prorated share of 843,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 172,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 124,533 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
29. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Support Office,
there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 25 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 30,709,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2019, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2019, as set out in its resolution 73/271;
30. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Support
Office, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance
and other revenue in the amount of 30,709,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2019, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 29 above;
31. Decides that the increase of 768,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2019 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 30,709,100 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 29 and 30 above;
32. Invites voluntary contributions to the United Nations trust fund established to support the African Union
Mission in Somalia;
33. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Financing of the
activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)”.
RESOLUTION 74/296
Adopted on 13 July 2020 by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544 of 27 March
2020, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/614/Add.1, para. 6)

74/296. Global service delivery model
The General Assembly,
Recalling section III of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012, paragraph 13 of section VII of its resolution
69/262 of 29 December 2014, paragraph 19 of its resolution 69/273 of 2 April 2015, section XIX of its resolution
70/248 A of 23 December 2015, section XVII of its resolution 71/272 A of 23 December 2016, section IV of its
resolution 72/262 C of 5 July 2018 and its decision 73/547 B of 15 April 2019,
148

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the global service delivery model for the United
Nations Secretariat71 as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,72
Decides to keep the question of the global service delivery model under review and to revert on the status of the
above-mentioned reports 71,72 at the main part of its seventy-fifth session.73

_______________
A/73/706.
A/73/791.
73
Postponement of the decision on whether the reports should continue to be considered, whether the General Assembly should request the
Secretary-General to submit a new, updated or revised report or whether no action should be taken on the reports.
71
72

149

IV. Decisions
Contents
Decision
number

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
74/402.

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions .............................155
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 155

74/406.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions.......................................................................................155
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 155

74/409.

Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee ....................................................................156
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 156

74/414.

Appointment of members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns ...........................................................................................................................156
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 156

74/415.

Membership of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People ...............................157

74/416.

Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit ...................................................................................................157

74/417.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session................................................................157

74/418.

Election of non-permanent members of the Security Council ........................................................................................158

74/419.

Election of members of the Economic and Social Council.............................................................................................158

74/420.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session .....................................................158

74/421.

Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session .............................159
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

74/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items .................................................................................................160
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 160

74/540.

Questions deferred for future consideration ...................................................................................................................162
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 162

74/542.

Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization ..................................................................................164
Decision A ................................................................................................................................................................... 164
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 164

74/543.

Intergovernmental conference on an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
of areas beyond national jurisdiction..............................................................................................................................164

74/544.

Procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic .................................................................................................................................................165

151

IV. Decisions
Decision
number

Title

Page

74/545.

Seventy-second session of the International Law Commission ......................................................................................165

74/546.

Disarmament Commission ............................................................................................................................................165

74/547.

Interactive dialogue on Harmony with Nature ...............................................................................................................166

74/548.

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development ..................166

74/549.

Fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, 2020 ......................................................................166

74/550.

Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice ...........................................................166
Decision A ....................................................................................................................................................................166
Decision B ....................................................................................................................................................................166

74/551.

High-level dialogue to assess the progress made in the fight against desertification, land degradation
and drought and to map the way forward.......................................................................................................................167

74/552.

Seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects ........................................167

74/553.

Twentieth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation ...............................................................167

74/554.

Twenty-first meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea ..................................................................................................................................................168

74/555.

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic .....................................................................................................................................168

74/556.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy................................................................................................168

74/557.

Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without a plenary meeting during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic .....................................................................................................................................169

74/558.

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic until the end of July 2020 .............................................................................................170

74/559.

Postponement of the seventy-second session of the International Law Commission ......................................................170

74/560.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal.....................................................................171

74/561.

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic until the end of August 2020 ........................................................................................171

74/562.

High-level meetings of the General Assembly in September 2020.................................................................................171

74/563.

Closing date of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly..............................................................................172

74/564.

Review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture ..............................................................................................172

74/565.

Informal interactive hearing with indigenous peoples ....................................................................................................172

74/566.

Extension of the term of office of the current members of the International Law Commission
and other related matters................................................................................................................................................173

74/567.

Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention on Countering the Use
of Information and Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes ....................................................................173

74/568.

Special session of the General Assembly against corruption ..........................................................................................174

74/569.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council ...........................................................................................................174

152

IV. Decisions
Decision
number

Title

Page

74/570.

Taking note of decision 74/544 entitled “Procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly
during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”................................................................................................174

74/571.

Taking note of the resolutions and decisions adopted by means of silence procedure between March
and August 2020 in accordance with decision 74/544 entitled “Procedure for taking decisions of the
General Assembly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic” ..................................................................175

74/572.

Taking note of the results of the election of the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session
held in accordance with decision 74/557 entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without
a plenary meeting during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic” ..................................................................178

74/573.

Taking note of the results of the election of non-permanent members of the Security Council held in accordance
with decision 74/557 entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without a plenary meeting during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic” ...........................................................................................................178

74/574.

Taking note of the results of the election of members of the Economic and Social Council held in accordance
with decision 74/557 entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without a plenary meeting during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic” ...........................................................................................................178

74/575.

Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations....................178

74/576.

Report of the Security Council.......................................................................................................................................178

74/577.

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution ...............178

74/578.

Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic .....................................................................................................179

74/579.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan ...................................................................................................179

74/580.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte .................................................................................................................179

74/581.

The situation in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine .....................................................................................179

74/582.

Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the separation
of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 .......................................................................................................179

74/583.

Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations ...............................................................................................179

74/584.

The responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity ...........................................................................................................................................................180

74/585.

Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second World War .....................................................................................180

74/586.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor ................................................................................................180
2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

74/537.

Revitalization of the work of the Second Committee .....................................................................................................180
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 180
3. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

74/540.

Questions deferred for future consideration ...................................................................................................................183
Decision C ................................................................................................................................................................... 183

153

IV. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
74/402. Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
B1
On 31 August 2020, the General Assembly appointed Ms. Suzuki Yoriko as a member of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a term of office beginning on 31 August 2020 and ending
on 31 December 2022, as a result of the resignation of Mr. Matsunaga Takeshi.2
As a result, as of 31 August 2020, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions is
composed as follows: Mr. Bachar Bong ABDALLAH (Chad),* Mr. Yves Éric AHOUSSOUGBEMEY (Benin),**
Mr. Amjad Qaid AL KUMAIM (Yemen),** Mr. Makiese Kinkela AUGUSTO (Angola),** Mr. Pavel CHERNIKOV
(Russian Federation),* Ms. Donna-Marie CHIURAZZI-MAXFIELD (United States of America),* Mr. Patrick
A. CHUASOTO (Philippines),*** Mr. Udo Klaus FENCHEL (Germany),*** Mr. Olivio FERMÍN (Dominican
Republic),*** Mr. Ihor HUMENNYI (Ukraine),** Mr. Conrod HUNTE (Antigua and Barbuda),** Mr. Marcel JULLIER
(Switzerland),*** Ms. Julia A. MACIEL (Paraguay),* Ms. SUZUKI Yoriko (Japan),*** Mr. Cihan TERZI (Turkey)*
and Mr. YE Xuenong (China).***
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2021.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2022.

74/406. Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
B3
On 13 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,4 appointed Ms. Jun
Ji-sun as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a term of office beginning on 13 April 2020 and ending on
31 December 2020, as a result of the resignation of Mr. Na Sang-deok.
On 5 June 2020, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,5 appointed Mr. Lin
Shan as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a term of office beginning on 5 June 2020 and ending on
31 December 2020, as a result of the resignation of Ms. Zhang Wei.
As a result, as of 5 June 2020, the Committee on Contributions is composed as follows: Mr. Syed Yawar ALI
(Pakistan),** Mr. Jakub CHMIELEWSKI (Poland),** Mr. Cheikh Tidiane DÈME (Senegal),*** Mr. Gordon
ECKERSLEY (Australia),*** Mr. Mohamed Mahmoud Ould EL GHAOUTH (Mauritania),*** Mr. Bernardo GREIVER
DEL HOYO (Uruguay),*** Mr. Michael HOLTSCH (Germany),* Ms. JUN Ji-sun (Republic of Korea),* Mr. Vadim
LAPUTIN (Russian Federation),* Mr. LIN Shan (China),* Mr. Robert Ngei MULE (Kenya),** Mr. OZAWA Toshiro
(Japan),** Mr. Tõnis SAAR (Estonia),** Mr. Henrique da Silveira SARDINHA PINTO (Brazil),* Mr. Brett Dennis

_______________
Decision 74/402, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 74/402 A.
2
See A/74/101/Add.2.
3
Decision 74/406, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 74/406 A.
4
A/74/525/Add.2, para. 4.
5
A/74/525/Add.3, para. 5.
1

154

IV. Decisions

SCHAEFER (United States of America),** Mr. Ugo SESSI (Italy),*** Mr. Alejandro TORRES LÉPORI (Argentina)***
and Mr. Steve TOWNLEY (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2021.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2022.

74/409. Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee
B6
On 13 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,7 appointed Mr. Agus
Joko Pramono as a member of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee for a term of office beginning on 13 April
2020 and ending on 31 December 2022.
As a result, as of 13 April 2020, the Independent Audit Advisory Committee is composed as follows:
Ms. Dorothy BRADLEY (Belize),** Mr. Anton V. KOSYANENKO (Russian Federation),** Mr. Agus Joko PRAMONO
(Indonesia),** Mr. Richard Quartei QUARTEY (Ghana)* and Ms. Janet ST. LAURENT (United States of America).*
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2022.

74/414. Appointment of members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns
B8
At its 64th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2020, the General Assembly, in accordance with resolutions
67/203 of 21 December 2012 and 69/214 of 19 December 2014, decided to appoint BHUTAN as member of the Board
of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns for a term beginning
on 11 September 2020 and ending on 15 September 2021.
As a result, as of 11 September 2020, the Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns is composed of the following three Member States:9 BHUTAN,* HUNGARY*
and SWITZERLAND.*
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 15 September 2021.

_______________
Decision 74/409, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 74/409 A.
7
A/74/527/Add.1, para. 4.
8
Decision 74/414, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 74/414 A.
9
Bhutan, Hungary and Switzerland are serving their second consecutive term. Two vacancies from African States, one vacancy from AsiaPacific States, one vacancy from Eastern European States, two vacancies from Latin American and Caribbean States and one vacancy from
Western European and other States remain to be filled for a term of office beginning on the date of appointment and expiring on
15 September 2021.
6

155

IV. Decisions

74/415. Membership of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
At its 60th plenary meeting, on 3 March 2020, the General Assembly, in the light of the decision of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People conveyed by its Chair to the President
of the General Assembly,10 took note of the change in the membership of the Committee, that is, that UKRAINE had
ceased its membership in the Committee, effective 1 January 2020.
As a result, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People is composed of
the following 25 Member States:11 AFGHANISTAN, BELARUS, BOLIVIA (PLURINATIONAL STATE OF), CUBA, CYPRUS,
ECUADOR, GUINEA, GUYANA, INDIA, INDONESIA, LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, MADAGASCAR,
MALAYSIA, MALI, MALTA, NAMIBIA, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, SENEGAL, SIERRA LEONE, SOUTH AFRICA,
TUNISIA, TURKEY and VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF).
74/416. Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit
At its 60th plenary meeting, on 3 March 2020, the General Assembly, pursuant to article 3, paragraph 2, of the
statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, contained in the annex to resolution 31/192 of 22 December 1976, appointed
Mr. Jesús Miranda Hita, Mr. Victor Moraru, Ms. Gönke Roscher and Mr. Tesfaalem Seyoum as members of the Joint
Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2021 and expiring on 31 December 2025.
As a result, as of 1 January 2021, the Joint Inspection Unit is composed as follows: Mr. Gopinathan
Achamkulangare (India),** Mr. Jean Wesley CAZEAU (Haiti),** Ms. Eileen CRONIN (United States of America),*
Mr. Jorge FLORES CALLEJAS (Honduras),* Ms. KAMIOKA Keiko (Japan),*** Mr. Nikolay LOZINSKIY (Russian
Federation),** Mr. Jesús MIRANDA HITA (Spain),**** Mr. Victor MORARU (Republic of Moldova),**** Ms. Sukai
PROM-JACKSON (Gambia),** Ms. Gönke ROSCHER (Germany)**** and Mr. Tesfaalem SEYOUM (Eritrea).****
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2021.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2022.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2024.

**** Term of office expires on 31 December 2025.

74/417. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session12
On 17 June 2020, the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations,
rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraph 1 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December
1978, as well as decision 74/557 of 29 May 2020, elected Mr. Volkan BOZKIR of Turkey as President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.

_______________
See A/74/690.
On 22 December 1976, Guyana, Mali and Nigeria became members of the Committee (decision 31/318). On 6 December 1990, Belarus
became a member of the Committee, with immediate effect, to fill the vacancy brought about by the accession of the German Democratic
Republic to the Federal Republic of Germany (decision 45/313). On 9 December 1997, Namibia and South Africa became members of the
Committee (decision 52/317). Subsequent to the adoption of that decision, Yugoslavia ceased to be a member of the Committee as from the
fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly. On 1 May 2004, Hungary resigned its seat on the Committee. On 31 May 2005, Romania
discontinued its membership on the Committee. On 11 September 2008, Nicaragua became a member of the Committee (decision 62/553).
On 7 September 2010, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela became a member of the Committee (decision 64/429). On 16 March 2012,
Ecuador became a member of the Committee (decision 66/420). On 22 August 2013, the Plurinational State of Bolivia became a member
of the Committee (decision 67/422).
12
In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of the President of the
Assembly, the 21 Vice-Presidents and the Chairs of the six Main Committees.
10
11

156

IV. Decisions

74/418. Election of non-permanent members of the Security Council
On 17 and 18 June 2020, the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 23 of the Charter of the United
Nations, rule 142 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraph 17 of Assembly resolution 68/307 of
10 September 2014, as well as Assembly decision 74/557 of 29 May 2020, elected INDIA, IRELAND, KENYA, MEXICO
and NORWAY as non-permanent members of the Security Council for a two-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2021 to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of BELGIUM, the DOMINICAN REPUBLIC,
GERMANY, INDONESIA and SOUTH AFRICA.
As a result, as of 1 January 2021, the Security Council is composed of the following 15 Member States: CHINA,
ESTONIA,* FRANCE, INDIA,** IRELAND,** KENYA,** MEXICO,** NIGER,* NORWAY,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SAINT
VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES,* TUNISIA,* UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and VIET NAM.*
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2021.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2022.

74/419. Election of members of the Economic and Social Council
On 17 June 2020, the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 61 of the Charter of the United Nations,
rule 145 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraph 17 of Assembly resolution 68/307 of 10 September
2014, as well as Assembly decision 74/557 of 29 May 2020, elected ARGENTINA, AUSTRIA, BOLIVIA (PLURINATIONAL
STATE OF), BULGARIA, FRANCE, GERMANY, GUATEMALA, INDONESIA, JAPAN, LIBERIA, LIBYA, MADAGASCAR,
MEXICO, NIGERIA, PORTUGAL, SOLOMON ISLANDS, the UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND and ZIMBABWE as members of the Economic and Social Council for a three-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2021 to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of BELARUS, ECUADOR,
EL SALVADOR, FRANCE, GERMANY, GHANA, INDIA, IRELAND, JAPAN, MALAWI, MALTA, MEXICO, MOROCCO, the
PHILIPPINES, SPAIN, the SUDAN, TOGO and URUGUAY.
As a result, as of 1 January 2021, the Economic and Social Council is composed of the following 54 Member
States: ANGOLA,* ARGENTINA,*** ARMENIA,* AUSTRALIA,** AUSTRIA,*** BANGLADESH,** BENIN,** BOLIVIA
(PLURINATIONAL STATE OF),*** BOTSWANA,** BRAZIL,* BULGARIA,*** CANADA,* CHINA,** COLOMBIA,**
CONGO,** EGYPT,* ETHIOPIA,* FINLAND,** FRANCE,*** GABON,** GERMANY,*** GUATEMALA,***
INDONESIA,*** IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),* JAMAICA,* JAPAN,*** KENYA,* LATVIA,** LIBERIA,*** LIBYA,***
LUXEMBOURG,* MADAGASCAR,*** MALI,* MEXICO,*** MONTENEGRO,** NETHERLANDS,* NICARAGUA,**
NIGERIA,*** NORWAY,** PAKISTAN,* PANAMA,** PARAGUAY,* PORTUGAL,*** REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** RUSSIAN
FEDERATION,** SAUDI ARABIA,* SOLOMON ISLANDS,*** SWITZERLAND,** THAILAND,** TURKMENISTAN,*
UKRAINE,* UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,*** UNITED STATES OF AMERICA* and
ZIMBABWE.***
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2021.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2022.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2023.

74/420. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session12
On 29 June 2020, the General Assembly, in accordance with rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly
and paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to Assembly resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, as well as Assembly
decisions 74/544 of 27 March 2020 and 74/555 of 15 May 2020, elected the following 21 Member States as VicePresidents of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session: AFGHANISTAN, ALBANIA, CAMEROON, CHINA,
ESWATINI, FRANCE, GRENADA, JORDAN, LEBANON, LIBYA, MALI, MONACO, PALAU, PARAGUAY, PERU,

157

IV. Decisions

RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SOMALIA, TOGO, TURKMENISTAN, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
74/421. Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session12
On 11 June 2020, the First, Special Political and Decolonization (Fourth), Second, Third, Fifth and Sixth
Committees of the General Assembly elected their Chairs in accordance with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly, as well as Assembly decisions 74/555 of 15 May 2020 and 74/557 of 29 May 2020.
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the President of the General Assembly announced that the
following persons had been elected as Chairs of the First, Special Political and Decolonization (Fourth), Second,
Third, Fifth and Sixth Committees of the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session:

158

First Committee:

Mr. Agustín SANTOS MARAVER (Spain)

Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):

Mr. Collen Vixen KELAPILE (Botswana)

Second Committee:

Mr. Amrit Bahadur RAI (Nepal)

Third Committee:

Ms. Katalin Annamária BOGYAY (Hungary)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. Carlos AMORÍN (Uruguay)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Milenko Esteban SKOKNIC TAPIA (Chile)

IV. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
74/503. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
B13
On 31 March 2020, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in the Assembly plenary agenda
item 163 entitled “Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”, under
heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of
a draft resolution.14
On 2 April 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda item 79 entitled “Report of
the International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-first session”, under heading F (Promotion of justice
and international law), and to consider it directly in the Assembly plenary in order to proceed expeditiously with the
consideration of a draft decision.15
Also on 2 April 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) entitled “Report
of the Disarmament Commission” of agenda item 100 entitled “Review of the implementation of the recommendations
and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session”, under heading G (Disarmament), and to
consider it directly in the Assembly plenary in order to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft
decision.16
On 13 April 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda item 106 entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice”, under heading H (Drug control, crime prevention and combating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations), and to consider it directly in the Assembly plenary in order to proceed
expeditiously with the consideration of a draft decision.17
Also on 13 April 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) entitled
“Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions” of agenda item 115 entitled “Appointments to fill
vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other
matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of the report of the Fifth Committee.18
Also on 13 April 2020, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in the Assembly plenary agenda
item 133 entitled “Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations”,
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the
consideration of a draft resolution19 and a draft decision.20
Also on 13 April 2020, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in the Assembly plenary agenda
item 147 entitled “Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals”, under
heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration
of a draft resolution.21

_______________
Decision 74/503, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 74/503 A.
14
A/74/L.50.
15
A/74/L.45.
16
A/74/L.43.
17
A/74/L.47.
18
A/74/525/Add.2.
19
A/74/L.53.
20
A/74/L.54.
21
A/74/L.55.
13

159

IV. Decisions

On 14 May 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (e) entitled
“Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa” of agenda item 19 entitled “Sustainable development”,
under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to consider it directly in
the Assembly plenary in order to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft decision.22
Also on 14 May 2020, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in the Assembly plenary
sub-item (b) entitled “South-South cooperation for development” of agenda item 23 entitled “Operational activities
for development”, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to
proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft decision.23
On 11 August 2020, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in the Assembly plenary
sub-item (a) entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries” of
agenda item 21 entitled “Groups of countries in special situations”, under heading A (Promotion of sustained
economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and recent United Nations conferences), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft resolution.24
Also on 11 August 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) entitled
“Operational activities for development of the United Nations system” of agenda item 23 entitled “Operational
activities for development”, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to
consider it directly in the Assembly plenary in order to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft
resolution.25
On 12 August 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda item 67 entitled “Rights
of indigenous peoples”, under heading D (Promotion of human rights), and to consider it directly in the Assembly
plenary in order to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft decision.26
On 14 August 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda item 107 entitled
“Countering the use of information and communications technologies for criminal purposes”, under heading H (Drug
control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations), and to consider
it directly in the Assembly plenary in order to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft decision.27
On 31 August 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) entitled
“Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions” of agenda
item 115 entitled “Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”, under
heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in the Assembly plenary in
order to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of the note by the Secretary-General.28
At its 64th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of
agenda item 120 entitled “Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft resolution29 and a
proposed amendment thereto.30
_______________
A/74/L.60.
A/74/L.64.
24
A/74/L.74.
25
A/74/L.77.
26
A/74/L.81.
27
A/74/L.84.
28
A/74/101/Add.2.
29
A/74/L.92.
30
A/74/L.93.
22
23

160

IV. Decisions

74/540. Questions deferred for future consideration
B31
On 13 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,32
Section A
Decided to defer until the second part of its resumed seventy-fourth session consideration of the following documents:
Item 140
Human resources management
Seconded active-duty military and police personnel
Report of the Secretary-General on seconded active-duty military and police personnel33
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions34
Section B
Decided to defer until the first part of its resumed seventy-fifth session consideration of the following
documents:
Item 135
Programme budget for 2020
Conditions of service and compensation for officials other than Secretariat officials
Report of the Secretary-General entitled “Conditions of service and compensation for officials other than
Secretariat officials: members of the International Court of Justice and President and judges of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals”35
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions36
Item 140
Human resources management
Report of the Secretary-General on the practice of the Secretary-General in disciplinary matters and cases of
possible criminal behaviour, 1 January to 31 December 201837
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions38
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Ethics Office39

_______________
Decision 74/540, in section B.6 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 74/540 A.
32
A/74/L.54.
33
A/74/700.
34
A/74/769.
35
A/74/354.
36
A/74/7/Add.20.
37
A/74/64.
38
A/74/558.
39
A/74/78.
31

161

IV. Decisions

Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions40
Report of the Secretary-General entitled “Composition of the Secretariat: staff demographics”41
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions42
Report of the Secretary-General on amendments to the Staff Regulations and Rules43
Report of the Secretary-General on amendments to the Staff Regulations and Rules44
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions45
Report of the Secretary-General entitled “Global human resources strategy 2019–2021: building a more
effective, transparent and accountable United Nations”46
Report of the Secretary-General on the overview of human resources management reform
for the period 2017–201847
Report of the Secretary-General entitled “Composition of the Secretariat: staff demographics”48
Report of the Secretary-General entitled “Composition of the Secretariat: gratis personnel, retired staff and
consultants and individual contractors”49
Report of the Secretary-General on the assessment of the system of desirable ranges50
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions51
Report of the Secretary-General on mobility52
Report of the Secretary-General on mobility53
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions54
Report of the Secretary-General on amendments to the Staff Regulations and Rules55
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions56
Report of the Secretary-General on the practice of the Secretary-General in disciplinary matters and cases of
possible criminal behaviour, 1 July to 31 December 201757

_______________
A/74/539.
A/74/82.
42
A/74/696.
43
A/74/289.
44
A/73/378/Add.1.
45
A/74/732.
46
A/73/372.
47
A/73/372/Add.1.
48
A/73/79.
49
A/73/79/Add.1.
50
A/73/372/Add.3.
51
A/73/497.
52
A/73/372/Add.2.
53
A/72/767.
54
A/73/569.
55
A/73/378.
56
A/73/622.
57
A/73/71.
40
41

162

IV. Decisions

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Ethics Office58
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions59
Item 141
Joint Inspection Unit
Note by the Secretary-General drawing attention to the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Review of
change management in United Nations system organizations”60
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Review of change
management in United Nations system organizations”61
Note by the Secretary-General drawing attention to the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Review of
mechanisms and policies addressing conflict of interest in the United Nations system”62
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Review of mechanisms
and policies addressing conflict of interest in the United Nations system”63
Note by the Secretary-General drawing attention to the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Review of
internship programmes in the United Nations system”64
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Review of internship
programmes in the United Nations system”65
74/542. Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
A
At its 54th plenary meeting, on 22 January 2020, the General Assembly decided that, after the departure of the
Secretary-General, his seat at the podium might be occupied by his representative.
B
At its 56th plenary meeting, on 23 January 2020, the General Assembly took note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the Organization.66
74/543. Intergovernmental conference on an international legally binding instrument under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction
At its 61st plenary meeting, on 11 March 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,67
recalling its resolution 72/249 of 24 December 2017, in which it had decided to convene an intergovernmental
_______________
A/73/89.
A/73/183.
60
A/74/669.
61
A/74/669/Add.1.
62
A/73/187.
63
A/73/187/Add.1.
64
A/73/377 and A/73/377/Corr.1.
65
A/73/377/Add.1.
66
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/74/1).
67
A/74/L.41.
58
59

163

IV. Decisions

conference, under the auspices of the United Nations, to consider the recommendations of the Preparatory
Committee68 on the elements and to elaborate the text of an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea69 on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, with a view to developing the instrument as soon as possible, and
also had decided that, initially with respect to 2018, 2019 and the first half of 2020, the conference should meet
for four sessions of a duration of 10 working days each, recalling also its resolution 74/19 of 10 December 2019,
in which it had decided to convene, from 23 March to 3 April 2020, the fourth session of the intergovernmental
conference, and noting with concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), decided to
postpone the fourth session of the conference to the earliest possible available date to be decided by the Assembly.
74/544. Procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic
On 27 March 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President, noting with concern the situation
concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the limitations recommended on meetings within the United
Nations premises as precautionary measures aimed at containing the spread of COVID-19:
(a) Authorized the President of the General Assembly, where, in his view, a plenary meeting of the Assembly
was not practicable owing to the coronavirus pandemic, to circulate, after consultation with the General Committee,
draft decisions of the Assembly to all Member States under a silence procedure of at least 72 hours;
(b) Decided that, if the silence was not broken, the decision should be considered adopted and the General
Assembly should take note of the decision at its first plenary meeting held after the cessation of the precautionary
measures as soon as the circumstances allowed, and that the present decision on the procedure for taking decisions of
the Assembly should be in effect until the end of May unless extended through that procedure.
74/545. Seventy-second session of the International Law Commission
On 2 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,70 recalling its resolution 74/186 of
18 December 2019, in which it had decided that the International Law Commission would hold its seventy-second
session at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 27 April to 5 June and from 6 July to 7 August 2020, and
taking into account the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19):
(a) Decided that the first part of the seventy-second session of the International Law Commission, scheduled
to be held from 27 April to 5 June 2020, should be postponed to the earliest possible available date to be decided by
the General Assembly;
(b) Also decided that the second part of the seventy-second session of the Commission should be extended
by one week such that it would be held from 29 June to 7 August 2020.
74/546. Disarmament Commission
On 2 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,71 recalling its decision 74/511 of
12 December 2019, in which it had decided that the Disarmament Commission would hold a substantive session
for a period not exceeding three weeks during 2020, namely from 6 to 24 April, and noting with concern the
situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), decided to postpone the substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission to a period in 2021 to be decided by the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.

_______________
Preparatory Committee established by General Assembly resolution 69/292: Development of an international legally binding instrument
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas
beyond national jurisdiction.
69
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
70
A/74/L.45.
71
A/74/L.43.
68

164

IV. Decisions

74/547. Interactive dialogue on Harmony with Nature
On 13 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,72 recalling its resolution 74/224 of
19 December 2019, in which the President of the General Assembly had been requested to convene, at its seventyfourth session, an interactive dialogue, to be held at the plenary meetings to be convened during the commemoration
of International Mother Earth Day on 22 April 2020, and noting with concern the situation concerning the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) decided to cancel the interactive dialogue on Harmony with Nature scheduled to be held during
the seventy-fourth session of the Assembly.
74/548. 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development
On 13 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,73 recalling its resolution 73/292 of
9 May 2019, in which it had decided to convene the 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development in Lisbon, from 2 to 6 June 2020, to support the implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14, and noting with concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19):
(a)

Decided to postpone the Conference to a later date to be decided by the General Assembly;

(b)

Also decided to set, at a later stage, the new deadlines for its preparatory process.

74/549.

Fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, 2020

On 13 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,74 recalling its resolution 73/71 of
5 December 2018, in which it had decided to convene the fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and
Mongolia as a one-day conference at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 24 April 2020, and noting with
concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), decided to postpone the fourth Conference of
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia to a period in 2021 to be decided by the Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session.
74/550. Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
A
On 13 April 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,75 recalling its resolution 73/184 of
17 December 2018, in which it had decided to hold the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice in Kyoto, Japan, from 20 to 27 April 2020, with pre-Congress consultations to be held on 19 April
2020, and noting with concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), decided to postpone the
holding of the Fourteenth Congress until further notice and to consider new dates in due course.
B
On 12 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,76 recalling its resolution 73/184
of 17 December 2018, in which it had decided to hold the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice in Kyoto, Japan, from 20 to 27 April 2020, with pre-Congress consultations to be
_______________
A/74/L.46.
A/74/L.48.
74
A/74/L.44.
75
A/74/L.47.
76
A/74/L.80.
72
73

165

IV. Decisions

held on 19 April 2020, recalling also its resolution 74/171 of 18 December 2019, and recalling further its decision
74/550 A of 13 April 2020, in which it had noted with concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and had decided to postpone the holding of the Fourteenth Congress until further notice:
(a)
Decided to hold the Fourteenth Congress in Kyoto, Japan, from 7 to 12 March 2021, with pre-Congress
consultations to be held on 6 March 2021;
(b)
Requested the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to give high priority at its
thirtieth session to considering the declaration of the Fourteenth Congress, with a view to recommending, through the
Economic and Social Council, appropriate follow-up by the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
(c)
Requested the Secretary-General to ensure proper follow-up to resolution 74/171 and the present
decision and to report thereon, through the Commission, to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session.
74/551. High-level dialogue to assess the progress made in the fight against desertification, land degradation
and drought and to map the way forward
On 14 May 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,77 recalling its resolution 74/220 of
19 December 2019, in which the President of the General Assembly had been invited, with the support of the
Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, to organize, during the seventy-fourth session of the
Assembly, a high-level dialogue to assess the progress made in the fight against desertification, land degradation and
drought and to map the way forward, in the light of the United Nations Decade for Deserts and the Fight against
Desertification, which was coming to an end in 2020, and noting with concern the situation arising out of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), decided to postpone to its seventy-fifth session the invitation to the President of the
Assembly to organize, with the support of the Executive Secretary of the Convention, the high-level dialogue to assess
the progress made in the fight against desertification, land degradation and drought and to map the way forward, in
the light of the United Nations Decade for Deserts and the Fight against Desertification, which was coming to an end
in 2020.
74/552. Seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects
On 14 May 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,78 recalling its resolution 74/60 of
12 December 2019, and noting with concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
decided to postpone the biennial meeting of States, scheduled for 15 to 19 June 2020, to consider key challenges and
opportunities relating to the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects79 and the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons80 to a period in 2021 to
be decided by the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
74/553. Twentieth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation
On 14 May 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,81 recalling its resolution 71/318 of
28 August 2017 and its decision 73/553 of 9 May 2019, and noting with concern the situation concerning the
_______________
A/74/L.60.
A/74/L.62.
79
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
80
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and A/60/88/Corr.2, annex.
81
A/74/L.64.
77
78

166

IV. Decisions

coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, decided to postpone the twentieth session of the High-level
Committee on South-South Cooperation to a later date.
74/554. Twenty-first meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea
On 14 May 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,82 recalling its resolution 74/19 of
10 December 2019, in which it had requested the Secretary-General to convene, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and
3 of resolution 54/33 of 24 November 1999, the twenty-first meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea, in New York for eight meetings during the week of 22 to
26 June 2020, and noting with concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
decided to postpone the twenty-first meeting of the Informal Consultative Process to 2021, to be held at a date to be
decided by the Assembly.
74/555. Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic
On 15 May 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,83 decided that its decision 74/544 of
27 March 2020 would continue to be in effect until the end of June 2020 and that the subsidiary organs of the Assembly
might apply the procedure set out in decision 74/544.
74/556. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
On 20 May 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,84 recalling its resolution 72/284 of
26 June 2018 on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review, in which it had requested the
Secretary-General to submit to the Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, no later than February 2020, a report on
progress made in the implementation of the Strategy, and had decided to undertake, by June 2020, an examination of
the report of the Secretary-General as well as of the implementation of the Strategy by Member States, and to consider
updating the Strategy to respond to changes, and taking into account the unprecedented technical and logistical
challenges to a comprehensive examination of the report of the Secretary-General posed by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic:
(a) Invited the Secretary-General to update as may be necessary, by February 2021, the report85 requested in
paragraph 84 of resolution 72/284 on progress made in the implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy,86 as well as on progress made in the implementation of that resolution;
(b) Decided to postpone the examination of the report of the Secretary-General to the seventy-fifth session of
the General Assembly;
(c) Also decided to postpone the seventh biennial review of the Strategy, as called for in paragraphs 83 and
85 of resolution 72/284, to the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly;
(d) Further decided to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy” in order to undertake, no later than June 2021, an examination of
the aforementioned report of the Secretary-General, as well as of the implementation of the Strategy by Member
States, and to consider updating the Strategy to respond to changes.

_______________
A/74/L.63.
A/74/L.65.
84
A/74/L.61.
85
A/74/677.
86
Resolution 60/288.
82
83

167

IV. Decisions

74/557. Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without a plenary meeting during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic
On 29 May 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,87 noting with concern the situation
concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the limitations recommended on meetings within the
United Nations premises as precautionary measures aimed at containing the spread of COVID-19, and considering
the various elections that were scheduled be held in June 2020 by the Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, in
accordance with resolution 68/307 of 10 September 2014, as well as rules 30 and 99 of the rules of procedure of the
Assembly, for the proper functioning of the Organization, including, in particular, the planned elections of nonpermanent members of the Security Council, members of the Economic and Social Council, and the President and
Vice-Presidents of the Assembly, as well as the Chairs of the Main Committees of the Assembly:
(a) Decided to hold the election of non-permanent members of the Security Council and the election of
members of the Economic and Social Council in June 2020, simultaneously, without holding a plenary meeting of
the General Assembly, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the rules of procedure and the established
practice of the Assembly, and the arrangements set out in the annex to the present decision;
(b) Also decided to apply mutatis mutandis the provisions of the present decision to other elections of the
General Assembly during the seventy-fourth session in which the number of candidates exceeded the number of seats
to be filled, or where a Member State requested a secret ballot, even if the number of candidates did not exceed the
number of seats to be filled;
(c) Further decided to take note of the results of any of the elections mentioned above at its first plenary
meeting held after the cessation of the precautionary measures as soon as the circumstances allowed;
(d) Authorized the Main Committees to apply mutatis mutandis the provisions of the present decision to the
election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, in the event that
a secret ballot became necessary.
Annex
Communications from the President of the General Assembly prior to the elections
1. The President of the General Assembly shall circulate a letter to all Member States, at least 10 working days
prior to the first round of secret balloting for the elections, to inform Member States of the following:
(a)

The date on which the elections will be held;

(b)

The number of vacant seats;

(c)

The venue where ballots may be cast (the designated venue);

(d) The contact details of the Secretariat official to whom Member States are requested to submit the names
of the representative, and an alternate, who will cast the ballot of the Member State (the voter);
(e)

Any other details concerning the conduct of the elections.

2. The President of the General Assembly shall circulate a letter to all Member States, at least one working day
prior to the first round of secret balloting for the elections, to notify them of the names of candidates communicated
to the Secretariat at least 48 hours prior to the elections pursuant to resolution 71/323 of 8 September 2017.
3. The lists of candidates will continue to be updated on the e-deleGATE portal after the circulation of the letter of
the President of the General Assembly.
Casting of ballots
4.

On the day of the elections, the voter is invited to visit the designated venue to cast its ballots.

_______________
87

168

A/74/L.67.

IV. Decisions

5. The voter is invited to visit the designated venue during a specific time slot communicated to the voter five
working days prior to the elections by the President of the General Assembly.
6. The voter shall receive the ballot papers upon arrival at the designated venue, following the presentation of a
valid United Nations grounds pass.
7.

Only ballots cast in the ballot boxes at the designated venue shall be accepted.

8.

No ballots shall be accepted after the last time slot has expired.

9. The President of the General Assembly, prior to proceeding with the counting of the ballots, shall ensure that
the total number of ballot papers cast in all the ballot boxes amounts to at least a majority of the members of the
General Assembly. In the event that the total number of ballot papers cast in all the ballot boxes did not amount to at
least a majority of the members of the Assembly, the President shall circulate a letter to all Member States indicating
a new date and time for the elections.
Announcement of the results
10. Upon receipt of the results certified by the tellers, the President of the General Assembly shall immediately
circulate a letter to all Member States in order to inform them of the results and to declare elected those Member States
that have received the greatest number of votes and a required majority of the members present and voting.
Additional rounds of balloting
11. If the number of candidates obtaining a required majority of the members present and voting is fewer than the
number of members to be elected, there shall be additional ballots to fill the remaining places.
12. In such a case, the President of the General Assembly shall circulate a letter to all Member States with the date
and time of the next round of secret balloting, which shall commence on a working day at most 20 hours after the
circulation of the letter. In the letter, the President shall also indicate the candidates that are eligible in that round of
secret balloting and any other details concerning the conduct of the secret ballot.
13. In the case of a tie vote, and when it becomes necessary to determine the candidate that will proceed to the next
round of restricted balloting, there shall be a special restricted ballot limited to those candidates that have obtained an
equal number of votes.
74/558. Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic until the end of July 2020
On 18 June 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,88 decided that its decisions 74/544 of
27 March 2020 and 74/555 of 15 May 2020 would continue to be in effect until the end of July 2020.
74/559. Postponement of the seventy-second session of the International Law Commission
On 23 June 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,89 recalling its resolution 74/186 of
18 December 2019, in which it had decided that the International Law Commission would hold its seventy-second
session at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 27 April to 5 June and from 6 July to 7 August 2020, recalling
also its decision 74/545 of 2 April 2020, in which it had decided to postpone the first part of the seventy-second session
of the Commission and to extend by one week the second part of the session so that it would be held from 29 June to
7 August 2020, and taking into account the continuing situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
decided that the seventy-second session of the Commission would be postponed to a later date.

_______________
88
89

A/74/L.72.
A/74/L.70.

169

IV. Decisions

74/560. Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal
On 6 July 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of Japan,90 recalling its resolution 74/16 of 9 December
2019, in which it had urged Member States to observe the Olympic Truce individually and collectively, within the
framework of the Charter of the United Nations, throughout the period from the seventh day before the start of the
Games of the XXXII Olympiad until the seventh day following the end of the XVI Paralympic Games, and noting
that, owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the Games of the XXXII Olympiad had been rescheduled to be
held from 23 July to 8 August 2021 and that the XVI Paralympic Games had been rescheduled to be held from
24 August to 5 September 2021, in Tokyo:
(a) Decided to observe the Olympic Truce throughout the period from the seventh day before the start of the
Games of the XXXII Olympiad until the seventh day following the end of the XVI Paralympic Games, to be held in
Tokyo in 2021;
(b) Also decided to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the sub-item entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal” of the item entitled “Sport for
development and peace”.
74/561. Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic until the end of August 2020
On 21 July 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,91 decided that its decisions 74/544 of
27 March 2020 and 74/555 of 15 May 2020 would continue to be in effect until the end of August 2020.
74/562. High-level meetings of the General Assembly in September 2020
On 22 July 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,92 noting with concern the situation
regarding the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the limitations recommended on meetings within the
United Nations premises as precautionary measures aimed at containing the spread of COVID-19, and recalling its
resolutions 57/301 of 13 March 2003 and 73/299 of 14 June 2019:
(a) Decided, without setting a precedent for future general debates and mandated high-level meetings planned
for future high-level weeks, that each Member State, observer State and the European Union93 could submit a prerecorded statement of its Head of State, Vice-President, Crown Prince or Princess, Head of Government, Minister or
Vice-Minister, which would be played in the General Assembly Hall during the general debate of the Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session, the high-level meeting to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and
the high-level meetings referred to in paragraph (c) below, after introduction by their representative who was
physically present in the Assembly Hall;
(b) Also decided that, in addition to the verbatim records of the general debate and the high-level meeting to
commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the President of the General Assembly would
circulate, as a document of the Assembly, a compilation document of the statements delivered by Heads of State or
other dignitaries by means of pre-recorded statements during the general debate and the high-level meeting to
commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and submitted to the President no later than the day
on which the pre-recorded statement was played in the Assembly Hall;
(c) Further decided that the summit on biodiversity, to be convened pursuant to resolution 74/269 of 31 March
2020, would be held on Wednesday, 30 September 2020; the high-level meeting on the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Fourth World Conference on Women, to be convened pursuant to resolution 73/340 of 12 September 2019, would
be held on Thursday, 1 October 2020; and the high-level plenary meeting to commemorate and promote the
_______________
A/74/L.73.
A/74/L.76.
92
A/74/L.75.
90
91

93 In the case of the European Union, the pre-recorded statements would be made by the President of the European Council, the President of the

European Commission or the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.

170

IV. Decisions

International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, to be convened pursuant to resolution 74/54 of
12 December 2019, would be held on Friday, 2 October 2020; and requested the President of the General Assembly
to finalize the other organizational arrangements for those meetings;
(d) Decided that the present procedures would apply only to the meetings of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, the high-level meeting to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations and the high-level meetings referred to in paragraph (c) above.
74/563. Closing date of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly
On 12 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,94 decided to postpone the closing
date of the seventy-fourth session of the Assembly to Tuesday, 15 September 2020.
74/564. Review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
On 12 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,95 recalling its resolution 70/262
of 27 April 2016 on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, in particular paragraph 31 of the
resolution, in which the Assembly had called for a further comprehensive review of United Nations peacebuilding
architecture at its seventy-fourth session, taking into account the unprecedented technical and logistical challenges
to a comprehensive review at the seventy-fourth session posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
which had necessitated a delay of the formal process of the review from June to September, and also taking into
account that the limited time remaining before the end of the seventy-fourth session would not be sufficient to
allow the comprehensive review mandated in resolution 70/262:
(a) Decided to extend the review of the peacebuilding architecture at the seventy-fourth session to the end of
the main part of the seventy-fifth session, in order to afford all parties involved the time necessary to engage in robust
intergovernmental consultations and a comprehensive review of the operation of the architecture;
(b) Also decided that the review process during the seventy-fifth session should continue to be conducted in
accordance with the terms of reference recommended by the Peacebuilding Commission;
(c) Requested the President of the General Assembly to facilitate the review process and ensure its successful
outcome.
74/565. Informal interactive hearing with indigenous peoples
On 12 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,96 recalling its resolution 71/321
of 8 September 2017, in which it had requested the President of the General Assembly to organize and preside
over an informal interactive hearing and to prepare a summary of the hearing, during its seventy-fourth session,
on the margins of the session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, with indigenous peoples, ensuring,
to the extent possible, balanced regional representation, and noting with concern the situation arising out of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), decided to postpone to its seventy-fifth session the request to the President of
the General Assembly to organize and preside over an informal interactive hearing with indigenous peoples and
to prepare a summary of the hearing.
74/566. Extension of the term of office of the current members of the International Law Commission and
other related matters
On 12 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,97 recalling its resolution 74/186
of 18 December 2019, in which it had decided that the International Law Commission would hold its seventysecond session at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 27 April to 5 June and from 6 July to 7 August 2020,
_______________
A/74/L.79.
A/74/L.82.
96
A/74/L.81.
97
A/74/L.78.
94
95

171

IV. Decisions

recalling also its decision 74/545 of 2 April 2020, in which it had decided to postpone the first part of the seventysecond session of the Commission and to extend by one week the second part of the session so that it would be
held from 29 June to 7 August 2020, recalling further its decision 74/559 of 23 June 2020, in which it had decided
that the seventy-second session of the Commission would be postponed to a later date, and taking into account the
continuing situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the limitations recommended on meetings
within the United Nations premises as precautionary measures aimed at containing the spread of COVID-19:
(a) Decided that the seventy-second session of the International Law Commission should be postponed and
should be held at the United Nations Office at Geneva in 2021, and that the seventy-third session of the Commission
should be held at the United Nations Office at Geneva in 2022;
(b) Urged the International Law Commission to further explore means to make progress on the topics in its
programme of work in the absence of a formal in-person session of the Commission in 2020, and to closely engage
with the Sixth Committee during the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly;
(c) Requested that the Secretariat explore and prepare options to enable the International Law Commission
to effectively conduct sessions remotely, or otherwise make progress in its work remotely, including but not limited
to technological solutions such as virtual multilingual videoconferencing platforms, and adjustments to the normal
scheduling of meetings, including in the event that the Commission was unable to hold in-person sessions
beyond 2020;
(d) Requested that the International Law Commission and the Secretariat report to the Sixth Committee on
the matters referred to in paragraphs (b) and (c) above at the Committee session to be held during the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly;
(e) Decided that the terms of office of the current members of the International Law Commission should be
extended by one year such that they would expire on 31 December 2022, in order to permit the current membership
to complete consideration of the topics on the programme of work for the seventy-second and seventy-third sessions
that were at an advanced stage;
(f) Stressed that the decision to extend the terms of office of the current members of the International Law
Commission was made on an exceptional basis, owing to the unprecedented circumstances arising as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic, and that the decision was without prejudice to article 10 of the statute of the Commission and
did not constitute a precedent, either for the Commission or for other bodies of the United Nations with elected
members;
(g) Reiterated its appreciation for the efforts of the International Law Commission to improve its methods of
work, and encouraged the Commission to continue that practice;
(h) Invited the International Law Commission to continue to take measures to enhance its efficiency and
productivity and to consider making proposals to Member States to that end.
74/567. Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention on Countering the Use
of Information and Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
On 14 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President, 98 recalling its resolution
74/247 of 27 December 2019, in which it had decided that the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of Information and Communications Technologies for Criminal
Purposes should convene a three-day organizational session in August 2020, in New York, in order to agree on an
outline and modalities for its further activities, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session for
its consideration and approval, and noting with concern the current situation concerning the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19):
(a) Decided to postpone the organizational session of the Ad Hoc Committee mandated by paragraph 3 of
resolution 74/247 to a date as early as conditions permit but not later than 1 March 2021;
_______________
98

172

A/74/L.84.

IV. Decisions

(b) Confirmed that the report of the organizational session of the Ad Hoc Committee, including the agreed
outline and modalities for the further activities of the Committee, and any budgetary implications, should be submitted
to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session for its consideration and approval.
74/568. Special session of the General Assembly against corruption
On 31 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the United Arab Emirates,99 recalling its
resolution 74/276 of 1 June 2020, in which it had decided that the special session of the General Assembly on
challenges and measures to prevent and combat corruption and strengthen international cooperation would be
convened for three days, from 26 to 28 April 2021, at United Nations Headquarters, in New York, and noting with
concern the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), decided to convene the special session of the
General Assembly on challenges and measures to prevent and combat corruption and strengthen international
cooperation from 2 to 4 June 2021, instead of from 26 to 28 April 2021, at United Nations Headquarters, in New York.
74/569. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council
On 31 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President:100
(a) Decided to reaffirm the central role of the General Assembly concerning the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Security
Council;
(b) Also decided to immediately continue intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council reform in
informal plenary of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, as mandated by Assembly decisions 62/557 of
15 September 2008, 63/565 B of 14 September 2009, 64/568 of 13 September 2010, 65/554 of 12 September 2011,
66/566 of 13 September 2012, 67/561 of 29 August 2013, 68/557 of 8 September 2014, 69/560 of 14 September
2015, 70/559 of 27 July 2016, 71/553 of 19 July 2017, 72/557 of 29 June 2018 and 73/554 of 25 June 2019, building
on the informal meetings held during its seventy-fourth session, as reflected in the letter dated 29 July 2020 from the
Co-Chairs, and on the revised elements of commonality and issues for further consideration, circulated on 7 June
2019, as well as the positions of and proposals made by Member States, reflected in the text and its annex circulated
on 31 July 2015, to help to inform its future work;
(c) Welcomed the active engagement, initiatives and intensive efforts of the President of the General
Assembly, and noted with appreciation the active role and concrete efforts of the Co-Chairs undertaken in a
consultative manner with a view to an early comprehensive reform of the Security Council;
(d) Decided to convene the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and
Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security Council during the
seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, if Member States so decide;
(e) Also decided to include in the agenda of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly the item entitled
“Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Security Council”.
74/570. Taking note of decision 74/544 entitled “Procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly
during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”
At its 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, the General Assembly, pursuant to its decision 74/544 of
27 March 2020, entitled “Procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”, took note of that decision.

_______________
99

A/74/L.87.
A/74/L.88.

100

173

IV. Decisions

74/571. Taking note of the resolutions and decisions adopted by means of silence procedure between March
and August 2020 in accordance with decision 74/544 entitled “Procedure for taking decisions
of the General Assembly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”
At its 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, the General Assembly, pursuant to its decision 74/544
of 27 March 2020, took note of the following resolutions and decisions:

174

Resolution

Date

Title

74/232 B

11 August 2020

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries

74/249 B

30 June 2020

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board
of Auditors

74/254 B

6 August 2020

Seconded active-duty military and police personnel

74/260 B

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti

74/261 B

31 March 2020

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur

74/261 C

30 June 2020

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur

74/269

31 March 2020

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the summit on biodiversity

74/270

2 April 2020

Global solidarity to fight the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)

74/271

13 April 2020

Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat

74/272

13 April 2020

Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch

74/273

20 April 2020

International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda

74/274

20 April 2020

International cooperation to ensure global access to medicines, vaccines and
medical equipment to face COVID-19

74/275

28 May 2020

International Day to Protect Education from Attack

74/276

1 June 2020

Special session of the General Assembly against corruption

74/277

18 June 2020

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all
their aspects

74/278

30 June 2020

Closed peacekeeping missions

74/279

30 June 2020

Triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement to Member States
for contingent-owned equipment

74/280

30 June 2020

Support account for peacekeeping operations

74/281

30 June 2020

Financing of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda

74/282

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy

74/283

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei

74/284

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic

74/285

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus

74/286

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo

74/287

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

IV. Decisions
Resolution

Date

74/288

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

74/289

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

74/290

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali

74/291

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force

74/292

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

74/293

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan

74/294

30 June 2020

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara

74/295

30 June 2020

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)

74/296

13 July 2020

Global service delivery model

74/297

11 August 2020

Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 71/243 on the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for
development of the United Nations system

74/298

12 August 2020

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 67/290 on the
high-level political forum on sustainable development, resolution 70/299 on the
follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the
global level and resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and
Social Council

74/299

31 August 2020

Improving global road safety

Decision

Date

74/402 B

31 August 2020

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions

74/406 B

13 April 2020
5 June 2020

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions

74/409 B

13 April 2020

Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee

74/503 B

Title

Title

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
31 March 2020

(item 163)

2 April 2020

(items 79 and 100 (b))

13 April 2020

(items 106, 115 (b), 133 and 147))

14 May 2020

(items 19 (e) and 23 (b))

11 August 2020

(items 21 (a) and 23 (a))

12 August 2020

(item 67)

14 August 2020

(item 107)

31 August 2020

(item 115 (a))

74/537 B

11 August 2020

Revitalization of the work of the Second Committee

74/420

29 June 2020

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session

175

IV. Decisions

176

Decision

Date

Title

74/540 B

13 April 2020

Questions deferred for future consideration

74/540 C

13 July 2020

Questions deferred for future consideration

74/545

2 April 2020

Seventy-second session of the International Law Commission

74/546

2 April 2020

Disarmament Commission

74/547

13 April 2020

Interactive dialogue on Harmony with Nature

74/548

13 April 2020

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development

74/549

13 April 2020

Fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, 2020

74/550 A

13 April 2020

Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice

74/550 B

12 August 2020

Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice

74/551

14 May 2020

High-level dialogue to assess the progress made in the fight against
desertification, land degradation and drought and to map the way forward

74/552

14 May 2020

Seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects

74/553

14 May 2020

Twentieth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation

74/554

14 May 2020

Twenty-first meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea

74/555

15 May 2020

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic

74/556

20 May 2020

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy

74/557

29 May 2020

Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without a plenary meeting
during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic

74/558

18 June 2020

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic until the end of July 2020

74/559

23 June 2020

Postponement of the seventy-second session of the International Law
Commission

74/560

6 July 2020

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal

74/561

21 July 2020

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic until the end of August 2020

74/562

22 July 2020

High-level meetings of the General Assembly in September 2020

74/563

12 August 2020

Closing date of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly

74/564

12 August 2020

Review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture

74/565

12 August 2020

Informal interactive hearing with indigenous peoples

74/566

12 August 2020

Extension of the term of office of the current members of the International Law
Commission and other related matters

IV. Decisions
Decision

Date

Title

74/567

14 August 2020

Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes

74/568

31 August 2020

Special session of the General Assembly against corruption

74/569

31 August 2020

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and other matters related to the Security Council

74/572. Taking note of the results of the election of the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session held in accordance with decision 74/557 entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret
ballot without a plenary meeting during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”
At its 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, the General Assembly, pursuant to its decision 74/557
of 29 May 2020, took note of decision 74/417 of 17 June 2020, entitled “Election of the President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session”.
74/573. Taking note of the results of the election of non-permanent members of the Security Council held in
accordance with decision 74/557 entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without a
plenary meeting during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”
At its 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, the General Assembly, pursuant to its decision 74/557
of 29 May 2020, took note of decision 74/418 of 17 and 18 June 2020, entitled “Election of non-permanent
members of the Security Council”.
74/574. Taking note of the results of the election of members of the Economic and Social Council held in
accordance with decision 74/557 entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without
a plenary meeting during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”
At its 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, the General Assembly, pursuant to its decision 74/557 of
29 May 2020, took note of decision 74/419 of 17 June 2020, entitled “Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council”.
74/575. Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations
At its 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, the General Assembly took note of the note by the
Secretary-General.101
74/576. Report of the Security Council
At its 62nd plenary meeting, on 3 September 2020, the General Assembly took note of the report of the
Security Council.102
74/577. Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the sub-item entitled “Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution” of the item entitled “Prevention of armed conflict” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
seventy-fifth session.
_______________
101
102

A/74/300.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/74/2).

177

IV. Decisions

74/578. Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic” in the draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session.
74/579. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
seventy-fifth session.
74/580. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte” in the draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session.
74/581. The situation in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly, by a recorded vote of 81 to 17,
with 65 abstentions,103 decided to include the item entitled “The situation in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine” in the draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session.
74/582. Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences of
the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the separation
of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965” in the draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session.
74/583. Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations” in the draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session.

_______________
The voting was as follows:
In favour: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu
Against: Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea-Bissau,
India, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Paraguay, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
103

178

IV. Decisions

74/584. The responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity
At its 63rd plenary meeting, 4 September 2020, the General Assembly, by a recorded vote of 121 to 13, with
32 abstentions,104 decided to include the item entitled “The responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity” in the draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session.
74/585. Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second World War
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second World War” in the draft agenda of its seventy-fifth session.
74/586. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
At its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor” and to include it in the draft agenda of
its seventy-fifth session.

2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
74/537. Revitalization of the work of the Second Committee
B105
On 11 August 2020, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Second Committee,106 mindful
of and without prejudice to the broader ongoing revitalization and alignment processes in the Assembly, other
Main Committees and the Economic and Social Council, and cognizant of the measures adopted by the Assembly
to adjust its working methods in the light of the situation concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, including its decisions 74/544 of 27 March 2020, 74/555 of 15 May 2020 and 74/557 of 29 May 2020:
(a) Recalled its resolution 73/341 of 12 September 2019 on the revitalization of its work and its decision
65/530 of 20 December 2010 on improving the working methods of the Second Committee;
(b) Took note of conference room paper A/C.2/74/CRP.7 on the revitalization of the work of the Second
Committee, prepared by the Bureau of the Committee at the seventy-fourth session;
_______________
The voting was as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against: Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, South Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Djibouti, Gabon, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malawi, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
105
Decision 74/537, in section B.4 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/74/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 74/537 A.
106
A/74/389/Add.1, para. 7.
104

179

IV. Decisions

(c)

Reaffirmed the importance of the full implementation of its resolutions on the revitalization of its work;

(d) Also reaffirmed that the revitalization of the Second Committee aimed to strengthen the work of the
Committee, enhance international development and accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;107
(e) Agreed that the work of the Second Committee needed to be better aligned with the 2030 Agenda and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,108 while
recognizing that the purview of the Committee was broader than the 2030 Agenda;
(f) Commended the Bureau for its work, and invited the Bureau to prepare and organize the work of the
Second Committee, building on improvements to working methods introduced at recent sessions, as outlined in the
conference room paper;
(g)

With regard to the general debate and the debates on individual agenda items of the Second Committee:

(i) Invited the Bureau to take measures to facilitate increased interaction among delegations and with the
Secretariat officials presenting reports in the preparation of the programme of work for the session;
(ii) Decided that the Bureau should propose an annual theme for the general debate, taking into account
the theme of the Economic and Social Council and the high-level political forum on sustainable
development, to be decided after consultation with the wider membership;
(iii) Also decided that oral introductions of draft resolutions in plenary meetings should be limited to two
minutes; speakers were encouraged to explain concisely the relevance of the draft resolution to the 2030
Agenda, in particular, and the reason why the General Assembly should adopt a resolution on that topic;
(iv) Invited the Bureau to make proposals to streamline the debates on individual agenda items of the
Committee through joint consideration of one or more agenda items, to be decided after consultation with the
wider membership;
(v) Also invited the Bureau, when organizing substantive sessions and where possible, to utilize the
remaining time of a concluded session for the immediate continuation of consideration of the following item
in the programme of work;
(h) With regard to the panel discussions and side events of the Second Committee:
(i) Encouraged the Bureau to select the themes of the panel discussions and side events, to be decided
after consultation with the wider membership and with the support of the Secretariat, taking into account the
themes of the Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly and the Second Committee for any given
session and current and emerging issues of interest;
(ii) Also encouraged the Bureau to hold panel discussions and side events in a manner that adds value by
enhancing informal, in-depth discussions and bringing together experts from various fields, without
prejudice to the progress of the substantive work of the Committee;
(iii) Decided to restrict the number of panel discussions and side events to a maximum of three in order to
avoid overloading the work of the Committee;
(iv) Emphasized the importance of ensuring, inter alia, a variety of perspectives and stakeholders and
appropriate geographic and gender balance in the selection of keynote speakers and panellists for panel
discussions and side events;
(v) Encouraged the Bureau to convene the side events, in consultation with the wider membership and
with the support of the Secretariat, as early in the session as possible to ensure maximum participation and
avoid overlapping with informal consultations and group coordination meetings;

_______________
107
108

180

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.

IV. Decisions

(vi) Also encouraged the Bureau to convene the joint meeting of the Committee with the Economic and
Social Council, in consultation with the wider membership and with the support of the Secretariat, as early
in the session as possible to ensure maximum participation and avoid overlapping with informal
consultations and group coordination meetings;
(i)

With regard to reporting to the Second Committee:

(i) Underlined the importance of the timely submission and issuance of reports as much in advance of the
consideration of related agenda items as possible, and requested the Secretary-General to ensure that the
reports were specific and contained evidence-based recommendations and empirical analysis; each report
should highlight developments that had occurred since the adoption of the resolution mandating the report;
(ii) Requested the Secretary-General to focus the reports submitted to the Committee, inter alia, on the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and their interlinkages and to
include actionable recommendations;
(j)

With regard to draft resolutions submitted to the Second Committee:

(i) Invited proposers of draft resolutions, in order to facilitate negotiations, to share the proposed drafts
early in an editable format with tracked changes where possible, and with references to the sources of new
language;
(ii) Invited delegations proposing draft resolutions, where appropriate, to reflect the link of the resolutions
with the 2030 Agenda in the title of the resolutions and to consider including provisions to accelerate the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda in the resolutions;
(iii) Also invited delegations to ensure that all draft resolutions were streamlined, more concise, focused and
action-oriented, including the requests for reports and the recommendations;
(iv) In order to balance the number of resolutions adopted in odd years and in even years, decided that the
biennial sub-item entitled “Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of
globalization and interdependence” of the item entitled “Globalization and interdependence” and the
biennial sub-items entitled “Women in development” and “Human resources development” of the item
entitled “Eradication of poverty and other development issues” would next be included in the agenda of its
seventy-seventh session;
(v) Invited delegations to consider staggering the resolutions on education for sustainable development
and on human resources development;
(vi) Also invited delegations to consider renaming the resolution entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21,
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development and of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development” during its
consideration at the seventy-fifth session;
(vii) Decided that the subject matter of the resolution on an effective global response to address the impacts
of the El Niño phenomenon would be addressed within the resolution on disaster risk reduction, and also
decided to request the inclusion of a special section on the matter in future reports of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, recognizing that the
resolution might be brought back in the future if deemed necessary;
(viii) Invited delegations to consider the periodicity of the sub-item entitled “Development cooperation with
middle-income countries” of the item entitled “Globalization and interdependence”;
(ix) Decided to consider the resolution on Harmony with Nature every other year;
(k) Decided to continue to discuss and improve the working methods of the Second Committee in future
sessions, and to focus the substantive work of the Committee around resolutions that would have, inter alia, the
most impact on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in the decade of action and delivery for sustainable
development;
181

IV. Decisions

(l) Requested the Bureau, in that regard, to continue to update conference room paper A/C.2/74/CRP.7 on the
revitalization of the work of the Second Committee and to continue to facilitate and guide those efforts, including
through open-ended consultations within the framework of the existing agenda item entitled “Revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly”;
(m) Decided to follow up on the implementation of the present decision at its seventy-fifth session.

3. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
74/540. Questions deferred for future consideration
C109
On 13 July 2020, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,110 decided to defer
until the second part of its resumed seventy-fifth session consideration of the following documents:
Item 151
Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
Report of the Secretary-General on the final performance of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire111
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions112

_______________
For decision 74/540 A, see section B.6 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 49
(A/74/49), vol. II; for decision 74/540 B, see section IV.B.1 of the present volume.
110
A/74/616/Add.1, para.5.
111
A/74/711.
112
A/74/785.
109

182

Annex I
Allocation of agenda itemsa
a

1. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, was also considered directly in the
Assembly plenary during the resumed seventy-fourth session, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent
United Nations conferences):b
19. Sustainable development:
(e)

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa.

2. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, was also considered directly in the
Assembly plenary during the resumed seventy-fourth session, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent
United Nations conferences):b
21. Groups of countries in special situations:
(a)

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.

3. The following sub-items, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, were also considered directly in
the Assembly plenary during the resumed seventy-fourth session, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent
United Nations conferences):b
23. Operational activities for development:
(a)

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system;

(b)

South-South cooperation for development.

4. The following item, which had been allocated to the Third Committee, was also considered directly in the
Assembly plenary during the resumed seventy-fourth session, under heading D (Promotion of human rights):b
67. Rights of indigenous peoples.
5. The following item, which had been allocated to the Sixth Committee, was also considered directly in the
Assembly plenary during the resumed seventy-fourth session, under heading F (Promotion of justice and international
law):b
79. Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-first session.
6. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the First Committee, was also considered directly in the
Assembly plenary during the resumed seventy-fourth session, under heading G (Disarmament):b
100. Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly
at its tenth special session:
(b)

Report of the Disarmament Commission.

7. The following items, which had been allocated to the Third Committee, were also considered directly in the
Assembly plenary during the resumed seventy-fourth session, under heading H (Drug control, crime prevention and
combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations):b
106. Crime prevention and criminal justice.
_______________
a
b

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.
See decision 74/503 B in section IV.B of the present volume.

183

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

107. Countering the use of information and communications technologies for criminal purposes.
8. The following items and sub-item, which had been allocated to the Fifth Committee, were also considered
directly in the Assembly plenary during the resumed seventy-fourth session, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters):b
115. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a)

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.

133. Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
147. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
163. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

184

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions *
*

Resolutions
Resolution
number

Page

21 (a)

11 August 2020

2

132

30 June 2020

84

140

6 August 2020

85

156

30 June 2020

86

Resolution B

163

31 March 2020

2

Resolution C

163

30 June 2020

87

74/267.

Enlargement of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions: amendment to rule 155 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly

123

53rd

14 January 2020

3

74/268.

The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between
the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict
as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts

30

60th

3 March 2020

4

74/269.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the summit
on biodiversity

19 (f)

31 March 2020

7

74/270.

Global solidarity to fight the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)

123

2 April 2020

10

74/271.

Progress towards an accountability system in the
United Nations Secretariat

133

13 April 2020

11

74/272.

Construction of a new facility for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch

147

13 April 2020

14

74/273.

International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against
the Tutsi in Rwanda

64 (b)

20 April 2020

15

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries
Resolution B

74/249.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors
Resolution B

74/254.

Seconded active-duty military and police personnel
Resolution B

74/260.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
Resolution B

74/261.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

74/232.

Title

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur

_______________
* Unless otherwise indicated, the resolutions and decisions were adopted by means of silence procedure, in accordance with General Assembly decision 74/544
of 27 March 2020 and subsequent related decisions, where applicable, owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

185

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
number

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/274.

International cooperation to ensure global access to medicines,
vaccines and medical equipment to face COVID-19

123

20 April 2020

17

74/275.

International Day to Protect Education from Attack

117

28 May 2020

18

74/276.

Special session of the General Assembly against corruption

106

1 June 2020

20

74/277.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects

52

18 June 2020

82

74/278.

Closed peacekeeping missions

148

30 June 2020

91

74/279.

Triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement
to Member States for contingent-owned equipment

148

30 June 2020

92

74/280.

Support account for peacekeeping operations

148

30 June 2020

92

74/281.

Financing of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda

148

30 June 2020

100

74/282.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy

148

30 June 2020

102

74/283.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei

149

30 June 2020

103

74/284.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic

150

30 June 2020

107

74/285.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus

152

30 June 2020

111

74/286.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

153

30 June 2020

115

74/287.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

155

30 June 2020

120

74/288.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo

157

30 June 2020

121

74/289.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

158

30 June 2020

124

74/290.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali

159

30 June 2020

125

74/291.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force

160 (a)

30 June 2020

129

74/292.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

160 (b)

30 June 2020

133

74/293.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan

161

30 June 2020

137

74/294.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara

162

30 June 2020

141

74/295.

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council
resolution 1863 (2009)

164

30 June 2020

145

74/296.

Global service delivery model

135

13 July 2020

148

74/297.

Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution
71/243 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system

23 (a)

11 August 2020

23

74/298.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
14 and
67/290 on the high-level political forum on sustainable development,
117
resolution 70/299 on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development at the global level and resolution
72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

12 August 2020

25

186

Title

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

31 August 2020

26

62nd

3 September 2020

33

64 (a)

62nd

3 September 2020

34

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa

64 (b)

62nd

3 September 2020

43

74/303.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

121

63rd

4 September 2020

53

74/304.

Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments
and the Inter-Parliamentary Union

125

63rd

4 September 2020

54

74/305.

Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate
malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2030

13

64th

11 September 2020

58

74/306.

Comprehensive and coordinated response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic

14 and
120

64th

11 September 2020

67

74/307.

United response against global health threats: combating COVID-19

123

64th

11 Septemer 2020

78

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

115 (a)

31 August 2020

154

115 (b)

13 April 2020
5 June 2020

154

115 (e)

13 April 2020

155

74/299.

Improving global road safety

12

74/300.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia

32

74/301.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support

74/302.

Decisions
Decision
number

74/402.

Title

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Decision B

74/406.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
Decision B

74/409.

Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee
Decision B

74/414.

Appointment of members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework of
Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns
Decision B

115 (i)

64th

11 September 2020

155

35

60th

3 March 2020

156

60th

3 March 2020

156

74/415.

Membership of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People

74/416.

Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit

115 (g)

74/417.

Election of the President of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session

4

17 June 2020

156

74/418.

Election of non-permanent members of the Security Council

113 (a)

17 June 2020
18 June 2020

157

74/419.

Election of members of the Economic and Social Council

113 (b)

17 June 2020

157

187

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
number

Title

Item

Date of adoption

Page

29 June 2020

157

63rd

4 September 2020

158

159

64th

31 March 2020
2 April 2020
13 April 2020
14 May 2020
11 August 2020
12 August 2020
14 August 2020
31 August 2020
11 September 2020

121

11 August 2020

179

Decision B

133

13 April 2020

161

Decision C

133

13 July 2020

182

74/420.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session

6

74/421.

Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session

5

74/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
Decision B

74/537.

74/542.

7

Revitalization of the work of the Second Committee
Decision B

74/540.

Plenary
meeting

Questions deferred for future consideration

Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
Decision A

110

54th

22 January 2020

163

Decision B

110

56th

23 January 2020

163

74/543.

Intergovernmental conference on an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction

74 (a)

61st

11 March 2020

163

74/544.

Procedure for taking decisions of the General Assembly during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic

7

27 March 2020

164

74/545.

Seventy-second session of the International Law Commission

79

2 April 2020

164

74/546.

Disarmament Commission

100 (b)

2 April 2020

164

74/547.

Interactive dialogue on Harmony with Nature

19

13 April 2020

165

74/548.

2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

19 and
74 (a)

13 April 2020

165

74/549.

Fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
and Mongolia, 2020

98

13 April 2020

165

74/550.

Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice
Decision A

106

13 April 2020

165

Decision B

106

12 August 2020

165

188

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
number

Title

Item

74/551.

High-level dialogue to assess the progress made in the fight against
desertification, land degradation and drought and to map
the way forward

74/552.

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

19 (e)

14 May 2020

166

Seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation
of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects

98

14 May 2020

166

74/553.

Twentieth session of the High-level Committee
on South-South Cooperation

23 (b)

14 May 2020

166

74/554.

Twenty-first meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea

74

14 May 2020

167

74/555.

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General
Assembly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic

7

15 May 2020

167

74/556.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy

118

20 May 2020

167

74/557.

Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without a plenary
meeting during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic

7

29 May 2020

168

74/558.

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General
Assembly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
until the end of July 2020

7

18 June 2020

169

74/559.

Postponement of the seventy-second session of the International
Law Commission

79

23 June 2020

169

74/560.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal

11

6 July 2020

170

74/561.

Extension of the procedure for taking decisions of the General
Assembly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
until the end of August 2020

7

21 July 2020

170

74/562.

High-level meetings of the General Assembly in September 2020

7

22 July 2020

170

74/563.

Closing date of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly

7

12 August 2020

171

74/564.

Review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture

62

12 August 2020

171

74/565.

Informal interactive hearing with indigenous peoples

67

12 August 2020

171

74/566.

Extension of the term of office of the current members of the
International Law Commission and other related matters

79

12 August 2020

171

74/567.

Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes

107

14 August 2020

172

74/568.

Special session of the General Assembly against corruption

106

31 August 2020

173

74/569.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters related
to the Security Council

122

31 August 2020

173

74/570.

Taking note of decision 74/544 entitled “Procedure for taking
decisions of the General Assembly during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”

7

3 September 2020

173

62nd

189

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/571.

Taking note of the resolutions and decisions adopted by means of
silence procedure between March and August 2020 in accordance
with decision 74/544 entitled “Procedure for taking decisions of the
General Assembly during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”

7

62nd

3 September 2020

174

74/572.

Taking note of the results of the election of the President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session held in accordance with
decision 74/557 entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret
ballot without a plenary meeting during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”

7

62nd

3 September 2020

177

74/573.

Taking note of the results of the election of non-permanent members
of the Security Council held in accordance with decision 74/557
entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot without
a plenary meeting during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”

7

62nd

3 September 2020

177

74/574.

Taking note of the results of the election of members of the
Economic and Social Council held in accordance with decision
74/557 entitled “Procedure for holding elections by secret ballot
without a plenary meeting during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”

7

62nd

3 September 2020

177

74/575.

Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2,
of the Charter of the United Nations

112

62nd

3 September 2020

177

74/576.

Report of the Security Council

27

62nd

3 September 2020

177

74/577.

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement
of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution

31 (b)

63rd

4 September 2020

177

74/578.

Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic

33

63rd

4 September 2020

178

74/579.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan

37

63rd

4 September 2020

178

74/580.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

38

63rd

4 September 2020

178

74/581.

The situation in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine

63

63rd

4 September 2020

178

74/582.

Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the legal consequences of the separation of the
Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965

86

63rd

4 September 2020

178

74/583.

Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations

120

63rd

4 September 2020

178

74/584.

The responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity

130

63rd

4 September 2020

179

74/585.

Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second World War

131

63rd

4 September 2020

179

74/586.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

154

63rd

4 September 2020

179

190
