United Nations

is

;J,

1281st

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

to
Is
In

lr

PLENARY MEETING
Monday, 16 December 1.963,
at 10.30 a.m.

EIGHTEENTH SESSION

:e

Official Records
'e
In

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

AGENDA ITEM 71

Page

Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Notions

Agenda item 71:
Consideration of pritlciples of international
law concerning friendly relations and cooperation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Na.tions
Report of the Sixth Committee • ...•••••

.
"

s
e
,

'.

REPORT OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE (A/56?!)

Agenda item 72:
Technioal assistance to promote the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreoiation
of international law: reportoftheSecretaryGeneral with a view to the strengthening of
the practical application of internationalla.w
Report of the Sixth Committee . .•••.•••

1

Statement by the President. . . . . . . . . .

9

AGENDA ITEM 72
Technical assistance to promote the teaching, study,
dissemination and wider appreciation of internationa I law: report of the Secretary-Genera I with
a view to the strengthening of the practical application of internationa I law

Agenda item 13:
Report of the Trusteeship Council
Report of the Fourth Committee • . ... . .

r

t
f

Agenda items 49, SO, 51, 52, 53 and 54:
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations: reports of
the Secretary-General and of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories:
@) Politioal and constitutional information,'
(Q) Information on educational, eCOnomic and
social advancement;
(E) General questions relating to the transmission and examination of information;
Dissemination of information in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories on the Declaration on
the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples: report of the Seoretary-General
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-SelfGoverning Territories: report of the Secretary-General
Question of the continuation of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Election, if required, to fill vacancies in the
membership of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
Special training programme for Territories
under Portuguese administration: report of
the Secretary-General
.
Report of the Fourth Committee . ••••.•.
Agenda item 86:
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . "

REPORT OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE (A/5672)
1. Mr. ZABIGAILO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic), Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee (translated
from Russian): I shoUld like to submit for consideration by the plenary meeting of the General Assembly
the report of the Sixth Committee [A/5671] on agenda
item 71 "Consideration of principles of international
law concerning friendly relations and co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations".
2. This item was placed on the agenda in accordance
with resolution 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962.
This resolution contains, inter alia, a decision "to
undertake, pursuant to Article 13 of the Charter, a
study of the principles of international law concerning
friendly relations and co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter with a view to their progressive development and codification, so as to secure
their more effective application".

9

3. The discussion in the Committee took several
turns. First of all, stress was laid on the paramount
importance of this question, which from the juridical
and political standpoint was the most important of all
those hitherto considered by the Sixth Committee.
4. The Committee's terms of reference were discussed. According to several representatives, these
terms of reference were limited to a study of principles. Others considered that the Committee's task
consisted not only in the study, but also in the progressive development and codification of principles
of international law, with priority gi ven to the following four principles: the principle that States shall
refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force, the principle of peacefUl settlement of
disputes, the duty not to intervene in matters within
the domestic jurisdiction of any State and the principle of sovereign equality of States. In this connexion
the initiative taken by the Czechoslovak delegation
was noted [A/567l, para. 63].

14

President: Mr. Carlos SOSA RODRIGUEZ
(Venezuel al.
1

A/PV.1281

2

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

5 A discussion also took place on the form in which
the results of this study of progressive development
and codification should be presented.

purpose. Certain measures are also proposed which
the General Assembly can begin to put into effect in
the current year.

A discussion of the procedure to be adopted in

12. The three relevant draft resolutions [A/5672,
para. 29]. two of Which were adopted unanimously,
are contained in the report with a recommendation
that the General Assembly should adopt them.

6

c~nsidering these questions occupied an important

place in the' Committee's debates. It was finally
decided to set up a special committee composed of
representatives of states Members of the United
Nations appointed by the President of the General
Assembly having regard for the principle of equitable
geographical representation and bearing in mind that
the world's principal legal systems should be represented on the Committee. The task of the special
committee, is to draw up a report containing, for the
purpose of the progressive development and codification of the four principles so as to secure their more
effective application, the conclusions of the special
committee and its recommendations.
7. The draft resolution is contained in the report
[ibid., para. 126, draft resolution 1]. The Committee
unanimously approved this draft resolution and
recommends its adoption by the General Assembly.
8. The report also contains draft resolution 1I, which
provides for the carrying out of a so-called study of
methods of fact-finding, since its sponsors considered
that this matter concerned the principle that States
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means. This draft resolution was adopted by fortyfive votes to fourteen, with twenty-one abstentions; a
number of representatives having stated that the
question should not be considered by the Commi ttee
since it did not appear on the agenda and since the
purpose of the "study" referred to was the establishment of an international centre of inquiry, i.e., a body
which would be at variance with the Charter, which
specifies what organs are responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security.
9. I should like, at the same time, to present the
second report of the Sixth Committee. I have the
honour to submit for consideration by the plenary
meeting of the General Assembly the report of the
Sixth Committee [A/5672] on agenda item 72, "Technica~ assistance to promote the teaching, study, dissemInation and wider appreciation of international
law". At its seventeenth session the General Assembly
decided to place this question on the agenda of its
eighteenth, or the present, session. In its resolution
[1816 (XVII)] of 18 December 1962 it urged states
Members of the United Nations to undertake broad
programmes of training, including seminars, grants
and exchanges of teachers, students and fellows as
well as exchanges of publications in the field of international law.
10. The Committee agreed on the need for States
Members of the United Nations to co-operate in
the development and implementation of suitable programmes. Various practical recommendations were
made, among them a recommendation that all States
should include in their curriculum on intf'rnational
law the prin~iples of peace, peacefUl coexistence,
equality of nghts, self-determination, and respect
for the independence and sovereignty of States contained in the Charter.
'
11. The Sixth Committee proposes that certain steps
should be taken to work out practical measures ancI.
proposals concerning the implementation of the United"
Nations programme. SUch a programme will be prepared by the special committee established for the

Pursuant to rule 68 of the rules of procedure, it
was decided not to discuss the reports of the Sixth
Committee.

13. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision just taken by the Assembly, representatives' statements will be limited
to explanations of vote on the draft resolutions before
us.
14. We shall first consider item 71, under which the
Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of draft resolutions I and I1, which are
contained in its report [A/5671, para. 126].
15. I give the floor to representatives who wish to
explain their vote.
16. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, in
order to clarify the situation I should like to ask a
question regarding our procedure. I should like to
know whether I am obliged to explain my vote now on
all the draft resolutions submitted by the Sixth Committee on agenda items 71 and 72, since I wish to
explain our votes on both of these item s, or Whether
I should now confine myself to explaining our votes
on item 71, and thereafter make a second explanation
of vote with regard to item 72.
17. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): My
intention is to give the floor first for explanations of
vote on the draft resolutions under item 71 and then
on those under item 72. However, the speaker may
refer to both 9raft resolutions 1 and 11 under i tern 71
and then, in another statement, when We consider item
72, he may refer to the three draft resolutions recommended, A, Band C. Consequently, the speaker may
now refer to the two draft resolutions relating to
item 71.
18. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republi?s) (translated from Russian): Thank you, Mr.
PreSident. In connexion with draft resolutions I and
II submitted by the Sixth Committee on item 71 [AI
5671, para. 126], my delegation considers it necessary to make the following statement.
19. As everyone knows, the discussion in the Sixth
Committee led to the unanimous adoption of draft
resolutl?n I, entitled "Consideration of principles of
internatlOnal law concerning friendly relations and
co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations". It is most gratifying
that, during the discussion of this question, most of
the States of Asia, Africa and Latin America supported the idea advanced by the socialist countries
at the fifteenth and sixteenth sessions of the General
Assembly that there was a need to formulate the
principles of international law relating to the peaceful
cO~xistence of States with different social systems.
It lS Widely known that the Soviet Union energetically
pursues and supports the policy of peacefUl coexist~nce among States. This has always been the general
hne of our foreign policy since the inception of the
Soviet state.

20. The
internatio
codificatil
nized by
sixteenth
(XV),168

21. The
internatic
the detai
importan1
interfere]
disputes
equality
decided!
sion, we
fication 8
principle
one anotl:
ciple of
peoples,
conscien'
under thE

22. We
fact tha
during tl
the Sixtl
would p:
formulat
internati
mainten!
the seCi
altered
definite
to reach

23. As
resoluti
decided
represE
the Prl
TIlittee
sions (
with a'
ficatior
as to !
TIleanS
rective
submit
priate
progre
tions d
intern~

peace

24.

T

adopte
adopti
25.' L
regar l
Cornu
establ
cases
StateE
origir
Add.l
many
advar
need
sion
have
prine
l

1281st meeting-16 December 1963
20. The importance of elaborating principles of
international law in this field with a view to their
codification and progressive development was recognized by the General Assembly at its fifteenth,
sixteenth and seventeenth sessions [resolutions 1505
(XV), 1686 (XVI) and 1815 (XVII)].

the United States and of the Latin American countries,
voted in favour of the draft in the Sixth Committee.
Thirty-five delegations, including the socialist countries and many countries of Asia and Africa, in one
form or another refused their support: fourteen voted
against, and twenty-one abstained.

21. The broad discussion of certain principles of
international law at the present session has led to
the detailed study in the Sixth Committee of such
important principles as those of non-aggression, noninterference, the obligation of States to settle all
disputes by peaceful means and, lastly, the sovereign
equality of States. To the principles which it was
decided should be considered at the seventeenth session, we have now added, with a view to their codification and progressive development, such important
principles as the duty of States to co-operate with
one another in accordance with the Charter, the principle of the equal rights and self-determination of
peoples, and the principle that all states should
conscientiously fulfil the obligations assumed by them
under the Charter.

26. Speaking in the Sixth Committee, the USSR delegation observed that even procedurally, the Sixth
Committee did not have the right, under the terms
of reference given to it by resolution 1815 (XVII), to
consider or adopt the draft submitted on the initiative
of the Netherlands delega.tion, The General Assembly
resolution give no instructions relating to the adoption
of such special organizational measures as the establishment of a special international body for factfinding in international disputes and conflicts among
States. The task set by the Assembly in that resolution, as we have just pointed out, is limited to the
codification and progressive development of the abovementioned important principles of im:ernational law.
But even setting aside this important formal consideration, it should be noted that during the discussion of this question in the Sixth Committee it became
clear that the Netherlands delegation and several
others were anxious to create a special body outside
the framework of the United Nations which in essence
would seek to usurp the functions of many important
organs and, above all, the Security Council, which has
primary responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

22. We wish to stress particularly the encouraging
fact that, although certain countries, particularly
during the first stage of the discussion this year in
the Sixth Committee, expressed doubts whether it
would prove possible to arrive at an appropriate
formulation of the above-mentioned principles of
international law, on whose observance depends the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
the second stage of the discussion these countries
altered their position somewhat, and there was a
definite change of heart which enabled the Committee
to reach a unanimous decision on this problem.

I
j

3

23. As is indicated in the report and in the draft
resolution submitted by the Sixth Committee, it was
decided to set up a special committee composed of
representatives of Member States to be appointed by
the President of the General Assembly, The Committee would prepare a report containing its conclusions on these principles and its recommendations
with a view to the progressive development and codification of the above-mentioned four principles, so
as to secure their more effective application. This
means that the future committee would receive directives from the General Assembly requiring it to
submit to the Assembly at its next session appropriate formulations representing the codification and
progressive development of many important propositions directly connected with the further relaxation of
international tension and the maintenance of world
peace and security.
24. The USSR delegation supports draft resolution I,
adopted by the Sixth Committee, and will vote for its
adoption in the General Assembly,
25.' Unfortunately, we cannot say the same with
regard to draft resolution II proposed by the Sixth
Committee, concerning a study of the feasibility of
establishing an international body for fact-finding in
cases of international disputes and conflicts among
States. This draft, it will be recalled, was submitted
originally by the Netherlands delegation [A/5470/
Add.l]. When it was discussed in the Sixth Committee,
many delegations, including the USSR delegation,
advanced cogent arguments to show that there was no
need for the General Assembly to adopt such a decision [831st meeting]. It is no accident that, as we
have just been informed. only forty-five delegations,
principally those of the Western countries headed by

27. During the discussion in the Sixth Committee, it
also became evident that some delegations were thinking in terms of replacing the formulation of the principles of international law with a view to their codification and progressive development, as provided in
resolution 1815 (XVII), by a discussion about the
establishment of a body whose very existence would
be contrary to the provisions of the Charter and the
basic principle of United Nations bodies which act
-and are bound to act-in accordance with the
Charter.
28. It is perfectly obvious that if a body such as
that proposed in draft resolution II were to be created,
it would inevitably claim a monopoly of fact-finding
in international conflicts and disputes.
29. One need only imagine the situation that would
arise, for example, if the question of apartheid or of
the Portuguese colonies were brought, not before the
Security Council, but before the above-mentioned
body. One need only imagine this to see that such
notions are wholly incompatible with the provisions
of the Charter.
30. The slight softening of the initial wording of the
Netherlands draft changes nothing in essence. It has
been maintained, and will perhaps be maintained here
too, that the draft merely calls for study of the idea.
But it is surely obvious that if the idea is fundamentally unacceptable and at variance with the
Charter, there is no need to organize any study of it.
31. Having said that, the USSR delegation wishes to
emphasize strongly that it attaches the utmost importance to fact-finding in connexion with any dispute
in any conflict between States.
32. It is perfectly obviolls that without objective
fact-finding it is impossible to consider an issue
or adopt correct decision.s aimed at the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts.

4

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

33. As everyone knows, the Soviet Union consistently
supports the principle of the peaceful settlement of
international disputes and the settlement of all disagreements and conflicts between States by peaceful
means alone, without recourse to the threat or use of
force. This is a sine gua non of peaceful coexistence.
34. Everyone is also aware of the various procedures
which States have used and continue to use successfully for the purposes of fact-finding in international
disputes and conflicts. Various fact-finding procedures
are laid down in many international agreements, as
well as in the charters of a number of international
organizations. Everyone knows, too, that in appropriate cases principal organs of the United Nations
such as the Security Council and the International
Court of Justice, acting in accordance with the United
Nations Charter and the Statute of the Court, can and
should take appropriate steps to ascertain the facts
in connexion with the international disputes which they
consider.
35. Many of the international agreements concluded
by the Soviet Union with other States-for instance,
agreements concerning State frontiers-also provide
for appropriate fact-finding procedures.
36. Thus, I want to make it absolutely clear that, if
we object to the idea put forward by the Netherlands
delegation, it is only because we consider it improper
that for the purpose of fact-finding in disputes and
conflicts among States there should be established a
new special body outside the framework of the United
Nations-I repeat, outside the framework oftheUnited
Nations-as a sort of universal and special organ
called upon to carry out fact-finding investigation in
circumvention and in disregard of the system which
is already provided for in the Charter, in the agreements of many international organizations and in bilateral agreements, and also in such ad hoc agreements as may be concluded and adopted in accordance
with the terms, and within the framework, of Article
33 of the Charter.
37. We repeat that the activities of such a special
body, if it should be established-as is evident from
the explanations with which this idea, advanced by the
Netherlands, was introduced-could easily be used in
particular, to by-pass the jurisdiction of an organ
such as the Security Council, which bears such responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
38. In view of these considerations, the USSR delegation requests a separate vote on the second part
of operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution U, begin"
ning with the words "and to any SUbsidiary organ
It also requests a separate vote on operative p'a'r'a~
graph 3 of the draft, We shall vote against these
parts of draft resolution U and, whatever the outcome
of the s~pllrate votes we are requesting, we shall
vote agamst draft resolution U as a whole for the
above-mentioned reasons.
39. Mr. PLIMPTON (United States of America)' I
wish to speak in explanation of our votes on the dr~t
resolutions adopted and recommended by the Legal
Committee. under agenda item 71 [A/5671, para. 126]
dealing WIth the principles of' international law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
St~:es in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
40, With respect to draft resolution I concerning
principles of friendly relations generally and es-

tablishlng a special committee of Member States to
be appointed by the President of this Assembly in
order to draw up a report containing the conclusions
of its study and recommendations, little more need
be said. Although the draf t resolution is not exactly
what each of us, or any of us, might have wished. it
represents an acceptable compromise.

prop
agen
amol
spec

~

41. I would like to add that if I understood what the
representative of the Soviet Union said a few moments
ago about draft resolution I, my delegation does not
agree with those remarks. The draft resolution if and
when adopted would not be a directive to the special
committee necessarily to produce codifications or
formulations' in detail or elaborate the four principles
of the Charter. The mandate of the special committee
speaks for itself. The special committee is to " •••
draw up a report containing, for the purpose of the
progressive development and codification of the four
principles so as to secure their more effective application, the conclusions of its study and its recommendations" .

f

i

;

I

42. The special committee is directed to report, and
that report is to include the conclusions of its study
and its recommendations. The latter are not restricted; they can be recommendations for a codification of one or more of the four principles or
recommendations against the codification of anyone
or more of those principles. The special committee
is clearly free to use its own wise judgement, and
we are confident it will use its wise jUdgement unfettered by a strait-jacket of instructions from the
General Assembly.

1
il

I

;j

46. It has been said that the stUdy called for in this
draft resolution is outside the scope of the special
co~mitt~e on principles concerning friendly relations
~. o~tslde the spirit of this agenda item. In our view.
IS IS not so. This draft reSOlution, calling for the
~tu~~ of a Wghly important factor which is involved
III
e peaceful settlement of disputes, is a concrete

49.
will
for E
menl

50.
poln1
wore

SOvil
a SI

[A/5

51.
Sovi
he !

by 1

spons.ored in the Sixth Committee by Canada, Cyprus,
JamaICa, Liberia, Mexico, the Netherlands, Pakistan
and Sweden, providing for a study of the feasibility
and desirability of establishing fact-finding responsibilities in an international organization. the United
States delegation will also vote in favour of this draft
resolution,

45. The draft resolution purely and simply calls for
a study, The results of that study must be reported
back to us and judged by the states Members of this
Organization. It is only after that study has been
~ompleted that a decision must be made as to what
If any. action should be taken.
'

48.
stud:
violE
the I
give

Dlitt

43. With respect to draft resolution II originally

44. Calling as it does simply for a study of factfinding responsibilities, the draft rresolution is at
the same time both a positive and a concrete proposal
and one which does not prejudge the special committee's or, indeed, our own immediate decision on
the matter. No one can deny that fact-finding is an
important element in the peacefUl settlement of disputes, Procedures for such fact-finding accordingly
deserve our most careful attention. This draft resolution is a constructive proposal for study by the
special committee of that important element of
pe.aceful settlement. At the same time, however, and
t~IS must be quite clear, adoption of the draft resolution would not commit us to establishing fact-finding
responsibilities in any particular organization,

47.
for
studJ
oallf
span
oons
of tl
oper

we
1811
shal
wor

II
'.

a hi

I

trill

1
1

(XV

I

1
11

~
f
,j
I

52.
soh;
to f
that
sett
the

see
tion
xnit

53.
the

USE

tUn
of i
tlef
the:
inq
inq

dro

shc

WOl
WOl
WOl

es!

Sec

age

SUI

me

she

1281st meeting-16 December 1963

5

proposal wholly within the letter and spirit of the
agenda item on friendly relations and co-operation
among States, and precisely wltWn the mandate of the
special committee.

would have no other task than pure fact-finding as a
subsidiary to either the Security Council or the
General Assembly, or to any other body or State
that might invoke its assistance.

47. It has also been contended that the study called
for in this draft resolution might detract from other
studies in the special committee. The draft resolution
calls for no priority. The study of fact-finding responsibilities should receive no more and no less
consideration than it deserves as one element of one
of the four principles of friendly t:elations and cooperation among States under examination.

54. But we are not proposing at the present moment
the establishment of such a body. We are merely proposing that a stUdy should be made tofind out whether
there is any reason to establish such a body, and I
suggest that as resolution 1815 (XVII) proposed a
study of the means of peacefully settling disputes and
of trying to achieve better application of the principles of international law, this draft resolution is
entirely in accordance with that resolution and also
with the Charter.

48. The contention that is sometimes made that a
study of fact-finding would involve in some way a
violation of the Charter or would be inconsistent with
the Charter is so incorrect on its face that I need not
give it any further consideration.
49. For the reasons I have indicated, my delegation
will vote in favour of this draft resolution, as it will
for each of the draft resolutions approved andrecommended by the Legal Committee.
50. Mr. SCHURMANN (Netherlands): I have only two
points to make. First of all I would like to say a few
words in reply to what the representative of the
Soviet Union has said and, secondly, I would suggest
a small alteration in the text of draft resolution IT
[A/56n, para. 126].
51. To turn first to what the representative of the
Soviet Union has just said, if I understood him rightly
he said that he was very much in favour of the committee on fact-finding but that he was being troubled
by his legal conscience because he thought that what
we were proposing was contrary either to resolution
1815 (XVII) or to the Charter, or to both. We do not
share this opinion, and I would like to say just a few
words about it.
52. So far as the resolution is concerned, that resolution asked for a study of the principles in order
to find out how they could be better applied. I suggest
that when one is studying the principles of peaceful
settlement and when one also has the aim of achieving
a better application, fact-finding is certainly one of
the means that should be studied and that could contribute to a further application. Therefore, it would
seem to me that from that point of view draft resolution 11 contained in the report from the Sixth Committee is entirely within the scope of resolution 1815
(XVII).
53. As to the contention that it would be contrary to
the Charter, I would like to point out that the Charter
itself mentions in Article 33 various means of settling disputes, and one of the means mentioned is that
of inquiry. That Article states definitely that the parties themselves should choose the manner in which
they will do this, and that means they can have an
inquiry within the United Nations or also have an
inquiry outside the United Nations. Therefore, if the
draft resolution in favour of which I am now speaking
should now propose the establishment of a body that
would do fact-finding outside the United Nations, that
would be in complete accordance with Article 33 and
would in no way infringe upon the Charter, and
especially it would not try to substitute itself for the
Security Council, as Mr. Morozov said afew moments
ago. There is no question of that body trying to assume the functions of the Security Council which are
mentioned in Chapters VI and VII. That body. if it
should be decided upon and if it should be established,

55. I have one proposal to make. It will be noticed
that draft resolution 11 contains three operative paragraphs. Operative paragraph 2 is as follows:
"Requests the Secretary to study the relevant
aspects of the problem under consideration and to
report on the results of such study to the General
Assembly at its nineteenth session and to any subsidiary organ that may be established at the eighteenth session in pursuance of the item entitled
'Consideration of principles of International Law
concerning friendly relations among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations'."
56. The idea of this wording was that we expect that
such a subsidiary organ would be established. and not
that we wish to refer this matter to that organ. It will
be found that according to draft resolution I such an
organ would in fact be established, and it is called a
special committee in operative paragraph 1 of that
draft.
57. I would suggest that if draft resolution I is
adopted we could simplifty the wording of draft resolution n. If the special committee is established
under draft resolution I, the wording of operative
paragraph 2 of draft resolution 11 could be changed
to read: " .•• the results of such study to the General
Assembly at its nineteenth session and the Special
Committee established under General Assembly resolution"-and here the number of the resolution
would be inserted. The same amendment could be
made to operative paragraph 3, the first phrase of
which would read: "Requests of Special Committee".
instead of "Requests such a subsidiary organ".
58. I have the honour to submit these amendments
formally. in the event that draft resolution I is
adopted.
59. Mr. DADZIE (Ghana): While the delegation of
Ghana has great respect for the co-sponsors of draft
resolution 11 [A/5671, para. 126] on the feasibility
and desirability of establishing a special international
body for fact-finding, it took the view in the Sixth
Committee, and still maintains, that the SUbject of
fact-finding is only remotely related to agenda item
71. "Consideration of principles of international law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations". In other words, the subject of fact-finding,
which is a method of inquiry, is only one of the many
methods for the peacefnl settlement of disputes within
the meaning of Article 33, paragraph 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations. That provision reads:
"The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, shall, first of all, seek

6

General Assembly

Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
regional agencies or arrang.em~nts, or other
peaceful means of their own chOIce.
60. It would appear, therefore, that fact-finding,
which comes under inquiry, is one of many metho~s,
the others being mediation, conciliation, arbitratIOn
and judicial settlement. The agenda item of. the
General Assembly which was allocated to the SIxth
Committee was concerned more with the general
structure of peaceful settlement, as one of the four
principles of international law which we were called
upon to examine, than with the individual methods of
achieving peaceful settlements of disputes.
61 The delegation of Ghana would welcome the oppo~tunity to examine fUlly the method of fac!-findi~g
before reaching a decision on whether fact-fmding m
the form proposed by the sponsors ofthe draft resolution is the best form to be recommended to the General
Assembly or whether some other form should be recommended.
62. Accordingly, the sponsors would have been best
advised to propose the item for inscription in the
agenda of the nineteenth session of the Assembly,
for our separate consideration at that session.
63. Therefore, without having had an opportunity to
examine these questions, my delegation will not be in
a position to support draft resolution n before the
Assembly.
64. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now proceed to vote on draft resolution I and
then on draft resolution n, recommended by the Sixth
Committee in its report [A/5671, para, 126].
65. We shall vote first on draft resolution I, which
was approved unanimously by the Sixth Committee.
May I assume that the Assembly also wishes to adopt
it unanimously?

Draft resolution I was adopted unanimously.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now proceed to vote on draft resolution n.
67. Following the statements made by the representatives of the Soviet Union and the Netherlands,
the situation with regard to this draft resolution is
as follows: the representative of the Soviet Union has
requested a separate vote on part of operative paragraph 2 and also on operative paragraph 3, The
Netherlands representative has suggested that, as a
consequence of the adoption by the General Assembly
of draft resolution I, operative paragraphs 2 and 3 of
draft resolution II should be re\yorded as follows.
68. In operative paragraph 2, for "and to any subsidiary organ that may be established at the eighteenth
session in pursuance of the item ..• ", read "and to
the Special Committee established under General
Assembly resolution •.. (XVIII)" and, in order to
make the wording of paragraph 3 consistent with this
amendment, for "Requests this subsidiary organ"
read "Requests the Special Committee". In fact, this
is not a SUbstantive change in the text; it is an amendment which may be considered immediately in accordance with rule 80 of the rules of procedure.
69. Consequently, if there is no objection, I shall
take it that the Assembly agrees to consider the oral
amendment proposed by the Netherlands.
It was so agreed.

70. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Inow
ask the Assembly whether it agrees to adopt the drafting changes which the Netherlands representative has
proposed should be made in operative paragraphs 2
and 3 of draft resolution lI.

The amendments were adopted unanimously.
71. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
Having settled that point we shall now have a separate
vote on operative paragraph 2, as requested by the
Soviet Union. If there is no objection, I propose, in
accordance with rule 91 of the rules of procedure,
to put to the vote first operative paragraph 2, with
the drafting change just adopted by the Assembly. We
shall then also have a separate vote on operative
paragraph 3, with the minor change which the Assembly has also adopted.

It was so decided.

prese
propo
the l
Speci:

not e,

taking
H.

rr

again:

78.
made
essen
stand
pared
heaJ:'d
prese
part
self.
first.

72. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): For
the purposes of the vote on operative paragraph 2 of
draft resolution n and for the sake of clarity, I shall
read the Assembly the text of this paragraph with the
change just adopted. It reads as follows:
"Requests the Secretary-General to study the
relevant aspects of the problem under consideration
and to report on the results of such study to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session and to
the Special Committee established under General
Assembly resolution ••• (XVIII), in pursuance of
the item 'Consideration of principles of international
law concerning friendly relations and co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations'."

79.
wouk
by tr
court
NethE
statel
can 1
a pas
para!
resu]
the ~
visio
oisio
basel
the ~

73. I give the floor to the Netherlands representative,
on a point of order.

80.
this
Neth

74. Mr. SCHURMANN (Netherlands): I am sorry to
interrupt you, Mr. President, but I think the last part
of the paragraph which you read out is no longer
necessary because we talked about "any SUbsidiary
organ that may be established at the eighteenth session in pursuance of the item entitled •.• ". Whereas,
if we refer to the organ which has already been established, then it is enough to say ".,. and to the
Special Committee established under General Assembly resolution" number such and such; it is not
necessary to repeat "in pursuance of the item entitled", et cetera.
75. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): That
is in fact the correct wording; when I read out the
amended text, as I did not have it in writing here,
I read out the last part which is no longer necessary.
With the amendment which has just been adopted to
paragraph 2, the last part becomes redundant. I shall
repeat the amended text of the paragraph for the sake
of clarity, It reacls as follows:
"Requests the Secretary-General to study the
relevant aspects of the problem under consideration
and to report on the results of such study to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session and to
the Special Committee established uncleI' General
Assembly resolution ••• (XVIII)".

woul

:for
tech:

81.
a nl
part
maj(
:furtl
be fl

82.
sI
ame

I

a d
opel

SiOll

83.
pre]
furt
of '
sha
of t:
84.
aec
pre

anH

76. I give the floor to the representative of the Soviet
Union on a point of order.

lasi
bee

77. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): There is a saying
that appetite comes with eating. That saying applies
to the proposals put forward by the Netherlands 1'0-

phr
a s

by
the
wit:

1281st meeting-16 December 1963
presentative. He first assured us that the change he
proposed was purely formal. Since we all realize that
the Netherlands resolution was drafted before the
Special Committee had been established, none of us,
not even those who are against the Special Committee
taking up the question referred to in draft resolution
H, raised any objections, as there was no voting
against the introduction of this formal change.
78. After we had a~reed to have this formal change
made, on the understanding that it signified nothing
essentially new for those of us who take a negative
stand on the Netherlands proposal or those unprepared to support it for one reason or another, we
heard a further statement from the Netherlands representative who now proposes the deletion of the last
part of the sentence for reasons known only to himself. The whole question now comes down to what he
first proposed as a purely formal amendment.
79. I have no desire to complicate matters, and I
would agree to this latest drafting change proposed
by the Netherlands representative, as a matter of
courtesy, although I am not in agreement with the
Netherlands idea as such for the reasons I have
stated. I repeat, I would agree to this if the assurance
can be given that we shall not later find ourselves in
a position where, having taken a separate vote on this
paragraph as I requested, and having obtained a given
result, we may be told that if the vote does not meet
the Netherlands delegation's point of view, this provision may be regarded as a modification of the decision just adopted unanimously by the Assembly,
based on the purely formal amendment proposed by
the Netherlands representative.
80. If the Netherlands representative will not take
this course-and I see that several members of the
Netherlands delegation are shaking their heads-it
would seem that I am given the assurance I asked
for in order to have a certain margin of safety, as
technicians put it, and so this question will not arise.
81. I should like to have it clear that, for instance,
a negative result in the vote we shall now take on
part of operative paragraph 2 will require a simple
majority. If the results are negative, I take it that no
further statements of the kind I just referred to will
be forthcoming from the Netherlands delegation.
82. If my understanding of the situation is correct,
I shall not object to having the second Netherlands
amendment accepted at this time, since it is purely
a drafting change, provided that this whole part of
operative paragraph 2 is put to the vote and the decision on it taken by a simple majority.
83. If I have not made myself sufficiently clear, I am
prepared to give the President or any delegation such
further explanations as may be reqUired. Afterwards,
of course, as the President has already said, we
shall have a separate vote on operative paragraph 3
of this draft resolution.
84. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In
accordance with the statement just made by the representative of the Soviet Union and in view of the
amended version of paragraph 2 and particularly the
last part of it, on which a separate vote had previously
been requested, and considering the explanation given
by the representative of the Soviet Union concerning
the position of his delegation which, in any case, has
withdrawn its request for a separate vote on this
phrase in operative paragraph 2 and is now asking for
a separate vote only on operative paragraph 3, as a

7

whole, we shall vote on that paragraph which, with the
amendment adopted this morning, reads as follows:
"Requests the Special Committee to include in its
deliberations the SUbject-matter mentioned in the
last preambular paragraph of the present resolution. "
A roll-call vote has been requested.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
Libya, haVing been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mauritania. Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Penl, Philippines, Senegal, Spain, Sweden,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus. Denmark, Dominican
RepUblic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France,
Gabon, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Liberia.
Against: Mongolia, Nigeria, Poland, Romania, Syria,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist RepUblic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Arab RepUblic, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Bulgaria, Byelonlssian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Chile, Congo
(Leopoldville), Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon.
Abstaining: Libya, Mali, Morocco, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Tanganyika,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Burma, Bunmcli, Cameroon,
Ceylon, Congo (Brazzaville), Dahomey, Guinea, Ivory
r:oast, Laos.
Paragraph 3 of draft resolution II was adopted by
58 votes to 28 with 21 abstentions.
85. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now vote on draft resolution Il, as a whole. A
roll-call vote has been requested.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
Iceland, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Iceland, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy. Jamaica, Japan, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone. Spain, Sweden.
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bl'azil.
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China.
Colombia, Congo (Leopoldville), Costa Rica, Cyprus.
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador.
Finland, France, Gabon, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras.
Against: India, Indonesia, Mongolia, Poland, Romania Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet' Socialist RepUblics, Yugoslavia, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist RepUblic, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, Hungary.

,
"

,

'

i

~l:t,

0>

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

8

Abstaining: Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kuwait, Laos,
Libya, Mali, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Tanganyika, Togo, Uganda, United Arab Republic, Afghanistan, Algeria, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Ceylon, Congo (Brazzaville), Dahomey, Ghana, Guinea.
Draft resolution 11 was adopted by 65 votes to 15,

with 47 abstentions.

86. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): With
this decision, we conclude the consideration of agenda
item 71. We shall now consider item 72, on which we
have the report of the Sixth Committee [A/5672].
87. I give the floor to the representative ofthe Soviet
Union for an explanation of vote.
88. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The USSR delegation would like to explain its vote on the three draft
resolutions submitted by the Sixth Committee under
agenda item 72 [A/5672, para. 29].
89. Following as it does a consistent policy of
peaceful coexistence, the Soviet Union favours the
strict observance of the rules of international law in
relations among States. It will be recalled that it supported the resolution on this question adopted at the
last session by the General Assembly [resolution 1815
(XVI!)].
90. It takes the view, in this regard, that technical
assistance to promote the teaching, study and dissemination of international law should be conducted
on a basis of equality and non-interference in the
domestic affairs of States.
~1. The Soviet Union provides extensive assistance
to other countries in the study of international law
by training undergraduate and post-graduate students
from various countries at Soviet law schools and
other higher educational establishments teaching the
humanities, and it carries on extensive exchanges of
specialists in international law tmder bilateral agreements with interested States.

92. Should Governments so wish, the Soviet Union is
prepared to continue admitting undergraduate and
post-graduate students from interested countries
into its higher educational establishments, and to
send instructors and professors from such establishments to the countries desirous of obtaining their
services.
93. In this connexion, the USSR delegation takes a
positive view of draft resolution C, in which UNESCO
is asked to collect periodically from Member States
information on possibilities of offering training in
international law and in which Member States are
invited to offer foreign students fellowships in the
field of international law and to consider the inclusion
in their programmes of cultural exchange of appropriate measures for the study and dissemination of
international law.
94. The implementation of the measures set out in
draft resolution C will further the study and dissemination of international law and will also provide
specific information on the matter, which is to be
studied by the Special Committee whose establishment is proposed in draft resolution A. Through a
carefUl study of this information, the Special Committee should be able to draw conclusions on any
further steps that ought to be taken by the United

Nations to promote the study and dissemination of
international law.
95. Until this necessary preparatory work is done
by the Special Committee, and hence until its report
is received and considered at the next session of the
General Assembly, it would in our opinion be premature to take any action on the financing of such
operations in the f1.1ture, since we do not know what
recommendations the Special Committee will submit.
96. In this connexion, the USSR delegation considers
that the measures proposed in draft resolution Bare,
to say the least, premature and therefore ill1warranted.
97. As regards the substance of draft resolution B
the USSR delegation considers that operative paragraph 2 contains provisions which are in obvious
contradiction to the United Nations Charter. Under
the Charter, the regUlar budget of the United Nations
cannot be used to finance any technical assistance
programmes, inclUding programmes in the field of
international law.
98. Appropriations for technical assistance cannot
be regarded as obligatory expenses to be borne by
Member States in the meaning of Article 17 of the
Charter. Consequently the USSR delegation objected
in the Sixth Committee and objects again now to the
adoption of the provision set forth in operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution B and will vote against
that part of the draft resolution.
99. As regards operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution B, my delegation wishes to point out to the
General Assembly that in the discussions of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance in the
Second and Fifth Committees some representatives
of developing countries repeatedly stated the view
that in redistributing EPTA funds the main stress
should be on financing measures to promote the economic and industrial development of newly emerging
States.
100. The USSR delegation therefore thinks it would
be advisable at least to wait before adopting the provisions in operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution
B and to revert later to the question whether it would
be possible and advisable to use EPTA funds for assistance in the teaching and study ofinternationallaw.
101, In the light of these considerations, the USSR
delegation would request that operative paragraphs 1
and 2 of draft resolution B should be voted on separately, one vote being taken on operative paragraph 1
and another on operative paragraph 2.
102. We shall abstain in the vote on operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution B and vote against operative paragraph 2. If operative paragraph 2is retained,
we shall vote against draft resolution B as a whole
for the reasons I have stated.
103. We are prepared to support and shall vote in
favour of draft resolutions A and C.
104. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I
have no further speakers listed for explanations of
vote. We shall therefore proceed to vote on the three
draft resolutions, A, Band C, recommended to the
Assembly by the Sixth Committee, which appear in
the latter's report [A/5672, para. 29].
105. Draft resolution A was approved unanimously
by the Sixth Committee.' May I therefore take it that
the General Assembly also adopts draft resolution A
unanimously?

1281st meeting-16 December 1963
Draft resolution A was adopted unanimously.

106. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now proceed to vote on draft resolution B. In
connexion with this draft resolution, the representative
of the Soviet Union has requested separate votes: first
on operative paragraph I, and then on operative paragraph 2 of the draft.
107. In accordance with the provisions of role 91 of
the rules of procedure, if there are no objections, we
shall proceed to vote first on paragraph 1 and then on
paragraph 2 of draft resolution B.
108. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I
accordingly now put to the vote paragraph 1 of draft
resolution B.
Paragraph 1 of draft resolution B was adopted by
89 votes to none, with 10 abstentions.

109. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now take a separate vote on paragraph 2 of draft
resolution B.
Paragraph 4 of draft resolution B was a.dopted by
83 votes to 10, Wit114 abstentions.

110. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now vote on draft resolution B as a whole, including the two paragraphs which have just been
adopted.
Draft resolution B was adopted by 91 votes to 10,
with 1 abstention.

111, The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now woceed to vote on draft resolution C. This
draft resolution was adopted unanimously by the Sixth
Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly
also adopts it unanimously?
Draft resolution C was adopted unanimously.

112. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
have thus concluded the consideration of agenda item
72 and the General Assembly has dealt with all the
items allocated to the Sixth Committee.
Statement by the President

113. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
now have to consider agenda item 13. However, before taking up this item and the other items with
which the Fourth Committee is concerned, I wish to
make the following statement to the Assembly.
114. The Chairman of the Fourth Committee has
advised me that certain doubts have arisen with regard to the statement which I made on 11 December
1963 at the 1277th plenary meeting followingtheadoption of the draft resolution [A/L.443 and Add.1 and 2J
on the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [A/5446/Rev.1]. This draft has now
become resolution 1956 (XVIII). I stated then that with
the adoption of the resolution, the General Assembly
has concluded consideration of items 23, 55 and 75
of its agenda. No objection was made to that statement at the time.
115. Subsequently, in thfl Fourth Committee, the
specific question was raised whether the consideration of the question of South West Africa, which
arises under items 55 and 23. was definitely concluded as far as the eighteenth session of the General
Assembly was concerned.

9

116. My statement was based on the terms of operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution on the report
of the Special Committee which requested the Special
Committee "to continue to seek the best ways and
means for the immediate and total application of the
Declaration to all territories which have not yet
attained independence, and to report to the General
Assembly not later than at its nineteenth session".
Furthermore, the absence of any arl"angements to
retain on the agenda of the eighteenth session any of
the questions dealt with in the resolution appeared
to support the view that the draft resolution adopted,
which has now become resolution 1956 (XVIII), had
the effect of concluding consideration of the questions
dealt with in the report of the Special Committee and,
specifically, of the questions of Southern Rhodesia,
South West Africa and the territories under Portuguese administration, as far as the eighteenth session
of the General Assembly was concerned.
117. However, it now appears that such was not the
intention of those who supported the draft resolution
which has now become resolution 1956 (XVIII), and
that in spite of the fact that operative paragraph 4 of
that resolution covers all the territories which have
not yet attained independence, and that the resolution
made no provision for retaining on the agenda of the
eighteenth .session any of the questions dealt with in
the resolution, the intention of those who supported it
was to maintain in force. inter alia, the provisions of
operative paragraph 9 of resolution 1899 (XVIII) of
13 November 1963, by which the Assembly decided
"to maintain the question of South West Africa on the
agenda of its eighteenth session and to resume consideration of this question in the light of the reply of
the Government of South Africa, given in accordance
with paragraph 5 above, and immediately after receipt
of that reply".
118. The reply of the Government of South Africa
[A/5634] was circulated on 2 December 1963. This
document was submitted under agenda item 55. I have
now been informed that at that time the Fourth Committee was engaged in consideration of other matters
and could not, as it had previously decided, "resume
consideration of this question, in the light oftlle reply
of the Government of South Africa. immediately on
receipt of that reply".
119. In the circumstances, and since the statement
which I made at the end of the 1277th plenary meeting
of the General Assembly does not constitute a proposal within the meaning of role 83 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, but was merely
an indication of the stage we had reached in our work.
given in the light of the information available to the
President at that time, I am prepared to consider
that items 23. 55 and 75 remain on the agenda of the
General Assembly until the closure of the eighteenth
session.
120. This clarification having been given, we shall
proceed immediately to the consideration of item 13
of the agenda.

AGENDA ITEM 13
Report of.the Trusteeship Council

REPORT OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE (A/5670)

10

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

AGENDA ITEMS 49,50,51,52,53 AND 54
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of
the United Nations: reports of the Secretory-Genera I
and of the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories:
~) Political and constitutional information;
(b) Information on educational, economic and social
advancement;
W General questions relating to the transmission and
examination of information;
Dissemination of information in the Non-Self-Governing Territories on the Declaration on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples:
report of the Secretary'-General
Offers by Mem,er States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories: report of the Secretary.-Genera I
Question of the continuation of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
E leetion, if required, to fj 11 vacancies in the membership of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Govern ing Territories
Special training programme for Territories under
Portuguese administration: report of the SecretaryGeneral

REPORT OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE (A/5673)
121. Mr. MARSH (Jamaica): The report of the Trusteeship Council was adopted unanimously by the
Fourth Committee and the report to the General
Assembly of the Fourth Committee's consideration of
this item is contained in document A/5670. The discussion on this report was brief and I do not think
that it needs much more introduction.
122. With regard to the report of the Fourth Committee on its consideration of the report submitted
by the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories, I have the honour to present
to the Assembly the joint report of the Fourth Committee on agenda items 49 to 53 inclusive [A/5673].
123. With the exceptions of paragraphs 17 to 19 the
draft report was unanimously approved by the Fourth
Committee at its 1515th meeting, which was also its
last meeting. As there was no time for the Rapporteur
to seek the Committee's approval on the section of
!he draft report referring to the proceedings covered
In these four paragraphs, the Fourth Committee entrusted me with presenting the section to the General
Assembly directly.
124. The Fourth Committee discussed most of the
agenda items just enumerated jointly and adopted five
~Iraft resolutions relating to Some of the individual
ltems. The texts of these draft resolutions as adopted
~~ the Fourth Committee are contained in paragraph
of. the report [A/5673] and are recommended for
adoptlOll by the Assembly.
125. Dr~ft resolution I Concerns the question of the
conti~uatlOn of ~he Committee on Information from
N~~-S:lf-Govermng Territories. Draft resolution II
:
s or approval of the report of the Committee on
ormation on economic advancement in Non-Self-

Governing Territories. Draft resolution III deals with
the situation in Aden and corresponds with that section of the draft report which is covered in paragraphs
18 to 21 inclusive. Draft resolution IV concerns the
special training programme for Territories under
Portuguese administration. In this connexion the attention of the Assembly is called to the report of the
Fifth Committee concerning the financial implication
of this draft resolution if it were adopted [A/5674].
Finally, draft resolution V contains certain recommendations concerning offers by Member states of
study and training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories,
126. I conclude my introduction of the reports with
the special hope that they will be adopted by the
General Assembly without objections.
127. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision just taken by the
Assembly, representatives will confine their statements to explanations of vote on the various draft
resolutions recommended by the Fourth Committee.
128. We shall first take up the draft resolution on
agenda item 13 which appears in the report of tht::
Fourth Committee [A/5670, para. 6], This draft resolution was approved unanimously in the Fourth
Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly
also adopts it unanimously?
The draft resolution was adopted Wlanimously.

129. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now take up agenda items 49. 50, 51, 52. 53 and
54 in respect of which the Fourth Committee recommends for adoption by the General Assembly five
draft resolutions which appear in its report [A/5673.
para. 28].
130. I now give the floor to those representatives
who wish to explain their vote on any of the draft
resolutions recommended by the Fourth Committee.
131. Mr. KING (United Kingdom): I should like to
explain the vote of my delegation on the so-called
emergency draft resolution on Aden, which is draft
resolution III in the report of the Fourth Committee
[A/5673].
132. When this draft resolution was adopted in the
Fourth Committee [1515th meetlng] on 13 December
1963 a number of delegations stated that they lacked
information 011 the question under discussion, I should
therefore like to set out the essential facts.
133. The British Government recently invited Ministers of Aden State and the Federation of South Arabia
to visit London for constitutional talks. The purpose
of these talks was to discuss the next stage in the
peaceful and orderly political progress of Aden State
and the Federation of South Arabia towards independence. The~e was no secret about these talks; indeed,
my delegatlOn had referred to them in its statement
in the plenary debate on 4 December 1963 [1273rd
meeting].
134, Some of the Ministers concerned In the talks
had already left Aden, The remainder. accompanied
by the High Commissioner, who was also attending
the talks, were due to leave Aden airport on 10 December 1963 and a number of other Ministers who
were remaining in Aden assembled to see them off
and to wish them success in their mission.
135. At this moment a hand grenade was thrown at
the group of Ministers. An innocent bystander, an

Indian
injured
Ruler (
F adhli,

Inform~

High G
with a f

136. A
of the:
emerge
:rested,
the aut:
sary Si
curity,
incidenl
than th~

137. T
litical I
is awa
its aim,
to viol~
country
violent
and to
Aden aJ
over. t:
the hol,
gress
towardl
their (
under ~

138. T
to dete<
stall fu
justifie
natural
by dele
Bures.
lack 01
this COl
Ministe
High C
innoceIl
inciden
139.

To'

reason!
Assem.l
AdenFl
were m
tion 01
sponso:
the As:
miniml.l
formatJ
this dl
inform:
terms
sympat
therefo

140. l'i
My dell
said ir
conderr
Aden. ~
brough1

141. (
repres l
own ex

1281st meeting-16 December 1963
Indian lady, was killed, and forty-three persons were
injured. Among those seriously injured were the
Ruler of F adhli State, Sultan Ahmed ben Abdullah alFadhli, who is the Minister of National Guidance and
Information in the Government of South Arabia. The
High Commissioner, Sir Kennedy Trevaskis, escaped
with a slight hand injury.
136. As a result of this outrage, the Supreme Council
of the Federation of South Arabia declared a state of
emergency, and twenty-nine persons have been arrested. These persons have been arrested because
the authorities in Aden consider that this is a necessary step in the immediate interests of pUblic security, and there is reason to suppose that the bomb
incident was part of an organized conspiracy rather
than the work of an isolated individual.
137. The persons arrested are members of a political party which has never, so far as my delegation
is aware, renounced the use of violence to achieve
its aims, and which has indeed been constantly incited
to violence by radio broadcasts from a neighbouring
country. This same party has made no secret of its
violent opposition to the present Constitution of Aden
and to those who are Ministers in the Government of
Aden and of the Federation of South Arabia. Moreover, this party is, for its own reasons, opposed te,
the holding of constitutional talks on the future progress of Aden and the. Federation of South Arabia
towards independence, as this would run counter to
their declared intention of bringing the territory
under Yemeni rule.

)

1

138. The measures taken by the authorities in Aden
to detect the perpetrators of this outrage and to forestall further incidents of a similar kind were entirely
justified in the circumstances, although my delegation
naturally understands the concern that has been shown
by delegations at the necessity for taking such measures. It cannot, however, understand the comparative
lack of concern at the attempted assassination by
this cowardly and indiscriminate means of the leading
Ministers of Aden and South Arabia and of the British
High Commissioner, nor the lack of sympathy for the
innocent persons who were killed or wounded in the
incident.
139. Finally, my delegation cannot understand the
reasons why these matters were not raised when this
Assembly was discussing the draft resolution on
Aden last week [1277th meeting], although references
were made to it during the debate preceding the adoption of that resolution [1949 (XVIII) J, unless the
sponsors hoped by delaying until the last moment of
the Assembly to force through a resolution with the
minimum of discussion and based on inadequate information. Whatever the motives of the sponsors,
this draft resolution is clearly not justified by any
information before this Assembly, and is couched in
terms which might appear to condone the outrage and
sympathize with its perpetrators. My delegation will
therefore vote against it.
140. Mr. TARCICI (Yemen) (translated from French):
My delegation would like to repeat what it has already
said in the Fourth Committee [1515th meeting] in
condemnation of the act of violence committed in
Aden. My delegation would be glad to see the criminal
brought to justice and sentenced under the law.
141. Contrary to what was stated by the honourable
representative who spoke before me here (to use his
own expression), contrary to what was stated by the

11

honourable representative of the United Kingdom (to
use the expression that we usually adopt here), my
delegation, at the time of the vote in the General
Assembly [1277th meeting] on the draft resolution on
Aden [A/L.436 and Add.l], was not yet in a position
to know exactly what the situation in Aden was. Since
then, information has reached us and has been communicated to the Press and a petitioner representing
political parties and trade union organizations in Aden
has appeared before the Fourth Committee [1515th
meeting].
142. After the Fourth Committee had heard the petitioner, representing the People's Socialist Party
and the trade unions, and had approved the draft resolution now before the General Assembly in that
Committee's report [A/5673, para. 28, draft resolution Ill], the situation in Aden has considerably
worsened and is becoming more and more critical.
143. Indeed, in the face of these acts of repression,
deportations and mass arrests, the people IS organi zations have reacted and those deputy leaders who have
not been imprisoned or deported and have been able
to meet have addressed a cable to their representatives here which I shall now read out:

[The speaker continued in English.l
"Following the explosion of a bomb in the civil
airport, the British authorities launched a series
of mass arrests and deportations, at the same time
declaring a state of emergency in the region. In a
few moments, our country has been turned into a
police state. Citizens have been arrested and deported over the borders and others depositect in
concentration camps by the hundreds.
"In the same night, during the late hours, all
executives of the Aden Trade Union Congress and
leaders of trade unions were rounded up by the
police, arrested and thrown into military concentration camps and consequently alienated into deserted regions in the Aden Protectorate. Families
were horrified by the inhuman midnight attacks and
the removal of the breadwinners of families. Today,'
wives, children and parents are left without maintenance or anybody to look after them.
"Aden Trade Union Congress has always followed
a course of peaceful strife towards liberation and
has always condemned all forms of violence. These
principles are still cherished by the Trade Union
Congress and all its followers, and therefore the
arrest of its leaders is unwarranted, unjustified
and out of place •••
"An emergency meeting of the delegates to the
Trade Union Congress was held this evening and it
was resolved:
Ifl, The Trade Union Congress condemns the i.nhuman arrests, detention and deportation of peaceful
citizens and demands immediate release of all and
the repeal of the state of emergency;
"2. The Trade Union Congress supports Government in its search for CUlprits, but disapproves
mass arrests of innocent citizens;
"3. Calls upon all citizens, workers and trade
unionists to stand firmly by their respective unions
with patience and confidence;
"4. Calls all international organizations to extend
all help and support to Aden workers and the people
of Aden.

12

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

"Aden Trade Union Congress raided by police.
Arabic typewriters and roneo stencils confiscated.
Arrests continue."

[The speaker resumed in French.]
144. Thus, the arbitrary acts of repression and the
arrests continue, which further aggravates the situation. This situation is described by the Fourth Committee in draft resolution III according to which the
General Assembly is
"Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive
situation obtaining in Aden and the Aden Protectorate as a result Cif the state cif emergency, and at
the arrests and detention of nationalist leaders and
trade unionists as well as the deportations of others,
a situation which constitutes a denial offundamental
rights and endangers peace and security in the
region."
This is the text which was approved by the Fourth
Committee on 13 December 1963 [1515th meeting]
and since then there has been the cable dated yesterday which indicates that the arrests are continuing.
Moreover, the number of deportees runs into several
hundreds, contrary to the figure given by the United
Kingdom representative in the Fourth Committee in
his statement on 13 December. He mentioned only 29
party leaders and 142 arrests or deportations. When
the United Kingdom representative spoke of 29 party
leaders he appeared to regard that as a very small
number. He also seemed to consider that the figure
of 142 arrests and deportations was minimal. However, in spite of the figures of 142 and 29 which have
been given, we have received cables showing, as I
have just stated, that by Friday the arrests had
reached several hundreds and that the arrests and
deportations are continuing.
145. These acts remind us all of the policy followed
by the colonialists at the height of the colonial period,
which is now over. Moreover, they create on what is
called the frontier between the occupied part of Yemen
and the free and independent part of that country an
extremely dangerous and explosive situation because
the number of deportees and refugees has increased
as a result of the state of emergency which now exists
in Aden.
146. As we said in our statement of 28 November
1963 [1266th meeting] on Aden during the general
discussion of agenda item 23, the United Kingdom
authorities are seizing every opportunity to maintain
an artificial division of Yemen by all possible means
in pursuance of their colonial policy of "divide and
rule",
147. Allow me to quote the follOWing passage from
the statement made by my delegation at a plenary
meeting of the General Assembly:
"To ensure the continued presence of the British
the total isolation of this region must be aChieved:
and not only a physical isolation but also an intelle?tual and emotional isolation, Even more than
thIS, a spirit of hostility should be aroused towards
the Arab countries, and especially towards the
Yemen Arab Republic in order to set it apart once
and for all and sanction an artificial division"
[1266th meeting, para. 88.]
•
This attempt to create a state of mind on the basis
of. a singl~ incident is clearly designed to encourage
thIS emotIonal division between the southern and
northern parts of our country. Quite clearly, the

authorities intend to profit from such an act to bring
into play their police machinery of repression against
the groups and organizations which are fighting for
national liberation and which do not approve of this
neo-colonialist policy.
148. My delegation has described this situation, which
is becoming worse every day, in order to address an
appeal to the General Assembly to vote in favour of
draft resolution Ill. It has also done so in order that
the British colonialists-who unfortunately still existmay realize that the great colonialist era is over and
that the policy of "divide and rUle" is not consistent
with the aspirations of our people in the occupied part
of Yemen. It is therefore useless to try to use a
single incident, which should be dealt with according
to eXisting jurisprudence, to try to check, silence
and even disrupt the trade union parties and organizations whose policy of adopting the most legal and
peaceful methods available is demonstrated by the
cable which I read out.
149. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now proceed to vote successively on draft resolutions I to V recommended by the Fourth Committee
in its report [A/5673, para. 28]. First of all, I put
draft resolution I to the vote.

Draft resolution I was adopted by 84 votes to none,
with 26 abstentions.
150. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now vote on draft resolution 11. This draft was
approved unanimously by the Fourth Committee. May
I take it that the General Assembly also wishes to
adopt it unanimously?

Draft resolution II was adopted unanimously.
151. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall vote now on draft resolution Ill.

Draft resolution III was adopted by 53 votes to 23
with 31 abstentions.
'
152. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
now take up draft resolution IV. Pursuant to rule 154
of the rules of procedure, the Assembly has before it
a report of the Fifth Committee [A/5674] on the financial implications of this draft resolution.
153. We shall now proceed to vote on draft resolution IV.

Draft resolution IV was adopted by 104 votes to 2,
with 1 abstention.
154. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
now take up draft resolution V. This draft resolution
was approved unanimously by the Fourth Committee.
May .I take it that the General Assembly also adopts
it unanimously?

Draft resolution V was adopted unanimously.
155. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I
give the floor to the representative of Portugal for
an explanation of vote.
156. Mr. MOREIRA (Portugal) (translated from
French): I should like to explain the reasons why the
Portuguese delegation voted against draft resolution
IV.
157. One of Portugal's greatest and deepest concerns
is to ensure the cultural advancement of all the
peoples living in overseas Portugal, by giving all
social classes access to education at the various
levels. In order to bring about that advancement, a

12S-1st meeting-16 December 1963
network of schools at different levels is provided in
the overseas territories, which are devoted to primary, secondary, vocational, technical and higher
education. This network is extended considerably
every year and the schools are attended by students
of all races, without any discrimination.

ing

nst

ror

tais

ich

158. Primary education is free and at the other
levels of education a very reasonable enrolment fee
is all that is required, as everywhere else in the
world. That does not mean that poor people cannot
attend the schools, because those who show ability
but lack the necessary funds are granted assistance
of all kinds by the Government, such as waiving of
the enrolment fee, free books and school equipment.
The granting of such assistance depends only on these
two considerations: the ability shown by the student
concerned and his lack of resources, without any
discrimination.

an

of

~at

~-

nIl
'nf:
rt

159. As to scholarships, they are awarded not only
by the government in each of the provinces, but also
by a number of official and private organizations and
by the central Government itself. The number of such
scholarships is growing. They are granted sometimes
for study in the province itself and sometimes for
study in the metropolitan country.

e

.•

160. In some areas it is impossible to set up certain
types of schools for various reasons, e.g. the population density or the fragmentation of the territory into
islands. In such cases, scholarships are granted for
use in the province. Scholarships in subjects which
cannot be studied in the overseas territories are
granted for use in metropolitan schools.

e
s

~.

)

r

I

I
)

161. Scholarship holders are allowed free round-trip
travel for their vacations, and receive board and lodging, medical care, hospitalization and medicine. They
can take part in sports, borrow or be given school
equipment and enjoy the moral and material support
of organizations such as the university hostels, homes
for students, Portuguese Youth, and the Student
Administration.
162. All the prOVinces support scholarship holders,
of whom there are a considerable number. Many of
them are indigenous Africans who are studying in
colleges in Lisbon, Oporto, Coimbra and other cities
where they take courses in fine arts, forestry, veterinary science, agronomy, medicine, law, teaching,
pharmacy, social science, etc. Thanks to the facilities
provided, the number of these indigenous students is
increasing annually. For the academic year just begun,
the central Government has provided 100 new scholarships, a large proportion of which will be awarded to
students from Portuguese Guinea.
163. Now that the universities of Angola and Mozambique have been set up, the number of Africans who
have taken higher education courses will very soon
increase.
164. That is the general picture of education in overseas Portugal and of the facilities provided for those
who live there, without distinction of race or of any
other kind, which the Portuguese political philosophy
condemns.
165. What has been achieved so far is not yet commensurate with the needs, not because of a lack of
desire to promote the cultural advancement of the
peoples, but because of the size of the task and the
difficulties of carrying it out. Portugalis nevertheless
engaged in a serious effort worthy of the respect of
those who are familiar with it.

13

166. Moreover, what State in Africa or any other
continent can really claim that it has solved its educational problems? The difficulties which Portugal is
encountering in the overseas territories are no worse
and no greater than those facing the African States
which met at the Addis Ababa Conference. In order to
solve these difficulties, Portugal has drawn up and is
now carrying out both short- and long-term plans for
the development of education, in the same way as the
African Powers which met at Addis Ababa. In the
first four years of the short-term plan, to be completed in 196'7. nearly 3,500 million escudos will be
spent on building and equipping schools, training primary school teachers, etc., without prejudice to the
regular expenditure on education in the various provinces. The fulfilment of these plans will enable overseas Portugal to keep its place in the van of African
states.
167. In the light of the considerations which I have
just put forward, I should now like to make some
comments on draft resolution IV. The portuguese
delegation maintains all the objections it has already
raised on the SUbject during the discussion at the
seventeenth session of the General Assembly.
168. We say that the draft resolution is discriminatory because it singles out Portugal when the situation in many African States regarding the cultural
advancement of the popUlation is in most cases worse
than in the Portuguese overseas territories. Furthermore, the draft is unfair because it fails to acknowledge Portugal's efforts in this field, which are
sincere and are guided by an ideal of human dignity.
The draft resolution is directed to selfish, political
and predetermined ends.
169. Every man has the right to an education. It is
an inherent right of the human individual, granted to
man to enable him to achieve full development of his
personality. It is at one and the same time a right
and an end in itself. To invoke this right but to attribute other objectives to it is to diminish and discredit
it.
170. For all these reasons, and leaving aside other
motives, the draft resolution does not further either
the establishment of more schools for the indigenous
peoples of overseaS Portugal or co-operation and
understanding among peoples, which is one of the
aims of the United Nations.
171. In the circumstances my delegation was obliged
to vote against draft resolution IV, despite our policy
of active co-operation in the cultural advancement of
the indigenous populations of overseas Portugal.
1'72. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I
give the floor to the representative of Liberia to
exercise her right of reply.
173. Miss BROOKS (Liberia): I would like briefly to
say that the true representatives of the peoples in the
territories under Portuguese administration desire
that technical assistance be given to them in the light
of the resolutions which have been adopted. It is regrettable that the representative of Portugal would
wish to deny the assistance that can be given by the
United Nations to his people.
174. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
have thus concluded consideration of items 49, 50,
51, 52, 53 and 54 of the agenda of the eighteenth session.

14

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

AGENDA ITEM 86
Admission of new Members to the United Notions

175. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall nOw take up item 86 of the agenda.
176. The General Assembly has before it the recommendations of the Security Council [A/5677 and AI
5678] concerning the applications for admission to
membership of the United Nations submitted by Zanzibar [A/5661] and Kenya [A/5662].
177. In connexion with these recommendations, the
Assembly has before it two draft resolutions: one
concerning Zanzibar [A/L.447] and another concerning Kenya [A/L.448].
178. Before we take up these two draft resolutions,
I wish to announce that I have been informed that all
the Mrican States belonging to the African-Asian
Group Which are not already listed as co-sponsors
of the two draft resolutions have expressed the desire
to be so listed. Consequently, these two drafts are
now sponsored by, among others, all the African
states which are members of the Mrican-Asian
Group. The Secretariat will in due course make the
necessary changes to the documents concerned.
179. We shall now take up the two draft resolutions;
first of all the one which recommends the admission
of Zanzibar to membership of the United Nations [AI
L.447 and Add.1]. If I hear no request for a vote, may
I take it that the General Assembly adopts the draft
resolution by acclamation?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

180. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): As
a result of the decision just taken by the Assembly,
I declare Zanzibar admitted to membership of the
United Nations.

The delegation of Zanzibar was escorted to its
place in the General Assembly Hall.

181, The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
now turn to the draft resolution which recommends
the admission of Kenya to membership of the United
Nations [A/L.448 and Add.1]. May I take it that the
General Assembly again decides by acclamation to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

182. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): As
a result of the decision just taken by the Assembly,
I declare Kenya admitted to membership of the United
Nations.
The delegation of Kenya was escorted to its place
in the General Assembly Hall.

183. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): As
President of the General Assembly, I have great
pleasure in welcoming to the General Assembly the
delegations of Zanzibar and Kenya, States which have
just been admitted to membership of the United Nations. I am sure that they will make a valuable contribution to the work of the Organization.
184. Those representatives who have signified their
desire to welcome the new Member States on behalf
of their own country and on behalf of groups of States
will have an opportunity to do so at the plenary meeting which will start this afternoon at 3.30 p.m. instead
of 3.00 p.m. because it is now already late.
185. I wish to announce also that the flag-raising
ceremonies in honour of Zanzibar and Kenya-originally scheduled for 2.45 p.m.-will take place at
3.15 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

1

a
a

l-

a
s

t
tl

a
c
c

}J

s

F

2

s

p
:r

C

t:

t,

:3
t
f

1:

:P

l:

S

t

4

c
{

(

1
(

Litho in U.N.

nODI-May 1965-2,175
