c_

UNITED NA TIONS

I

NA TIONS UNIES

r
I

SECUBITY

i
i
I
I

OFI'ICIAL RECORDS

I

THIRTEENTH

815

COUNCIL
YEAR

rh MEETIN G: 29 APRIL 1958
eme sEANCE: -i9 A VR1i-1-9-58--TREIZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECUBITE
DOCUM,ENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda

(S{Agendaj815)

,..........

1

Adoption of the agenda.............................

..... .. ....

1

Complaint of the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in
a letter to the President of the Security Council da ted 18 April 1958 entitled
" Urgent measures to put an end to flights by United States military aircraft armed with atomic and hydrogen bombs in the di:"ection of the
frontiers of the Soviet Union" (Sj3090, S/3991. 5/399:\ S/3997).......

TABLE

I(

t

f

!
1

DES

MATIERES

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda!815).........
Adoption de l'ordre du jour

1

1
,.,

,...

1

Plaintc du representant de l'Union des RepubIiques socialistes sovi6tiques,
contentle dans une Iettre en date du 18 avril1958 an President du Conseil
de securite, et intitulee : II Adoption de mesures urgentes pour fairc cesser
les vols d'aeronefs militaires des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, armes de bombes
atorniques et de bombes a l'hydrogene, dans la direction des frontieres de
I'Un;on ,ovietique, (5j3990, 5/3991. S/3995, S/3997)
,

I

SjPV.815

-

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Cbuncil are published in quarterly supplements to the Official

Records.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital lellers comhined
with figures. Mm/ion of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
documfIlt.

•••
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
eomptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent de
lettres majuscules et de chiflres. La simple menfion d'une cote dam un lexle signifie
qu'il s'agit d'un docwnent de l'Organisalion.

r

lI

I

EIGHT HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH MEETING

l

Held iD. New York, on Tuesday, 29 April 1958, at 3 p.m.

I

HUIT CENT QUINZIEME SEANCE

I

Tenue 8 New~York, le mardi 29 avril19S8, a 15 heures.

\
'I

T

(United States of America).

Presidenl : M. Henry Cabot LODGE
(Etats-Unis. d'Amerique).

Presenl: The representatives of the following countries: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Presenls : Les representants des pays suivants :
Canada, Chine, Colombie, Fl-ancc, Irak, Japon, Panama,
Suede, Union des Rcpubliqucs soeiaIisles sovietiques,
Royaume~Uni de Grandc-Brctagne et rJ'Irlande au
Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amcriqu.c.

ProvilJiooal agenda (SjAgendaj815)

Ordre du jour provisoire (SJAgeudaj815)

President: Mr. Henry Cabot LODGE

I

I

I

"'1'"

,I
I

I

r
I

I
I

l

f
I

r

(

(,
I

I

1.

2.

Adoplion of the agenda.

1.

Adoption de ['ardre du jour,

Complaint of the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics in a letter to the President of the Security Council dated 18 April
1958 entitled "Urgent measures to put an end to
flights by United States military aircraft armed
with atomic and hydrogen bombs in the direction
of the frontiers of the Soviet Union" (8/3990).

2.

Plainte du representant de l'Union des Republiques
socia[ist~s sovit~tiques, contenue dans une lettr('
en date du 18 avril 1958 au President du COl'.seil
lie securilc, et intiluIee : It Adoption de mesures
urgentes pour faire cesser les vols d'aeronefs
.miIitaires des Elats-Unis d'Amcrique, armcs de
bombes atomiqucs et de bomhes a I'hydrogenc,
dans la direction des froT1~ieres de l'Union sovietique» (S/3990).
Adoption de I'ordre du jour

Adoption of the agenda

L'ordre du jour est adopt/!.

The agenda was adopted.

Complaint of the representative of the Union of Soviet
Soc.ialist Republics in a letter to the President of
the Security Council dated 18 April 1958 entitled
" Urgent meOSUreB to put an end to flights hy
United States military aireraft armed with atomic
and hydrogen Lombs in the direction of the
£rontius of the Soviet Union" (Sj3!J90. S/39!JI,
8/3995, S/3997)

Plainte du representant de I 'Union des RepublilfUes
socialistes sovit'~tiques, contenue dllns une Ieure
eo date du 18 avrll 1958 an President dn Cooseil
de securite, et intitulee : « Adoption de meBures
urgentes pour faire cesser les vnls d'aeronefa mill·
taire8 des Etats- Unia d' AmerilfUc, armis de bombes
atonUt[Ucs et de bombes a l'hydrogene, dans la
direction des frontieres de I'Uoion sovietiquc 11
(8/3990, 5/3991, 5/3995, S/3997)

1. T[le PRESIDENT: The Council has before it two
draft resolutions: one submitted by the United States
(S/3995] and one submitted by the Soviet Union
[5/3997]. An amendment to the United States draft
resolution has been submitted by Sweden [5/3998].

1. Le PRE;SIDENT (lruduil de l'anglais) .. Le Conseil
est saisi de deux projets de resolution, prcsentes ['Ull
par les Etats-Unis [5/3995J, l'autre par l'Union sovietique [5j3997J, et cl'un amendement ou projet de resolution des Etats-Unis, qui f.I Cte prBscnte pal' la Suede
[S/3998].

2, Mr. RITCHIE (Canada): Slightly more than a
week ago, when the Security COllllcil discussed this
item, I referred to the world-wide anxiety about
the poss~bility of an outbreak of nuclear warfare

2. M. RITCHIE (Canadn) [Iraduii de l'anglais] :
Lorsque le Conseil de secllrit.e a examine cette question,
it y a un peu plus cl'une semaine, j'ai evoque l'anxiete
que fait na:ltre dans le monde enUCT la possiblite d'une
1

1

I
"

[813lh meeting). This thought was expressed in most
of the statements which the Council heard on that
occasion, The Canadian delegation sought to empha~
size the concern with which peoples everywhere viewed
the prospect that, through some accidental spark, the
highly explosive tinder of today's armed preparedness
might be fired, Thus, each advance in the science
of rockets and nuclear energy is looked upon not only
as a great step forward into the future, but, aLternatively, as a step towards the destruction of mankind
because of the great potenLial for war involved.

guerre nucleaire [813e seance}. Ccttc pensee s'est fait
jour dans la plupart des declarations prononcccs :'1
cette occasion devant le Consei! de :;;ecurite. La dchlgation canadienne a voulu mettre en evidence l'inqnietude rcssentie par tous les peuples a I'idee qu'etant
donnc l'etat actuel des arruements, il 5ufflrait d'une
etincelle pour declenchcr une conflagration. Dans
cllaque progres que fait la science dans le domaine
des fusees et de l'energie nucIeairc, on ne voit pas
sculement un grand pas en l:.want vers l'averur, mais
egalement un pas vel'S la destruction de l'huml'ln[te,
en raison des enormes possibilites d'ordre milLtairc
qu'offrent ces progres.

3. Of course, the fear and anxiety derive not from the
scientific developments themselves, but from the doubt
and suspicion which characterize the relations between
the States mainly concerned. This condition of suspicion and fear, this wariness about the intentions of
the. opposite side, this lack of confidence in international
<lealings, has led the world along the path of armed
preparedness. Moreover, as was amply explained at
our last meeLing, as long as the nations oC the West
consider that Lheir security i!; threatened, they will
insist that definite preparations continue and improve
in aceordance with scientific discovery.

3. Biell entendu, la crninte et I'anxiete ne sont pas
causees par les decouvertes scientifiques elles-ml1mes,
mais par l'incertitude et la suspicion qui marquent Ics
relations entre Etats les plus directement interesses.
Cet chlt de suspicion et de crainte, ceUe circonspection
a l'egard de la partie adverse, Cl'. manque de confiance
dans les rapporls iniernationaux, ont conduit le monde
a se preparer a la guerre. Et, ainsi qu'on l'a abondam·
ment expliqu8 a la dernierc seance du Conseil, tant
que les pays occidentaux. considereront lenr s~curite
comme mcnacee, ils continueront a se preparer activement en utilisant les resultats des decouvertes
scientifiqnes.

4. I have no doubt that this attitude finds corresponding expression on the Soviet side. During the past
few years, however, there has been some sifting of this
problem through international study in the General
Assembly, in the Disarmament Commission and its
Sub·Committee, and elsewhere. We believe that this
process has made it more possible for us to define a
principal cause of doubt and anxiety in international
relations.

4, Je sl.1is certain que cctte attitude se retrouve du
cMe sovietique. Cependallt, le problemc a lite quelque
peu clarifie res dernieres annces, grace a I'etude qui
en a ete faite sur le plan international, au seill de I'As!\emblCe generale, de la Commission du desarmement
et de son Sous-Comite, aussi bien qu'aiIleurs. Nous
croyom que cette etude nous met rnieux a meme de
dMmir ['une des causes principales de j'incertitude et
de l'allxiete qui caracterisent les relations internntionales.

5. We have seen that a high degree of urmed preparedness llas emerged as the product of a military
appreciation that, with the modern weapons at its
disposal, one side could strike a crippling blow at the
other and quickly render the adversary helpless.
Clearly this result could most ensLly be achieved
through a surprise attack, and those responsible for
national defence have devoted much energy and inge~
nuity to devising means of meeting that threat.

5. Nous nous samrnes rendu compte que la preparation
nrmee intensive est nee de la conviction que Les armes
modernes permettent de porter un coup fatal a l'adversaire et le reduire rapidement a l'impuis.sance. De toute
evidence, c'est l'attaque par surprise qui permeLtrait
d'atteindre ce resultaL le plus facilement. Aussi les
responsables de la defcnse nationale ont-jls consacre
beaucoup J.'energie et d'ingeniosite a meltre au point
les moyens de parer a llll tel danger.

6. As we and others have freqllently emphasized, the
removal of that risk does not lie either in unilateral
action or in meaningless declarations, If, for example,
the West were to lower its guard, such action, we
believe, would increase rather tlLan rednr.e tlle danger
of nuclear war throu.gh mistake or miscalculation, The.
solution lies in dealing with the causes which have led
to armed preparedness, and one of the main couses,
in our view, is tile danger of surprise attack. It is what
produces the fear that if one side should halt or reduce
its defence preparedness tile other would strike a
death·blow.

6. Comme nous l'avons souvent souligne ~ et d'autres
avec nOllS -- ni des initiatives unilateraLes ni des dl~cIa­
ratiom dpnuees de valeur ne permettront d',Himiner
cc risque. Si l'Occident, par exemple, rel~chait sa
vigilance, il augmenterait plutt'lt qu'il ne diminuerait
le danger d'une gllerre llucleaire declenchec par suite
d'une eITeUl' ou d'un mauvais caleu!. La solution consiste a s'attaquer aux causes qui ont conduit a cet etat
de preparation al"IlH~e, et l'une des causes principales
est, scIon nous, le danger d'une attaque par surprise.
C'est lui qui fait craindre que si une partie arretail
ou rcduisait ses pr~parati[s de defense, l'autre lui
porterait un coup morte!.

7. It is just because we recognize ~urprise attack as
perhaps the most ominous of the dangers facing the
world that the Canadian Government warmly welcomes the initiative. which the United States has
taken in the Security Council today. In our view, the

7. C'est precisement parce qn'il reconnait que J'attaque
par surprise est peut-Hre le danger le plus grave auquel
le mondc ait a faire face que le GOll\'crnement canadien
applaudit a l'initiative prise aujourd'hui au Conseil
de securite par les Etats-Unis. La proposition tendant

2

or a ctablir rapidement. dans les reglOlls arctiques. un

I
T,

r

proposal for the prompt establishment of a system
inspection in northern areas to provide safeguards
'against t.he d:m,ger of surprise attack represents a practical attempt to deal with this ;nost deeply-rooted
cause of anxiety and tension.

systeme d'inspection qui ofTrirait des garanties contre
le danger cl·une attaque par surprise reprcser.te, A nos
yeux, un effort Goncret de lutle contre une cause profondement enracinee d'anxiete et de tension.

,g. Before I enter further into the substance of the
draft resolution now before us, I shOUld like to call
attention to the somewhat novel situation in Wllich
the Security Council Hnds itself. I think that t am
right in saying that this is one of the few occasions if not the first occasion - on wltich <l. member has
requested the Council to convene to consider, not a
complaint nor ill£' action comiequent on a General
Assembly resolution, nor the report of a subsidiary
organ or o( some agent of the United Nations, but lol
positive and constructive proposa_ which is designed
to assist the Council in majntaining international peace
and Security, It is the Canadlan Government's hope
that these proceedings will show that the Council
can act constructively through the adoption of preventive as well as remedial mellsures.

8. Avant d'exa:niner plus en detail le fond du projet
de resolution dont nou~ sommes saisis, j'aimerais attirer
I'attention du Conseil sur la situation asscz nouveLle
d<.wanl laquc!le :1 se trOl1ve. Jc. crois pouvoir affirmer
que c'est la UilC des rarcs occasior.s - sinon la premiere - OU le Conseil se reunit 0. la dernande d'l.1n de
ses membres pour examiner, non pas une p~ainte, ou
bien la suite :i douner a une resoluLion de I'Assemblee
generale, Oll bien le rapport d'un organe subsidiaire
ou de quclque agent des Nations Unics, mllis une proposition positive et constructive VLsant a aider le Conseil
a maintenir la paix et la seeurite internaLionales. Le
Gouvernement canadien espere que nos debats mon~
treront que le Conseil peut faire amvre utile en adoptant
des mesures ]>nivcntives au.ssi bien que des mcsures
d'ordrc curatif.

9. The Canadian Gover:nnent has already expressed
its readiness to open the whole of Canada. to a general
systel::l of inspection, Mo:-eover, tlle pOSitive Canadian
attitude towards mcasuns to provide against surprise
attack is onc which we have maintained for ~p.vf'_ral
years. I might, however, give some precision to Canada's
attitude towards partial plans for international in~
spection, We are prepared to have a part of Canada
inCluded in any inilial scheme of inspection which
would involVe a zone containing a North American
p.ortion and a Soviet portion of relatively equal importance. My point is that we nre not wedded to any
specific proposal and that the essence of the Canadian
position is that the areas on both sides should be of
comparable importance so that the arrangements
should be eqUitable, We recognize that the estaJllishmenL of a system of safeguards which included Canadi:ln
terdtory would mean that there might be international
teams of observers, eqlipped with electronic devices
and the necessary communications, stationeJ in Canada,
with certain rights of inspection and freedom of rnove~
ment. We further recognize that foreign aircraft
for international inspeeti.on purposes might be :mthOl'~
ized to flyover Canad::l and that logistic support
elements for such aircraft would probably be stationed
in Canada, We also recognize that Canada might well
be called upon to provide personnel, aircraft nnd other
kinds of support as a contribution to the system.
The~c various oblig3tiorts are considered acceptable
in principle, subject to the negotiation of the details
on an equitable basis. III other words, just as Canada
has previously endorsed the more general concept
of an Arctic zone of intemational inspeci:ion as part of
a wider system, we.are prepared to accept such a zone
in itself.

R Le Gouvernement canadien a deja ind:que qll'i
etait pret a permettre que le Cltnada tout cutier soit
soumis a un systeme general d'inspcetion. n y a d'ailleurs plusicurs annees que le Canada est en favenr de
mesures destinees a prevenir une attaque pilf surprise.
Je voudrais cependant donner quelques pnkisions sllr
I'attitude du Canada 8. regard de ?[ans partiels d'ill.s~
pee,tioll internationale. Nons acceptons qu'une partie
du Canada soit comprise dans tout plan initial d'ins~
pcetioJ. s'appliquant a uue zone englobant une partie
de I'Amerique du Nord et unc: partie d'importance
sensiblement ~gale du territoire de l'Union sovictique.
Je tiens a precisel' que nons n'avous d'attachement
exclusif pour aucune des solutions proposees. Nous
dern31:dons seulement que les zonef; a inspecter de
part et d'auLl'e soient d'une importance comparable,
fll1n qlle les dispositions prises soicnt Cquitables. Nous
reconnaissons que la creation d'ull systcme de garanties
s'appLquant a du territoire canarlien signHien! peut-etre
que (cs cquipes intCrrt~Lionales u'observateurs, dis~
posant des appareils electroniques et des moyens de
transmission necessaires, dcvront Hre stationnees au
Canada et nantics de ccrtains droits d'inspection
aUBsi ilien que cc la liberte de JIlouvemcnt. l\ous reconnaissons egalcmcnt que nOllS devrons peut-ctre auto·
riser les aeronefs etrangers utilises pour 1'inspection
internalionale a snrvoler le Canada et que des elements
d'appui logistique de ces acronefs setont pl"ohablement
mis en place au Canada. Nous reconnaissons enfin que
le Canada sera peut-etre appele, pour sa part, a fournir
du personnel, des aeroncfs et autres formes J'appui
lleces,~aires a la mise en {elJ\rre du s~rsteme. Nons acceptons en principe ces diverses obligations, sous reserve
que les questions de detail serout negociees sur une
base equitable.. En d'autres termes, de meme que le
Canada a deja apP'I'ouve I'idee pIllS generale cl'uue zone
arctique soumi~e a !'inspection internationale dans le
cadre d'Lln systeme plus large, il est pret a accepter
la creation de la zone proposec.

to. WP. !'\hould like to think that the proposal now
befure us is only a first step, to be followed both by
disarmament meaSllfCS relating to nuclear and conventional weapons and forces and by a further extension

10. Nous nous pluisons a croire que la proposition
qui nous est soumlse n'est qn'un premier pa~ qui sera
suivi de mesures de desarmcment relatives aux armes
nucleaires et de type c1assiquc, et d'une nouvellc

j

'1

r

I

r
1

I

I

(

I

I
l

1
f

1

re
(

3

of safeguards against surprise attark It is our hope
that co-op'ration in the development of security in
the Arctic can. provide a basis for larger agreements
relating to disarmament and other questions which
could be examilwd jointly with the S<lviet Union. Among

these other measures which might be discussed are,
for example, those which would be necessary to verify
compliance with an agreement to suspend n.uclear
tests.
11.

I must say that the reception given to the United

States proposal by the Soviet Union representative
at the previolls meeting was depressing indeed. It was
more than depressing: in our view, the position tal[cn
by the Soviet Union representative was in some ways
incomprehensible. If the Soviet Union Government
is seriously worried about developments in the Arclic,
why does it reject a proposal designed to set up
inspection in that area? It may estimate that such inspection can serve no useful purpose and CllnTIot diminish insecurity, but how can it know this in advance?
The United States draft resolution calls on the States
mentioned "to designate representatives to participate
in immediate discussions with a view to agreeing on the
technical arrangements required". Surely, it is in such
discussions that the scope of inspedion required and
its objectives could be exnmined, Does the Soviet
Union Government refuse even to discuss these problems ? And, i[ I may ask, whaL harm could it do tlJe
interests of thc Soviet Union Government to participate
in such discussions? That Government would have ut
least demonstrated its willingness to examine all possi~
bilities of decreasing international tension.

12. We, for our part, believe that the plan for a
nortbern zone of inspection is practicable and important, and Canada pledges itself to give all support to
the proposal. We hope that on second thought the
Soviet Union Government will reconsider the negative
response which the Soviet Union representative has
indicated today.
13. I am aware that I have not commented on the
Soviet Union draft resolution and on the Swedish amendment to the Urri.ted States drafl resoLution. Since I
may have occasion Lo intervene again, at a later stage
in the debate, I shall reserve my remarks on those proposals for tlte time being.

j

-1

extension des garanties visant a prevenir une attaque
par surprise. Nons esperons que l'esprit de cooperation
dont 011 aura fait preuve pour muintenir la securite
clans l' Arctique permettra par la suite de conclure des.
accords plus larges relatifs au desarmemenL et a d'autres
questions gui pourraient etre examinees en comrnun
avec l'Union sovietique. Parmi ces questions figurent
notamment les mel·mres qui permettraient de verifIer
]' execution d'un accord sur la suspension des experiences
nucleaircs.
11. Je. doi~ dire que l'accueil que le representant de
l'unioll sovietiqlle a fait a la seance precedente a la
proposition des Etats-Unis a ele tres decouragcant.
Il a meme cte pins que decourageallt : Q notre avis,
I'attitude adopt~.e par le representant de l'Union
sovietique a ete, it certains egards, incomprehensible.
Si le Gouvunement de I'Union sovietiquc s'inquiete
scrieusement de. ce qui se passe dans l'At'ctiquc, pourquoi rejette-il line proposition visant a creet' un systeme
d'inspection dans cette region? Peut-etre pense-t-il
que cette inspection ne servirait de rien et ne redllirait
pas l'insecurite, mais comment peut-il le sa voir it
l'avallce? Le projet de resolution des Etah-Unis
lIlvite les Etats mentionnes «a designer sans deIai des
representants, pour prendre part a des entretiens qui
auront lieu immediatemenL en vue de parvenir a un
accord sur les disposiLions techniques requise~ )J.
Assurement, c'e~t au cours de tels entretiens que
l'€lendue de l'inspection uecessaire, ainsi que ses objectUs, pourraient ctre examines. Le Gouvernement de
l'Union sovletique re[use-t-iJ meme de discuter ces
problemes? Et, s'il m'est permis de poser cette question, quel prejudice le Gouvernement de ]'Union so"ietique porterait~il uux inter~Ls de son pays en participant a de tels entretiens ? II aurait du moins donne
la preuve qu'il est pret a etudier toutes les possibilites
de reduire la tension internationale,
12. Pour notre part, nails croyons que le plan de creation d'une zone septentrionale d'inspection est applicable et qu'il est important, et le Canada s'engage a
dOllller tout son appui a cette proposition. Nous esperons qu'a la reflexion, le Gouvernement de l'Union
sovietiquc reviendra sur la reponse negative qU'Q
donnee llujonrd'hui son representant.
13. Je n'ignore pas que je n'ai parle ni du projet de
resolution de l'Union sovietique ni de l'amendement
suedois au projet de resolution des Etnts-Unis. Comme
j'aurai peut-ctre l'occasion d'intervenir a nouveau a
un slade ulterieUT du debat, je reserve pOllr le moment
mes observations sur ces propositions.
14-. M. GEORGES-PICOT (France) : La proposition
des Etats-Unis, qui a motive notre reunion d'aujourd'hui, constitue, aux yellx de la delegation fran~aise,
la suite logique de la plainte introduite par l'Union
sovieLique le 18 avril 1958 [SI3990J. Le representanL de
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques s'est
efIorce, lors de notre derniere seance, avec I'llabile
dialectique it laquelle il nous a habitues, de nous demontrer que 11.'.5 vols d'entrainement de l'aviation des
Etats-Unis dans Ies regions arctiques constituaient
un risque de conflagration mondiale. Il nous a rappeJe
egalement que les forces aeriennes sovietiques disposaient, eIles aussi, de moyens puissants. La proposit.ion
americaine ne rcpresente-t-ellc pas le moyen le plus
sur d'eIiminer les risques qu'il a lui-meme denonces ?

14. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translafed from
French): The United States proposal, which is the
reason for our meeting today, represents, in the view
of the French delegation, the logical continua.tion of
the complaint submitted by the Soviet Union on 18
April 1958 [5/3990]. At our last meeting the represen~
tative of the Soviet Union tried to prove to us, with
the dialectic skill to wh.ich he has accmtllmed us, that
the training flights made by United States aircraft
in the Arctic area constituted a risk of world conflagration, He also reminded liS that tile Soviet Air Force,
too, possesses powerful weapons. Surely the United
States proposal represents the surest means of elimi.
nating the risks which be himself has denounced?

4

,

f

T
-f
)
(
T
j

I'

I

1

-'1'
.1.

(

I

'I

I
1

r
I
I

I'

(

I
r

-r
t-r
,(

15. We agree with the representative of the Soviet
Union that the progress of modern armaments threatens
the world v.ith the terrible risk of destruction. But,
.as has already been pointed out, it is not by abandoning our powers of defence, without any counterpart,
that we shall recover our sense of security. The USSR
calls upon the hee world to give up its defensive stand,
but what doe.s it offer in return? Nothing butde clarations of intention and promises for which there is
no guarantee. The watchful eye of tlle United Stntes
Strategic Air Command in the Arctic zone is, in the
present circumstances, the best guarantee against a

15. Nous pensons. camme le representant de l'URSS.
que le progres des armes modernes rait poser sur le
monde des risq11es terribles de destruction, Mais,
comme il a deja ~te indique, ce n'est pas en abandonnan L
sans contl'epul'tic notre poteutiel dt dMem.e que oous
retrouverons le sentiment de la securite. L'Union des
Republiques sociaJistes sovic.tiqucs demande all monde
Iibre de renoncer a son attitude defensive; mais que
lui ofi're·t·elle en retour 'I Rien que des declarations
d'intention et de,s promesses inconlrolables. La garde
vigilante que monte l'aviation strategique des EtatsUnis dans Les regions arctiques constitul'. dans les
circonstances prcsentes, la meilleure garantie contre
une attaquc par surprise et doit done ctre mainLenue
tant que la conjoncture actuelle n'aura pas cvolue.
C'est seulemcnt au cas ou un systeme d'inspection inter·
nationale llOUTrilit etre etahli d'un commun accord
dans res r6gions ~ et dans cc cas seulemcnt - qu'il
deviendrait possible de relacher !lotrc vigilance,

surprise attack and must therefore be maintained so
long as there is no clmnge in tlJe world situation. Only
when a system of international inspection has been
established in this area by joint agreement-- then
and only then - will it be possible to relax our vigilance.
Hi. The proposal put forward today by the United
States is a clear proof, were any such proof necessary,
that it has no aggressive intentions, since it agrees
tu allow international inspection of a system of obser·
vation which, moreover, it is already operating, with
the full knowledge of the whole world, inastrategically
vital area. That is a constructive step and a realistic
offer of co-opemtion in reply to fl proposal which, as
put forward by the USSR, could not, because of its
unilateral nature, lead to any practical results and
even aggravated the situation by fostering distrust of
a great Powcr,

1.6. La proposition que font anjourd'hui les EtatsUnis montre a I'evidence, s'U en etait meme bcsoin.
qu'il n'existe, de leur cote, aucune intention agressive
pUiSqll'ils acceptenL de suhordonner a une inspection
internationale une surveillance qu'ils excrcent d'ail·
lcurs deja au su et au vu de tout le monde sllr line
region essenlielle an point de vile strategique. C'est la
une initillLivc constructive et une ofIre realiste de cooperation en n'.ponse a nne proposition qui, telle qn'elle
etait presentee par I'URSS, ne pouvait, en raison
notamll1eut de son caractcre unilateral, conduire a
aucun resultflt praLique et aggravait mcme la situation
en incitant a In mefiance vis-tt-vis d'unc grande puissance,

17. We are aware, of course, that an international
inspection zone will not be sufficient in itself to restore
confidence and to provide lasting security. That is
Why my Government still adheres faithfully to the
constructive proposals on controlled disarmament
put forward by the Western members of the SubCommittee of the Disarmament Commission on 29
August 1957 t and approved by the United Natiolls
General Assembly in its resolution 1118 (XII) of 14
November 1957. The establishment of a special system
for the Arctic area should not, in its view, be regarded
as a' departure from the principle of the indivisibiliLy
of the disarmament measures, as repeatedly defined
by Mr, lules Moch, the representative of France in the
Sub-Committee and in the Disarmament Commission,
It is, in facL, a special step: as has been so aptly said
by the United States representative [814ilt meeting],
it is not a disDrmament measure, but a prelude to
disamlament, a measure prompted solely by a desire
for security and designed to allay the fears expressed
by the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs in his statement of 18 April [Sp991] and again on 21 April by
Mr. Sobalev (813/h .meeting]. The aim is to show by a
limited experiment that our ideal of security oased
on co-operation is not unattainable.

17. Nons savons certes que l'etablisscUllOnt d'une zone
d'inspection intel'nationale ne suffira pas, a lui Sleul. a
retablir la conClance et a fairc regner la securite, C'cst
pourquoi mon gOllvernement reste lldelement attache
a l'enscmble des propositions constrnctives de desarmement controle presentees pur les membres occidentaux du Sous-Comite de la Commission du cles2rmement
le 29 ao11t 1957 et approllvecs par I'Assernblce gene-rale
dans sa resolution 1148 (XTI) <In 14- novembre 19.57 1.
La mise sur pied d'nn regime special pour les regions
arctiqucs ne devrait pas, a son avis, ~tre considere
comme une atteillte au principe d'indivisihilite des
rnesurcs de dcsul'tnemel1c, td qu'il a de defini u maintes
reprises pnr M. Jule& r>.'Ioch, representant de la France
au Sous-Comite et
la Commission du desarmemcnt.
C'est la, en ellet, une initiative parliculiere ; comme
l'a deja si bien dit le representanL des Etats-Unis
[81#e seance]. ce n'est pas une mesure de dr.sarmemellt
mais un prelude an desarmemcnt. une mesnre inspirec
pm· des motifs de pure securit~ et destillee a calmer [es
apprehensions exprimees par le i\1ini.'itre des affaires
etrangercs soviWqne dans sa declarati.on dn 18 avril
[813991] et rept'ises, le 21 avril, par M. Soholev [813 e
sconccj, Il s'agit seulement de demontrer, par Ilnc
experience limitee, que notre ideal de securite forrdee
sur la cooperation n'est pas inaccessible.

18. Tht results of such a partial success would be
considerable, At a Lime when the prospect of a summit

18. Les consequences d'un succ~s partiel scraient
considCrables. Au momenL oil la perspective d'une reu"

1
Offleial Records of the Disarmamenf C01rl11lissf~n, Suppl~menl
jor J'lnuary la December 1!J57, document DCj113, annex 5,

1.
DI)~lJmenls oflldels de la Comllli~siorr du dtsll1m~meTI{, Sup
pUment de ianIJier a dJe~mbr81{}J7, document DCJ113, annexe 5.

a

5

-

!:
,

"

meeting has aroused so much hope in the world, agreement, were it only on the principle of international
inspection of the Arctic zone, would prove that the
most. serious difficulties can be settled if they are
tackled in good faith, By accepting the co~operation
orIered to it in this matter, the Soviet Union would
dispel the misgivings about the sincerity of its intentions which its present attitude engenders in us and in
many other States.

nion au sommet a fait naitre tant d'espoirs dans le
monde, un accord, ne serait-ce que sur le principe d'une
inspection internationale des regions arctiques, apporterait la preuve que les plus graves difficultes peuvent
etre resolues si cUes sont abordees dans la bonne foi.
En acceptant la cooperation qui lui est offerte sur ce
point, l'Union des Republiques sociaJistes sovietiques,
dissiperait les apprehensions que son attitude actuelle
nous inspire, comme a beaucoup d'autres Etats, quant
a la sincerite de ses intentions.

19. The French delegation regrets that in considering
the limited problem with which we are dealing and for
which a precise solution has been proposed, the Soviet
delegation has resorted to tactics which afC used all
too often and which consist in distracting attention
by making groundless accusations in order to be able
to reject more r:asily the offers of co-operation made
to it. The present discussion should promote peace
and not provide grist for the mill of progaganda, which
uses the cause of peace for purposes alien to it. We do
not see how a summit conference can be a magic means
of removing the threat of atomic war and reducing
international tension. We shall only arrive at this by
showing that we are an animated by good will and a
spirit of co-operation. A demonstration of this frame
of mind and this spirit would undoubtedly open the
way to constructive possibilities for a summit conference. That is why the decision which the Council is
asked to take today in the United States draft resolution
could, as Mr. Lodge pointed out, be the significant
turning-point that mankind has been long awaiting,
if the Soviet Union were willing to join in it. There is
no question of any measure being imposed by a majority
vote, as Mr. Sobolev claimed; wc arc only asked to decide unanimollsly on the opening of negotiations in
which each one would be free to reject or accept any
measure examined. The United States delegation has
mentioned a few, by way of example, adding that it
has no preconceived ideas on the subject and is ready
to accept any reasonable proposal.

19. La delegation franyaise regrette que la delegation
sovietique, en examinant le probleme limite qui nous
est soumis et pour lequel une solution precise est
proposee, ait recouru a une taetique trop souvent
employee qui consiste a detourner l'attcntion par des
accusations sans fondement pour pouvoir rejcter plus
facilement les offres de cooperation qui lui sont faites.
Le present debat doit servir la cause de la paix et non
alimenter une propagande qui utilise la cause de la
paix a des fins qui lui sont etrangeres. Nous ne voyons
pas comment une conference au sommet peut etre un
moyen magique d'ecarter la menacc d'une gucrre atomique et de reduire la tension internationale. Nous n'y
parviendrons qu'en donnant une preuve que nous
sommes tous animes de bonne volonte et d'esprit de
cooperation. Dne manifestation de ces dispositions et
de cet esprit ouvrirait incontestablement la voie a des
possibilites constructives pour une conference au
sommet. C'est pourqnoi la decision demandee aujourd'hui au Conseil dans le projet de resolution des EtatsUnis pourrait, comme l'a indique M. Lodge, constituer
le tournant significatif que l'humanite attend depuis
longtemps si l'Union sovietique voulait bien s'y associer. Il ne s'agit pas, comme l'a pretendu M. Sobolev,
cl'imposer une mesure quelconque par un vote de la
majoritC, mais simplcment de decider, a l'unanimite,
l'ouverture de pourparlers au cours desquels chacun
resterait libre de refuser ou d'accepter telle ou teJle
mesure qui serait etudiee. La delegation des EtatsUnis en a enumere quelques~unes a titre d'exemple,
en ajoutant qu'elle n'avait pas d'idees precoll<;:ues it
ce sujet et qu'elIe etait prete a accucillir toute proposition raisOllnable.

20. It is in this spirit that the French delegation has
decided to support the United States draft resolution,
hoping that the Soviet Union will agree to reconsider
its position in the light of the arguments put forward
during the discussion and that the draft resolution
in question will be adopted unanimously by the Council,

20. C'est dans cet esprit que la delegation fran<;:aise
a decide d'appuyer de son vote le projet de resolution
des Etats-Unis, esperant que I'Union sovietique acceptera de reconsidercr sa position en tenant compte des
arguments exposes au cours du debat et que la resolution dont il s'agit pourra etre adoptee a l'unanimite
des membres du Conseil.

21. I reserve the right of my delegation to speak later
on the Swedish amendment [813998} and the USSR
draft resolution [SI3997].

21. Je reserve le droit, pour ma delegation, de reprendre plus tard la parole sur l'amendement suedois
[SI3998} et sur le projet de resolution de l'URSS [SI
3997).

22. Sir Pierson D IXON (United Kingdom): I have
listened attentively to the explanation, which the
President gave in his capacity of representative of
the United States, of the purposes of the draft resolution before us. Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom supports this proposal that a zone of
international inspection against surprise attack be
established in the Arctic area and that representatives
of the countries concerned should hold immediate dis-

22. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [lraduit de
l'anglais] : J'ai ecoute avec attention les explications
que le President a donnecs en sa qualite de representant
des Etats-Unis concernant les objectifs du projet de
resolution dont nous sommes saisis. Le Gouvernement
de Sa Majeste dans le Royaume~Uni appuie la proposition tendant a etablir une zone internationale d'inspection contre les attaques par surprise dans la region
arctique et a inviter les representants des pays inte6

•
a

eussions with a view to agreeing on technical arrange-

resses
engager immediatemcnt des ponrparlers en
vue de parvenir a un accord Sllr les dispositions d'ordre technique.

ments.

,.

r
I
I

I

I

i
I

. ,

r
I

I

23. It is the firm opinion of my Government that the
be:st way to make progress with the complex problems
of secLlIity and disarmament is for Lho.~e concerned
to hoLd practical discussions of the kind proposed in
order to estaJJlish what could and should be done. In
our view, the mere fact that all the Powers concerned
had agreed to co~operl)te in technical disclIs:'Jions on
internationaL inspection for the Arctic area would in
itself help to allay mutual fear of surprise attack and
thus diminish international tension and promote l'onfidence.

23. Mon gouvernement est convaincu, pour ce qui
est des problemes complexes de la securite et du desarmemer.t, que le mcilleur moyen de [aire des progres
consiste, pour les intcresses, a enRager des discussions
pratiques comme celles qui ont em proposecs cn vue de
determiner ce que 1'on peut et ce que l'on doit faire.
A notre avis, le seul fait que tOlltes I~s puissances
interessees se sont mises d'accord pour participer
a des diseussions techniques sur une in"'pection internationale de la region arctique doit deja contribuer par
lui-meme it apaiser It's eraintes lllutuetles d'une &Uaque
par surprise et ainsi a reduire la tcnsion internationale
et a favoriser un climat de con fiance.

2,1. In this connexion it is note wOl'thy that wbat is
being proposed is international inspection carried ont
by international teams, and that it is the intention
that the teams ShOllLd always include a representative
of the country on whose territory the teams are working.
The establishment of such an arrangement could therefore involve no threat to the security of the countries
concerned.

24. 11 conviellt de notcr, n eet egard, que cc que I'on
propose, c'est une inspection internation8Je efl'ectuee
par des groupes interllutioo.aux qui devmient toujours
cornprendre un representant du pays sur le territoire
dnq1..lel ces groupes opereraient. La reaLisation d'Ull tel
accord n'impliquerait aucune mennce pour la securitc
des pays en cause.

25. The representative of the Soviet Union has in
the past taken the line that the only way to taclde
the problem of disarmament is at a conference of
heads of Governments, and I was sorry to note that
in his speech at the last meeting he adopted tlle snme
regtrictive attitude. Certainly Her Majesty'., Government is anxious to see the problem of {lLsarmament
on the agenda of a properly prepared meeting of heads
of Government. This does not mean, however, that
no work o[ any kind should be done on disal'mament
or the problems related to it except in direct relation
to a summit meeting. If an opportunity offers itself
to make progress on some serioHs international problem,
are we to reject the opportunity? Are we to say, "No,
we cannot get together on that problem because it
has a relationship to the general disarmament question,
and that question can only be discussed at a meeting
of heads of Government"? Surely that would be a
formalistic and unreaL attitude.

25. Le repI'('i~entant de I'Vnioll sovietique a dCfendu
precedernment le point de vuc selon leqllel la seule
fagon d'aborder le proble-me du desarmcment scrait de
convoquer une conference des chefs de gouvernemcnt
et je regrette de Hoter que, dans le discoUl's qu'il a fait
it la 814 e seance, il a adopte la mcme attit,ude restricLive. 11 est certain que le Gouvtrnement de Sa Majeste
desire que le problernt du desarmement so it inscrit
a l'ordre du jour d'une conference des chefs de gouvernement preparee avec soin. Cela ne signiflc pas cependanL que ('on ne doive rien entrcprcndre touchant
le desarmement ou les problemcs qui s'y rattachent,
si ce n'est en relation directe avec une conference au
sommet. Si une occasion se prcscnte de progre;sser vers
la solution d'un probIerne international grave, faut-il
La laisser pas"er" AlIons-nolls dlre : ~ Non. nous ne
pouvons pas \lOLLS rClJOir pour discuter d~ ce probleme
parce qu'ii a trait a la question generale du dcsarmement et que cette question ne peut etre discutec qu'a
unt:: conference de~ chefs de gouvernement 1>? Ce
sera it lit, sans nul doute, nne attiLude formaliste et
depourvue de realisme.

26. Undoubtedly the proposal in the draft resolution has a bearing on the problem of disarmament.
The draft proposes arrangements to afford security
in one particular zone against the dangers of surprise
attack. But this connexion is not an objection; it
is an advantage. Although this proposal deals pri.marily
with the question of international security and international confidence, if agreement could be reached
on it, that would be a considerable contribution to a
general disarmament agreement, and if a genernl
disarmament agreement were reaclled, large-scaJe defen.'iive measures would no longer be necessary.

26. Il est indeniable que la proposition contenue
dans le projet de resolution a des rap ports avcc la
question dll desarmemi:nt. Ene prevoit des arrangements visant a foumir des garunties, dans une zone
particuliere, contre le danger d'une attaque par ~ur­
prise. PourtanL iJ ne s'agit pas lit d'une objection,
mais d'un avantage. Bien que cette proposition ait
trait principalcment i la question de la securite et de
la confiance sur le plan international, si un accord pouvait etre realise a son sujet, ce serait Hne contribution
tres importante a un accord general sur le desarmement;
si 1'on pouvait conelure un tel accord, it 11e; serait pIu"
necessaire de prendre des mesures defensive:; de grande
envergure.

27. I was sorry to hear the representative of the
Soviet Union describe at the last meeting this serious
and valuable proposal as a diversionary manoeuvre.

27. J'ai eu le regret d'entendre le representant de
1'Union sovietique declarer a La derniere; sk.ance que
cette proposition serieuse et d'une grande utilite etait

r
I
I

(

l
1,
I

r

l

f
\

7

Yet it is a proposal which otlghl surely to appeal
particularly to the Government of the Soviet Union,
which has shown itself especially sensitive to the
possible dangers of defensivp: mea~ures involving
the Arctic area, It is precisely those dangers which
the propo~'ll sets out to deal witl!.

une manceuvre de diversion. Cepend:Hlt, une telle
proposition devrait sans aueun doutc avoir l'agrement
dl1 Gouvernement de l'Union sovietique, qui s'est
montre specialement sensible aux dangers qui pourraient resulter de rnesures defensives s'etendant a la
region arctique. C'est precisement a ces dangers que h\
proposition a trait.

28. Nor is there anything in this proposal which in
any way conflicts with the intention to make progress
on disarmament at !1 meeting of heads of Government.
On the contrary, it would surely he a source of great
~ncouragement to the heads of Governments if, when
they met, they had before them a practical plan for
international inspection in one particular part of UtC
world,

28. 11 n'y a rien non plus dans cette proposition qui
soit de nature a faire ob:ltacle a la volonte de progresser
dans le domaine dn desarmement Cll cOllvoquant une
reuuion des chefs de gouvernement. Au contraire, si
les chefs de gOllvernement se trouvaient saisis, lors
de leur reunion. d'un plan pratique d'inspection internationale dans une region determinee du monde, ce
serait pour eux un precieux encouragement.

29. I am bound to say thot, at fITst hearing, I found
the speech made by the representative of the Soviet
Union at our Ia,<;t meeting disheartening for the pro~
spects of progress. But for all the reasons 1 have given
jt is the earnest hope of the United Kingdom delegation
that the Soviet Union will, on refledion, agree to sUll~
port this draft resolution and to co-operate in the teclmical discus-sions which are proposed, and thus contribnte.
in a significan.t way to an easing of tension, which is
the universal desire of mankind.

29.

Je wis conlraint de dire que le discollrs prononce

a la derniere seance par le representant de I'Union
sovietique m'a paru, lorsque je l'ai entendu, decoumgeant du point de vue des perspectives de progres.
Mais la delegation du Royaume-Uni esperetres vivement,
pour toutes les raison~ que j'ai indiquees, que l'Union
sovietique acceptera, it la ret1exion, d'appuyer le projet
de resolution et de parlidper aux discussions techniques
proposees, contribuant ainsi dans line mesure importante
a ereer UllP. detente, comme le souhaite l'humanite tout
enhere.

30. I may wish to spenl, at a later stage on the draft
resolution just drcul<lted by the Soviet delegation and
to comment in greaLer detail on Mr. Sobolev's statement.

30. 11 se peut que je desil"€ parler ulterieurement all
sujet du projet de resolution qui vient d'~trc distribue
par la delegation sovietique et presenter des observations plus detaLIJees sur la declaration de M. Sobolev.

31. I should alsa like to reserve my comments on the
amendment to the Uoited States draft resolution put
forward by the representative of Sweden, and meanwhile would ta1,e the opportunity to welcDme the
statement by Mr. Jarring in which he announced the
support of the Swedish Government for the United
States proposal [814111 m~elingJ.

31. Je me reserve egakment le droit de commenter
l'amendement propose par le representant de la Suede
au projet de resolution des Etats-Onis, En attendant,
je saisis cette occasion de dire que je me felicite de la
declaration de M. Jarring !814~ seance] par laquelle
il annonce que le Gouvernement suedois appuiera le
projel des Etats-Unis.

32. Mr. MATSUDAIRA (Japan): My delegation has
stUdied most carefully the draft resolution submitted by
the United States [8/8995]. The draft, if adopted, will
certainly serve to allay the fear of surprise attack
across tlle Arctic area. We must admit that the scope
of the dmft resolution is ratller limited. It covers
geographically only a narrow area. It envisages specifically an inspection system to guard against surprise
attack. However, as I understand it, this system of
Arctic inspection would only be a first step toward a
broader inspection system to prevent the possibility
of surprise attack aver other regions as well as tlle
Arctic, Tt could also pave the way for a hroader ins~
peetion system which would cover all the other aspects
of disarmament problems. It would undoubtedly he
conducive to the setting up of a body or bodies of
experts to study such an inspection system, including
the one provided for in General Assembly resotution
1148 tXII). In short, wc welcome this measure as a
significant move towards disarmament.

32. M. MATSUDAJRA (Japon) [lraduil de l'anglais} :
Ma delegation a etudie ayec le plus grand soin le projet
de resolution presente par les Etats-Unis [5/3995].
Ce projet contribuera certainement, s'il est adopte,
a dissiper In crainte d'une attaque par surprise dans
la region arctique. Il cOllviellt de reconnaltre qu'il
a une portee assez limitee, car il ne concerne qu'une
zone geographique restreinte. Il vise expressement a
etablir un systeme d'inspection destine a prevenir taute
attaque par surprise. Toutcfois, si je comprends bien,
la mise en application d'utl tel systeme ne serait qu'un
premier pas vers l'instauration d'un systeme plus
large d'inspection tendant a empecher des attaques
par surprise lancees dans d'autres regions, aussi bien
que dans la zone arctique. 1I pourrait egalement preparer la voie a un systeme d'inspection plus etendll qui
engloberait tous les antres aspects du probleme du
desarmement. Il faciliterait sans aucun doute la constitution d'un ou de plusieurs groupes d'experts charges
d'etndier la mise au point d'un systeme de ce genre,
y compris cellli qui est prevu par la resolution 1148
(XII) de l'Assemblce generate. Bre£' nDus nOilS felicitons
de cette initiative clans la mesure all cUe constituc
un pas important dans la voie du desarmement.

33. In this spirit, my delegation will support the said
draft resolution. However, it will do so on the clear

33. C'est dans ClOt esprit que mu delegation appuiera le
projet de resolution des Etats-Unis. Toutefois, il est

8

•

l
\
1

I
,.i

..

1
I

I
I

I

understanding that the inclusion of the KurU islands
in the proposed zone does not by any means prejudice
the territorial claims af any country concerned to
those islands.

entendu que le fait d'inclllrc les lIes Kouriles dans la
zone proposee ne prejuge en rien les revendications
qu'un pays quelconquc pourrnit faire valoir sur ces
iles.

34.

34. Ma delegation espere que le Conseil examinera le
projet de resolution
I'etude avec le plus grand soin,
car il aborde de fa90n constructive I'un des problemes
les plus importants qui se posent dans le domaine du
desarmement. Il l'aborde sous I'egide de 1'0rganisation
des Nations Unies et c'es"L, a cet egard, une initiative
tout :1 fait opportune,

My delegation hopes that the Council will give

the most serious thought to this draft resolution. It
is a constructive approach to one of the most important
disarmament problems. It is an approach under the
aegis of the United Nations. Under the circumstances,
it is indeed a most fitting move.

a

35. May I, however, draw your attention to the fact
tllaL there remain many other important and urgent
problems on disarmament which should be discussed,
such as the suspension of nuclear bomb tests and the
demilitarization of Quter space, both, naturally, to be
internationally controlled and inspected, I am con~
fident that tILe constructive debate on the present issue
will lend, undoubtedly, a ray of llOpe for au early
settlement of these problems,

35. Je desire cependant attirer votre attention sur
le fait qu'il reste a examiner, dans le domaine du desarmemellt, beaueoup d'autres problemes urgents, notamment la cl?5satiolI des essais nucleaires et la demilitarisation des espaces extra-atmospheriques, qui devraient
naturellement etre soumis il. un contrale international,
.Te veux esperer que le debat constructif qui se deroule
actueUement no us ouvrira la perspective de voir ces
problemes bienUit resolus.

36. May I reiterate our sincere hope that the discussion
of this issue v,'iIl serve, in the long history of negotiations
for peace, as a turning point toward renewed, urgent
and vigorous efforts for disarmament.

Puis-je exprimer a nouveau I'cspoir sincere que
l'examen de la question actuellement a l'etude constituera un tournant dans la longue histoire des nego~
dations visant a edifier Ill. paix et conduira a des efforts
renouvelBS, immediats et vigoureux en Caveur du
desarmement.

37. I should like to reserve my delegation's right to
speak at SOUle future date on the new Soviet draft
resolution SJ3997], as well as on the Swedish amend~
ment [S{399S].

37. Je tiens a reserver le droit de ma delegation de
prendre la pUrDle it une date lllterieure au sujel du
nOliveau projet de resolution sovietique [S/3997],
ainsi que de I'amcndement suedois [S/3998].

38. Mr, ILLUECA (Panama) (translated trom Spa~
nish): On Monday, 21 April, the Coundl metto consider
the complaint submitted by the Soviet Union. The
discussion of the Soviet complaint placed the subject
in its true light. From the narrow confines of a complaint
submitted by a State which thought its frontiers are
threatened by the flights of military aircraft of another
Power, the discussion led to the broader significance
of the topic: the danger of surprise attack, a danger of
jnst coneern to all the peoples of the world, whalever
migllt be the attacking power and whatever its victim;
for a surprise attack may develop into a war, and evcn
more than war, into total destmcti(Jn, since the devastating force of nuclear weapons would be brought to
bear.

38. M, ILLUECA (Panama) [traduit de l'espagnol]
Le conseil s'est reuni le lundi 21 avril pour examiner
la plainte deposee par l'Union des Republiques socia~
listes sovietiques. L'cx;lmen de cette plainte a place
la question sous son jour veritable. Des limites res~
treintes d'une plainte presentee p;lr un Etat qui seatait
ses fronLieres menaeees par les exercices militaires
aeriens d'un autre Etat, on en est arrive a une aceeption plus large du sujet, savoir le danger d'one atlaque
par surprise, donl s'inquietent il. juste titre taus les
pcuples du monde, quellc que puisse etre la puissance
attaquante et quelle que puisse Mre la victime, car
\loe aLlaque par surprise pourrait signifIer la guerre,
et, plus que la guerre, la destruction totale, puisque la
puissance devastatrice des armes nucMaires entrerait
en j('_u.

39. Representatives drew attention, wjthout reserve
and in the frankest spirit of impartiality, to the necessity for the great Powers to arrive at a peaceful seltlement
of the differences which have so far made it impossible
to reach any agreement, even a preliminary one, on
disarmament.

39. Sans nucune reserve eL dans un esprit de parfaite
imparbalite, les membres du Conseil ont souligne ici
la necessite, pour les grandcs puissance.'l, de mettre fin,
par des moyens pacifiques, a leurs divergences de vues,
qui anI: ernpeche jusqu'ici de parvenir a un accord,
meme preliminairc, en mlltiere de desarmement,

40. I have said on behalf of my country that the world
is hoping, with a faith rooted in the elementary instinct of self~preservation, that the great Powers, which
are both militarily and economically strong, can reach
agreement and that from this agreement there will
arise a world free from the threat of total annihilation
that would result from a war fought with the new
weapons of mass destruction available in modern
arsenals [81.3th meeting, para. 131], I added then, and

40. Au nom de man pays, j'o1i declare prccedemmenl:
que l'humanitc at.lend, avec line foi liCe a ]'instinct
elementaire de conservation, que les grands pay&,
puissu!1ts sur le plan militaire et sur le plan economique,
se mettent d'accord, et que, de eet accord, surgisse un
monde libere de la menace de la destruction totale
qu'enLrainerait une guerre mence avec Ies 110uveaux
moyens de destruction massive dont disposent les
arsenaux modernes [813e s~ancc, par. 131]. J'ai ensuite

),

7

36.

I

r

9
f"

•

J repeat it now because it seems to me to be extremely
important, tll3t an agreement 011 disarmament between
the great Powers would release considerable funds and
substantial resources which might be llsed to free
the peoples from their desperate poverty through eco~
nomic aid. Confidence in the possibility of building a
better world would then be strengthened and human
society could live under improved conditions, work
better aad to greater profit [Ibid.]. On behalf of my
country I also expressed the firm hope that the day
would come when the great Powers. responsible for the
dest.iny of the world, will reach agreement and will
try to interpret the feelings of large sections of hl.lm8~
nity [Ibid., para. 132].

ajoule, et je le repete aujourd'hui, parce que j'y attache
une importanee considerable, qU'Ul1 accord entre les.
puissances au sujet du desarmement rendrait disponibles.
des sommes considcrables et des ressources precieuses
qui pourraient etre utilisees pour arraeher les peuples
a la misere et au desespoir, grace a une aide economique.
On verrait alors se rafl'ermir la confial1ce en un monrle
meilleur, et les hommes pourraient jouir de meiJIeures
conditions de vie, travailler mieux et retirer un pins
grond profIt de leun; efforts libid.]. Au nom de man
pays, rai encore exprime le ferme espoir que tout cela
Sl" rcalisera le jour ou un accord interviendra entre
les grande~ puissances qui ont entre leurs mains l'avenil' du monde et ou on tiendra compte de~ vreux d'une
grande partie de J'hull1anite [ibid., par. 132].

41.

4.1. L'adoption de mesures propres a eviter un;;)
attaque par surprise ouvrira III voie au rlesarmement.
J'ai deja en l'occosion d'insister sur le fait que si ron
vent reellement liherer le monde de la menace d'une
nouvelle guerre, il faut arriver it desarmer ; pour uesarmer, il faut d'abord faire naitre 'Une confiance reciproque entre les peuples, et rien ne pourrait mieux. y
reussir que la certitude, decoulaut de l'adoption de
mesures appropriees, que nat ne sera victime d'une
attaquc par surprise.

The measures we adopt to avoid a surprise attflck

wiII open the way to disarmament. I have previollsly

had occasion to emphasize that if there is a real desire
to free the world from the threat of another war, there
must be disarmament; but before disarmament can
be attained mutual trust between peoples must be
established. There could be no better source of such
trust than the certainty, through the adoption of
international measures to that end, that they will
not be victims of surprise attack.

r

"-

!

I

"..

, ---

42. Here there arises a point that we eallnot ignore:
in the modern world a surprise attack would not be the
start of a war, but war itself. \Ve have already passed
the historic stage of wars prepared long in advance,
of manoeuvres with the gradual concentration of forces
along the enemy's Irontiers. The resources of science,
advances in aviation and the destructi.ve power of
nllclear weapons have reduced all these warlike preparations of other days to the surprise attack. Consequently, as I said before, the surprise attack will in
no event be the beginning of war but war itself; more
than that, it will be atomic war, with its deadly consequences for the future of manldnd.

42. 11 Y a egalement nn aspect que nous ne pouvons.
pflsser sous silence: dans le monde moderne, ['atLaqu~
par surprise ne ~erait pBS le commencement de la gucrr<'.
mais la guerre elle-meme. NOllS avons de passe l'etape
historique des gucrres longuement preparccs, des
manreuwes .wee concentration progressive de forces
nux fmntiercs de ]'cnnemi. Les ressourccs de la science,
les progres de l'aviation et la puissance destructive des
armes nucleaires ont simpline tous les preparatifs de
guerre d'autrefois en res rempla~ant par I'attaque par
sarprise. C'est pourquoi je disais que l'attaque par
surprise serait non pas un commencement de gtlerre,
mais la gucrrc clle-meme, et qui plus est, la guerrc
atomique avec ses consequences fatales pour l'avenir
de l'humanite.

43. The draft resolution submitted by the United
States for our consideration is conceived in very clear
terms which hring into sharp focus tile pE'tils and fears
which I have just outlined briefly.

43, Le projet de resolution des Etats-Unis dont nous
sommes saisis est conqu en tennes fort elmrs qui font
ressortir les dangers et lcs eraintes que je viens d'indiquer sommairement.

44. Its p,eamble draws attention to the development, porticularly in the Soviet Union and the United
States of America, of growing capabilities of massive
snrprise attack. This growing capaciLy for surprise
attack can be attributed, as is r<:adily understandable,
to the fact tll('lt both these great Powers possess the
most modern military aircraft, Jlowerful guided missiles
and vast reserves of nuclear energy for the production
of powerful weapons of mass destruction.

44. Dans le preambule, il est question de la capacite
croissante de declencher une attaque massive par
surprise qui se developpe en particulier en Union
sovietique et aux Etat~-Unis d'Amerique. Cette capacite croissante de declenchcr une attaque par surprise
est uniquement due, comme il est aise de le comprendre,
au fait que ces deux grandes puissances sont en possession des avions militaires les plus modernes, de
puissants projectiles guides et d'importantes reserves
d'energie nucJeaire destinee a la fabrication de puissantes armes de destruction en masse.

45. In its third paragraph of the preamble the draft
resolution enters into the realm of psychology, which,
as wc stated earlier, is of crucial importance if we are
to find a.n effective solution lIJ the disarmament problem: the establishment, the fonnation, as it were, of
confidence among States - and, I would add, among
peoples - which would become a basis for the mutual
renunciation of those reservations which stand in the

45. Au troish~me considerant, le projet de resolution
entre dans le domaine psychologique dont nous avons
deja signale l'importance decisive pour arriver a une
solution efficace du probleme du desarmement : la
creation, la croissance en quelque sorLe, de la confiance
entre les Etats. et entre les peuples pourrait-on
ajouter, con fiance qui permettrait l'abandon, de part
et d'autre, deces reserves qui font obstacle aux nego10

:yuy of dis,armament negotiations. As is clearl stated
m the p~rugrapll,.a reduction of internationaltension

allli ;),11 lIlcrCllSC m confidence among St
n.chi' . 'd BI 'f tl
ates can be
' ,"\'1" °d , Y .,'1' le mc~sures adopted are safeguardea
[(11
.
<\, an III m; case, 10 particular, only if a r e "
l~ reached to eliminate the fear 01 'urn" g emlt,nk:
'r" 1 t
'h
'J_ll~e a RC
r ~ ...fret 'n III
[' sr-cond paragraph of the preamble.
3

TIlL' rJl'a~L fllSOluLion takes nole of the statements

·1t\.

t.t1,a~(,'. IlY \'~\1.'IOUS mcml!ers of the Council at the pre-

U,dlllg lll(';Ltug rcgardmg the particular significance

of tl~c '\rcllc area, not only for the countries that posses.'l
lcrnt.nnes Lhere. ~ut for all those who feel that an
aLonllc enconnter III that area would unleash a total
war which would be the death-blow to world peace.

.

I
I

I
f
I

\

~iations sur le desarmc:ment. Comme il t'sL llit trh

Just~me~t dans ee con~iderant, le relachctncnt de l~
tCllS\On
_
mternnlionalc tt- " nccro\S:;cmcn
'
t cl c 1a (lonliul\(:l'

entre les Etnts ne pcuvcmt etre realises qlll' si I'cm
~dopte des mesures constituant dC's garanties pour
taus, ~t dans le cas pa:·ti~u[ier qui nous OCCllpC, si 1'01\
trouYe le ~oycn de d.lsslper la craintc cl'une nttaquc
par. surpnse dout I! est que~tion all (ipuxii'me
conSulerant.
.

lu COl

'anu1a
Cl\ pl
ine Sl

.lG: Le projd de resolutiDrt prend note cks declarations
faltes.3. la seance prcecl1ente par certains melllbreil dll
Conseli concernant l'ilnportanee particulii'j'(' de la
regIOn aretiqul', n~JI . sClIlcmc:lt P()U~ le~ 1',ly:; C[Lli y
PO~SCd~llt des teITltOlrcs, malS HUSSI pour tous eeux
q~l eS:lme~t C[u'nn comhat atomique dans cettl' n\gitln
dec~Jamera't une gucrrc totale, Cl: qui signilierait l'Hn!'~
antlssement de la paix mondialc.

47. This has [om the very outset been the attituce
of the va"t majority of the Council, as We have ::laid
lll'fllre. The (Jangcrs inherent ill a surprise attack were
the crux. of the debaLe at our I:arlier meeting. On behalf
nf my COllllLry I cxrrcssed the certaillty that thf'.~e
would have been no oCC2sion for the Soviet complaint
if the prl'liminary talks had been held as scheduled in
prcp:.Iration for a conference of heads of Government
which mighl kad to an effective settlement of the
::;~Tiou.s Jlroblcm~ now disturbing worlr] peaet'., in parllcnlnr the problem of disarmament.

T:lle a CLe, des le debut, comme nOIlS !'nvon~
deja dlt, la position adoptee par unc grande majorite
des membres du Conse,l. Les tlnngers que comportc
une attaque par surprise ont cOlls'.ituc le theine t:l'lltlllL
des dehats a la seance preeed(':n~e, .rai alors fait re~
mal'quer, an nom de mon pay,';, qne no us etians conyain·
cus ~ue la plainte de I'URSS n'nurait pas ell de rnisr)ll
{}'Hre si a cc momenl-Ia s'etaienl clument dcrou[ccs
les conferences preliminaires pour la preparation de III
con~er~nce d:"s chefs de gOllvcrncment cn vue dl' parvemT a un re.glement elflcace des !.lr:>yc:; prllhlrJnc~ qUi
Lrou;"lelJt la tranquillit~ dn mO::Jde, ct touL parlklllierement le \lroblemc du desannenH'nt.

,18. Measures to avert a surprise attack are among the
Il1CURIlrCS which, if broadened further, Would It::>d to
diSUtlllanlcnl. They are the preliminary stage; first
and foremost, because once international inspection
hus made it impossible to deliver a surprise attack,
peoples and Governments will have greater cod)derrce in negotiation and will ue more inclined to
renounce their military might. For we could hardly
('xpeel any Power to decide to do away w.th its forces
forthwith, or even to reduce them gre::ltly, in the absence 'l[ 1111 Lnlernational syslem to protect it from an
attack upon iL~ national security.

48.

.Ht The United States draft resolution has its origin
in a similar proposal tn~d('. by the United States Secretary of State on behalf of his own country, tlte United
Kingdom, France and Canada fit the meeting of the
SUb-Committee of thc Disarmament Commission on
2 August 1957; 2. that proposal, as we alllmow,. was
b~l.~ed on the originnl position adopted by PreSident
Ei.<>cn:lOwer.
50. The four-Power proposal of 2 August 1957 consis~
Led o[ two parts. The first wns of bro.ader seope. and
envisaged the inspection of all the contmC',lltal territory
of the United State!! o~ Aluerica, the whole of Al2.~ka
including the Aleutian i!!lands, all tl~e ten:itory of
Canada and all the territory of the Soviet Umon, md,
broadly speaking, the whole. ~f Europe. The second
proposal, whieh was less alIlUItlOuS but for that reason

cluil

'(aitcr

f7 /i. ,

4~:.

Les rneSUl'es visant a prcYC'llir une uttaqne 1)31'

surprise font rarti!' de ec!!es qui, dans Ull endrc pins

large, doivent conduirt. au desannement. Elks constituent une clape preliminaire, aYant tout pnrce que si
du fait de !'inspection internationale, unc atta'1 11C
par surprise devient impossible, les peuples et Ics gOllver~emcnts se sentiront plus conOants pom conduire
des negociations et pour renoncer il lellJ' pul~sallcc
miJitaire. On ne peut en efIet esperer qU'llIIC puissance
quelconque se dckider<l a se demunir lmmediutcmcnt
de ~es ressources militaircs ou a [cs reduir," com;iderublcment s'H n'existe pas un systCme international qui
la ficHe 3. l'abri cl'unc attaf/ue contrt' sa securite
nntionalc.
49. Le projet de resolution cle~ Etats-Unis a pour
antecedent une proposition du mClIle genrc qui a tlte
furl11u!ce pur le Secrp[Aire d'Etat dcs Etats-Unis, ,lU
nom de son pays, rill Royaumc~Uni, de la FraTlrl~ et
du Canada, 3 La seance du 2 aoilL 19G7 rlu Sons·C01l1iLe
de la Commission du desarmement 2, et qli, a son [our,
a etc inspiree. eOIDme nOllS le savons tous, p:H 1;.1 pro·
position orig-:nale du president Ei::;cnhower.
50, La proposition presentee par les quatrc jluisS311CCS le 2 nout 1957 se composait de deux parties.
La premiere avait une, portee tr&s vuste : file ellvisagt'ult
l'ir.spection de tout le territoire continentnl des ELatsUnis d'Amclique, de tout l'Ala~b, Y compris les iles
Ale(lutiennes, de tout le territoire du {;[lnada et de
tout le ter~itoire de l'Unioll sovictiquc, et, d'unc
fa(jon plus generale, de tout le territoire de l'Euror c •
I Dncumnls olficlelR de la Cnmlr.is.<i"" du Ilr."'rmemenl, Suppltmenl rle jaJ1lJicr b dlun:bre 1.9/;7, df!(~<.lmcnt DrillS. 8nl1e~e 1.

Ofli
Records of {Jle Disarmameni Commission, su.ppltmenl
cial
lor .r..m.ury 10 December 1~6'1, document DCj1lS, IlnnllX 1.
ii

11

-

easier to put into effect, was submitted in case the
Government of the Soviet Union should reject the first
proposal. As Mr. Lodge said at the last meeting, the
second proposal envisaged inspection of all the territory
north of the Arctic Circle belonging to the Soviet Union,
Canada, the United States (in this instance the reference is to the territory of Alaska), Denmark (in
respect of Greenland) and Norway; all the territory
of Canada, the United States and the Soviet Union west
of 1400 W.longitnde, eust of 160 0 E.longitude and north
of 500 N. latitude; all the remainder of the territoTV
of Alaska; all the remainder of the territory of th~
Kamchatka Peninsula; and Lhe Aleutian islands and
the KurH islands.

La deuxierne proposition, moins ambitieuse. mais par
cela me-me plns facile a mettre en reuvre, a ete pre_sentec
pour le cas OU le Gouvernement de l'Unioll sovietique
rejetterait la premiere. Cette deuxieme proposition
envisageait, comme l'a rappeIe M. Lodge a la derniere
seance, l'inspedion de tout le territoire septentrional
du cercle arctique appartenant a l'Union sovietique,
an Canada, !lUX Etats-Unis (dans ce cas, il s'agit uu
territoire de I'Alaska), au Danemark (en ce qui concerne
le territoire du Groenland), A la Norvege ; tout le territoire du Canada, des Etats-Unis et de l'Union sovietique se trouvant a }'ouest du 140 e degre. de longitude
0., a I'est du loOe degre de longitude Eo, et au nord du
50 e parallele de latitude N. ; tout le reste du territoire
de l'Alaska j tout le resLe dn territoire de la peninsule
du Kamtchatka; ainsi que les ilf'.s AlCoutiennes et
KourMs.

5t. This second proposal is the <lctual forerunner of

51. C'est cette deuxieme proposition qui est le veritable antecedent des paragraphes 1 et 2 du dispositif
du projet de resolution dont nous sommes saisis,
puisque ce projet recommande que soit promptemeut
ctablie la zone septentrionale d'inspection internationale
contre llne attaque par surprise, comprenant la rtgion
situee au nord du cercle arctique, avec certaines exceptions et additions, qu'avait consideree a Londn:s,
en aout 1957, le Sous-Comite de la Commission du desarmement, conformement a la proposition formulee
par les Etats-Unis, le Car.ada, la France et le RoyaumeDni.
52. Le paragraphe 2 dn dispositif du projet de resolution invite les dng Btats qui ant consiMre la proposition a Londres, ainsi que le Danemark et la Norvege,
et tout autre Etat ayant des territoires au nord du cercle
arctique qui desirerait que lesdits territoires soient
compris dans la zone d'inspection internationale, a
designer sans delai des representants, pour prendre
part a des entretiens qui auront lieu immediatement
afin de pnrvenir a un accord sur des dispositiolls techniqnes reguises. Cette invitation assure la participation,
au systeme cl'inspection internationale, de tOilS les pays
qui ant des tel'ritoires dons la region antique et qui,
comme il est permis de le penser, ant egalernent intcn~t
a la mise en placi' dans cetLe region d'un systeme
qui garllntirait lenr securiM nationale en prevenant
toute attnque par ~urprise, d'ou. qu'elle vicnne. Qu'il
nOllS soit pennis d'exprimer ici I'espoir que l'Union
sovietique accepLerll de pllrticiper a ce systeme d'inspection qui III protegcra contre tout danger comme
celui dont eBe supposait l'existence lorsqu'elle a depose
sa plainte devant le Conseil de securite, le 18 avril.

operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of the draft resolution
nllw before us; tbat is obvious Lrom the recommendation
that there be promptly established a northern zone of
international inspection against surprise atlac.k, compri~ing the area north of the Arctic Circle with certain
exceptions and additions, that wa~ considered by the
Sub-CommiLtee of the Disarmament Commission in
accordance with the proposal submitted by the United
States, Canada, France and the United Kingdom in
the course of the meetings held in London in August

1957.
52. Operative pnragraph 2 of the draft resolution
then calls upon the five Powers who were concerned
ill the London proposal, together with Denmark and
Norway, and any other States having territory north
(If the Arctic Circle which desire to have such territory
included in the zone of international inspection, to
designate representatives to participate in immediate
discussions with a view to agreeing on the technical
arrangements required. This is an invitation whicl1
assures the participation in the system of international
inspection of all those countries which have territory
in the Arctic area and it is to be hoped are also interested
in having their national security guaranteed there by
means of a system which would averL any surprise
attack, whencesoever it might come. Allow us to
express the hope that the Soviet Union will agree to
form part of this inspection system, which would protect it from any danger such as that with which it
believed itself threatened when it brought its complaint
before the Security Council on 18 April.
53. It will he necessary, as this same parah:rraph oi
the operative part of the draft resolution specifies, to
enter into agreements of a technical nature in order
to facilitate the work of the inspection teams, These
agreements would obviously have to be embodied in
pacts between the parties, based on good faith and
the firm determination to entry out what has been
agreed upon. As was already .~pecified in the London
proposals of August 1957, inspection to avert a possible
sllrprise attack would in every insLance entail aerial
inspection, with land observation posLs at the principal ports, railway junctions and central highways
and the most important airports. in a form to be agreed
upon.

12

53. Comme il ressort de cc rneme paragraphe, il sera
ncccssaire d'arriver a des accords de caractere technique
propres a faciliter la tflchc des equipes d'inspection,
llccord~ dont tous les aspects devront faire l'objet
d'une entente entre les parties, agissant de bonne foi
et ar.imees de la ferme volonte de respecter leurs
engagements. Comme les propositions presentees a
Londres au mois d'aout 1957 le precisaient deja, le
systeme destine a prcvenir une attaqne par surprise
Bventuelle devrait comporter dans tous le&- cas une
inspection aerienne avec pastes d'observation au
sol dans les grands ports, aux nceuds ferroviaires, sur
les principales grandes routes et les aerodromes importants, suivant des modalites convenues d'un commun
accord.

I

f

1
{,

I

.

I
t

1

I•

r
I

1

"'

54. All those measures to make the international
inspection system effective - measures which will
have to be adopted with the consent of all the parties
concerned after being thoroughly sifted in discussions
between the experts of the countries in q:uestionwill ~rovide in themselves a guarantee for everybody.
In thIS case there will be no question of imposing one's
will or of making a concession without obtaining a
corresponding advantage. We firmly believe that it
will be possible to reach an agreement on this basis
which will be satisfactory to the great Powers and the
other countries which have territories in the area north
of the Arctic Circle.

~4. T~u::cs ces m,:sures.. qui o~t pour objet d'assurer
1efficaclte du systeme mternatlOnal d'inspeetion, devront Hre prises avec le consentement de toure I
.
8 M
·
. t'
par t les m 'eressees et uprcs avoir et6 mises au poi t
lors d:entretiens en~re les experts des pays en caus:;
en SOl, eUes ~onshtuero,nt Hne garantie pour tous.
Aucune volonte ne sera lmposee et aucunc concession
ne sera faite sans contrepartie. Nous croyons fermement
qu'il se~it possible d'arriver, sur celle base, a un accord satH,falsant :pour les grandes puissances et pour
les antres pays qUi ont des territoires au nord du cercle
arctique.

55.

the possession of guided missiles and the progress made
in every branch of science oblige us of necessity to
regard every area of the world, including the Arctic
area, as vulnerable to attack in modern warfare.

55. Le developpement des armes de destruction en
masse, la possession de projectiles teleguides et les
progres de la science dans tous ses damaines no us
forcent a conclure que touies les regions de la terre
y compris la zone arctique, seraient vulnerables d:lll~
une guerre moderne,

5&. An international inspection system in this area
will be of positive practical benefit. We sincerely helieve
this, since there can be no doubt of the great effect
it will have on peoples' minds, seeing in it as they will
a resolute step towards the consideration of many of
the problems of disarmament, the first step towards
the solution of which might well be systems of inspection on the lines of that proposed in the United States
draft resolution.

56. Un sysleme d'inspection internationale dans cette
region aurait certainement de grands uvantagcs pratiques. Nous le croyons sinccrcment, car il produirait
sans aucun doute un grand eITet sur l'esprit des reurlns
qui y verraient un progrcs certain vers l'examen d'un
grand nombre des problemes du desarmcment, dont la
solution pourrait peut-etre comporter, comme premiere ctape, l'institution de systemes d'inspection
analogues a celui que propose le projet de resolution
des Etats-Unis.

57. At this point it is appropriate to recall the" openskies" proposal S made by the President of the United
States of America when he attended the Conference of
the I-leads of Government of the four great Powers, held
at Geneva in July 1955, a proposal specifically designed
to obviate the danger of surprise attack. It was a
question of an emergency measure, which by its very
nature was of a preliminary character, in the broader
negotiations on disarmament which were already taking
place at that time.

57. Je voudrais rappeler ici la proposiLion du 1\ cie!
ouverl)) faite par le President des Etats-Unis d'Amerique
lors de la Conference de Gcneve entre les quntr('; Gnwds
qui s'est tenue au mois de juillet 1955 3 , proposition
qui avait precisement pour but d'ecarter le danger
d'une attaque par surprise. Il s'agissait d'unc mesure
d'urgence a qui S3 nature mcme donnait un caractere
preliminaire et qui s'inserait dans le cadre plus vaste
des negotiations sur le desarmement qui se deroulnient
alors.

58. Looking at the situation from the point of view
of international equity, it seems to us that if an understanding were reached on the establishment of an international inspection system in the Arctic area it would
serve to encourage new and broader agreements on
the vexed question of disarmament. For all these
reasons the delegation of Panama will vote in favour
of the United States draft resolution which we are
considering.

58. Considerant la situation sous l'nngle de I'equite
internationale, nous pensons que le fait de s'entendre
sur l'etablissemenl d'un systeme d'inspectioll intcrnationale dans la region arctique ouvrirait la portes. de nouveaux et plus larges accords sur tout ce qui:
a trait a la question dimcile et contescee du desarmemento Pour tou'res ces raisons, la dClegation du
Panama votera en favenr du projet de resolution des
Etats-Unis.

59, My delegation has carefully studied the draft
resolution submitted by the Soviet Union [5/3997].
It is a reproduction of the draft resolution which the
Soviet delegation submitted for our consideration la~t
week [5/39931 and then withdrew before the Cou~cl1
could vote upon it. Only the last part adds anythmg
which calls for comment.

59, Ma delegation a etudic attentivement le pro~ct
de resolution de l'Union sovietique [5/39971. Ce proJct
reprend les termes de celui que la deh~gation sovill;tique nous a presente la semaine der!liere. [5/39931 ct
qu'elle a retire ensuite, avant que le Consell ,ne se pr?
nonce a son sujet par un vote. ~~ule la der,I:lcre pa.rile
du tcxte contient un notivel element qu 11 conVlent
d'examiner.

The development of weapons of mass destruction,

dCl

Icn

!dll

rfu

lu
'an

cc
lin(

17

60. Ma delegation estime qu'a premiere. vue, c:, ~ou­
veall tcxte pourrait faire croire que rUman sovletIqllc

60. In the opinion of my delegation, this new t~xt
might at first sight give the impression that the Sovlet

3
Docu.ments oflicicis de la Commission du desarmement, 511"pliment d'auril er decembre 1955, document DC/71, annexe 17.

~

Oflicial Records of Ihe Disarmamenl Commission, Sl1pplem~nt
tor April to Dt.cember 1965, document DC/n, annex 170.

13

fi

-

Union is making: >l concession. According to those
paragraphs, it would seem that the Soviet Union
nourishes firm and sincere hopes that the surnmlt
conference will sncceed in adopting concrete provisions
which will preclude the danger of surprise attack and
.in consequence the danger to which it drew the Security Council's attention in its complaint about the
flights by United States military aircraft in the Arctic
area. We entertain the same hope, although we consider
that the problem which has arisen in the Arctic area
calls for immediate measures which caD be confirmed
and strengthened later. at the summit conference.

fait une concession. D'apres ce texte, en efIet, il semblerait que l'Union soviHiquc espere fennemcnt et
sincerement qu'une conference des chefs de gouvernement parviendrait a adopter des mesures concretes
pOUf prevenir le danger d'une attaque par surprise,
et par cOllsequent le danger que I'Union sovietique
a signale au Conseil dans sa plainte touchant les vols
d'aeronefs militaires des Etats-Unis dans la region
arctique. NOllS nourrissons le mbne espoir, car nous
croyons que ]a situation qui s'est creee dans la region
arctique exige des Jnrsures immcdiates, qui pourraient
pellt-Hre etre ulterieurement confirmees et renforcces
par la conference des chefs de gouvernement.

G1. A calm analysis, however, leads us to conclude
that, if the danger which the Soviet Union sees in
those flights in the Arctic area is truly grave and their
ces~<1tion a matter of urgency, it is not possible to post~
pone the adoption of measures for the avoidance of
that danger until a summit conference, the date of
which is not even fixed yet, takes place. We therefore
feel that the text relating to the convening of such a
conference, the only new part of the draft resolution
submitted today by the Soviet Union, provides a dilatory measure which is inconsistent with the note of
urge.ncy in the Soviet complaint agninst the HighLs
of United States uircraft in the Arctic area. My delegation will therefore be obliged to vote against the
Soviet draft resolution.

61. Mais apres avoir analyse le problcmc a tete
reposee, DOllS conclnons que si le danger de ees vols
dans la region arctiqne denonce par rUnion sovietique est eltectivelOent grave, et s'il est urgent de
l'ecarter, l'adoption de mesures a cet dIet ne peut
attendre la reunion d'une conference des chefs de
gouvernemcnt, dOllt Oll ignore encore la dale de COJ1\'(J~
cation. Nous estimolls done que le texle relatif a la
convocation de ceUe conference, le senl qui soit nOllvcau
dans le projet de resolution presente aujourd'lmi par
l'Union :;ovietiquc, propose une mesure dilatoire qui
ne s'accorde pas avec le ton urgent de la plainte sovietiqne contre les vols d'aeronefs des Etats-Unis dam;
la region arctique. Aussi ma delegation se Yerra-t-eJIe
obligee de voter contre le projet de resolution sovietique.

62. Before concluding, may I say that my delegation
fully shares the point of view expressed in the amendment which the Swedish delegation has submitted
[8{3998} to the United States draft resolution and will
therefore vote in favour of it.

62. Avant que je Lermine, permettez-llloi de dire
que mn delegation partage enLierement le point de vue
exprimc dllns I'amendement presente par La delegation
de la Suede [S{3998] au projet de resolution des EtatsUnis, et qu'elle votera par consequent en faveur de
eet amendement.

133. Mr. TSlANG (China): I find it unnecessary to
make a long statement in the present debate because
my delegation, on numerous occasions in the past,
has made clear its views on the question under discussion. 0111)" last Monday, in a statement in this Council
[813111 meeling], I stressed the great fear that overshadows many countries of the world - the fear of surprise attack - and the important factor that this
lear constitutes ill the militllry and political problems
of the present day.

63. M. TSIANG (Chine) [lraduil de l'anglais] : le ne
crois pas necessaire d'intervenir longuement dans ee
debat, car ma delegation a eu mamtes fois l'occasion
de faire connaltre clairement ses vues sur la question.
Lundi dernier encore, j'ai insiste ici meme [813 e seance}
sur la grande peur qui p~se sur de nombreux pays du
monde - peur d'une attaque par surprise - et sur
I'importance de ce facteur dans les problemes militaires et politiques de I'heure presente.

64. r think it will suffice for mc to say that it is the
considered opinion of my delegation that an international ngreement to prevent surprise attack is the most
comlructive and frnitful single ste[1 that the nations can
take to relax international tension and to strengthen
world peace at the present moment. If the Powers
directly concerned cannot agree even on this onc step,
I do not see what else a summit conference, or any
kind of conference, call adlicve. As a matter of principle, therefore, my delegation will :mpport the draft
resolution which the United Slates delegation has
placed before the Council.

64. le puis done me borner a dire qu'apres mure
reflexion, ma delegation estime qu'un accord international destine a prevenir une attaque par surprise
serait actucllement la mesure la plus constructive
et la plus fructuense que pourraient prendre les nations
en vue de diminuer la tension internationale et de
renforcer la paix mondiale. Si les puissances directement
interessees ne parviennent rneme pas a se mettre d'accord sur cette mesure, je ne vois pas ce qu'une conference au sommet, Oll tonte autre conference, pourrait
apporter. Par principe, par consequent, la delegation
chinoise appuiera le projet de resolution que la delegation des Etats-Unis a presente au Conseil.

85. I note that the draft resolution does not go into
detail. Indeed, the technical aspects of international
inspection may, upon close study, turn out to be quite
complicated. The draft resolution therefore wisely
leaves the technical arrangements to a conference to

65. le constate que ce projet de resolution n'entre
pas dans le detail. Il est en efiet probable que lorsqu'on
les examinera de pres, les aspects techniques du problme de I'inspection internationaJe se reveleront tres
compIiques ; iI etait done sage de prevoir dans le projet

14

..

•

, c

I

J.
r

rr

I

I

f'
".
i

,~~

..

~r'

I'

be convened immediately. It does, however, present
a clear outline of the action to be taken.

tle resolution qu'une conference, qui serait convoquee
immMiatement, serail chargee de regIer les aspects
ter.lmiques du probleme. Toutefois, le projet indigue
clairemenl, dans leurs gran des ligne~, queUes seraient.
les mesures a prendre.

66. On the practical side, I wish to make two remarks.
The present proposal limits international inspection
to the Arctic Circle, together with Alaska, Kamchatka
and tlle nearby islands. Now, the usual objection,
whether expressed or implied, to any e!Tc-ctive intenmtional inspection system is that such international
inspection opens the way to international espionage
and to foreign interference in domestic afTairs. The
Arctic Circle - whether the part thllt belongs to the
Soviet Union or the part that belongs to other countries - has, I should thin!{, very ]j ttle to be spied
upon and vcry little to be interterfd with. This region
seems to he the logical region in which to start this
system of international inspection. Certainly, such a
system in the Arctic Circle would impose the least
burden and the least risks on the countries participating.

66. Sur le plan pratique, je voudrais presenter deux
observations. 'Tout d'abord, la proposition actueUe
Limite l'inspection territoriale an cercle arctique, a
l'Alaska, au Kamtchatka et aux ilcs voisines. L'objection habituelle, exprimee ou sous entenduc lorsqu'il
est question d'llll systeme d'inspection intcrnationaLe
efflcace, est que cettc inspection ouvre la voie a L'espionnage international et a l'ingerence etrangere
dans les affaires interieures de~ Etats. Or le cerde arc·
tique, qu'il s'agisse de la partie qui appartient a l'Union
sovietique ou de ceIle qui apparlient a d'autres pays,
n'offre guere, j'imagine, d'objets d'espiOlmage ou de
motifs d'ingerence. Il semble done logique de ehoisir
cette region pOllr les debuts du systeme d'inspection
internationaIe. Sans o.uclIn doute, c'est bien la qu'un
systeme de ce genre imIJoserait le moins de charges
et femit comir le moins de rbgues aux pays participants.

67. There is a second remark I would like to make.
The benefits that accrue from such a scheme are common to all and in no way confined to one State or one
group of States as against some other State or some
other group of States. Among the beneficiaries would,
naturally, be both the USSR and the United States.
Since the Soviet Union professes to be deeply concerned
with the flight of American military aircraft, I would
have thought that it would welcome this present
proposal.

67. le voudrais maintenant formuler une tleuxieme
observntion. Les "vantages que comporte le plan prevu
s'etendent a tOllS et ne ~onL en aucnne malliere limites
a un Et8t Oll fl Ul! groupe d'Etats, par opposition a UIl
aUITe ELat ou a Ull autre groupe d'Etats. Au nombre
des beneficiaires seraient naturellement l'URSS, aus.'>l
biell que les Etats-Vnis, Puisque l'Union sovietit}ue
pretend s'inquieter vivement des vols d'aeronefs
militaires des Etats-Unis, j'avais pense qu'elle se feliciterait d'une telle proposition.

68. That is all I have to say on this draft resolution,
for which I shall vote.

68. Je n'ai rien d'autre a ajouter an ~lljet de ce projet de resolution, en favenr duquel je voLerai.

69. We have before us also a Soviet draft resolution.
It is the same as the one placed before us on Monday
of lasl week, with three paragraphs added. The addition
of lllOse paragraphs does not make the dmft l'esolution
more acceptable to my delegation than the original
was last Monday.

Nous sommes egalemenl saisis d'tm prQjet de
resolution sovie.tique. Il est identiqnc a celui qui nOlls.
a rite soumis la semaine derniere, si ce n'est que trois
paragraphes y ont ete ajontes. Pour roa delegation,
l'adjonction de Cl'S paragraphes ne rmd pas ce projet
de resolution plus acceptable que ne L'etait Le projet
initial.

70. We have also before us a Swedisb amendment.
My delegation will study it carefully. I am not in a
position Lo say anything fmal. For the moment perhaps
I may be permitted to olier one preliminary remark.
I find it imprudent for the Security Council to try to
Lead the peoples of the world to put all their eggs in
one basl,et - the basket of the summit conference.

70. Enfin, nous sornmes saisis d'un amendement
suedois. Ma delegation etudiera aLtentivement cc
texte ; je ne suh ptlS, pOllr le moment, en mesllre de me
prononcer delinitivement a SOll sujet. Qu'il me soit
cependant permis de faire une observation preIiminaire :
je crois que le Conseil de securite n'agirait pas prudemment en conduisant Les peuples dll monde Et miser
tont sur In mrme carte, a savoir la conference «au
sommet n.

71. Mr. KHALAF (Iraq): At the 813th meeting of
the Council, speaking for my Government, I was one
of those who, while refusing to entertain the charges
of the Soviet delegation, expressed the hope that some
agreement would be reached to eliminate the danger
of a surprise attack. I said then: " As long as no agreement has been reached on measures to eliminate the
danger of such an attack the world is going to live in
constant fear and terror." [813th meeting, para. 110].
It is only appropriate, therefore, for my delegation,
like other delegations, to note with satisfaction the
action of the United States Government in coming
forward with a draft resolution which is consisteat

71. l\L KHALAF (Irak) [lraduil de l'anglaisJ : A la
8l3 e seance du Conseil, parlant au nom de mon gouvernement, j'ai cLc parmi ceux qui, tout en refusant d'admettre les accusations de la delegation sovieLique,
ont exprime l'espoir que quelque accord serait conclu
en vue d'ecarter le danger d'une attaque par sllrprise.
,J'ai dit alors que Ij tant qu'aucun accord n'aura ete
conclu sur les mesures propres a cHminer le danger
d'une attaque de ce genre, le monde vivra dans une
terreur et une crainle constantes". [813e .~eance, par.
110.] Il est done parfaitement logique que ma deLegation, comme d'autres dclCgrltions, note uvec S:ttisfaction
l'initiative que le Gouvernemcnt des Etats-Uuis a

69.

15

uil
aitl
.C,

'll.

~

..

with its former .. open-.~lcilO~ " proposal and its proposal
for an international agreement on measures to reduce
the danger of surprjse attnck. This is not only in line
with the promise of the United States Government
to do its best to reduce world tension, but it also takes
into consideration the wishes of members of the Security Council and the hopes and flspiratiolls of all the
peoples of the world.

prise en presentant au Canseil un proiet de resolution
en harmonie avec ses propositions precedentes, relatives au «( ciel ouvert" et a un accord international
sur des mesures propres a reduirc le danger d'une
attaque par surprise. Cette initiativo n'est pas sculement conforme a la promesse du Gouvernemcnt dcs
Etats-Unis de faire tout ce qui est en son pouvoir en
vue de diminuer la tension internationale; elle tient
compte egalement des vccux des membres du Conseil
de securite, des espoirs et des aspirations de taus les
peltples du ll1onde.

72. My delegation is prepared, therefore, to l':upport
the draft resolution SLlbmitted by the United States
delegation. We will support any measures which would,
in the words of the draft resolution itself, "allay fears
of. , _massive surprise attack" and" contribute to the
increase of confIdence among States."

C'est pourquoi la delegation irakienne se propose
de voter en faveur du projet de resolution presente
par la delegation des Etats-Unis. Nous appuierons
toui;e mesurc de nature a dissiper la crainte d'une
attaque massive par surprise et qui contribuerait a
aceroitre la conliance entre les Etats, comme il est dit
dans le projet de resolution.

73. Although we realize that only those countries
directly con.cerned would take part in the proposed
uiscussions to esbJblish the northern zone of inspection
against surprise atlilck, we nevertheless are convinced
tl1at every coulltry will be both interested in seeing
to it that those discussions are slarted immediately
and well advi':icd to do so.

73. Nous sommes certes c<lnscients du fait que seuls
lcs pays directcment intcresses prendraient part aux
entretiens envisages en vue de creer la zone septentrionnle d'inspedion contre une attaque par surprise,
mais nous aVOilS ccpendant la conviction qu'il serait
de l'inter€! de tous les pays de travailler it ce que ccs
entretiens soient entrepris irnmectiatement.

74. It is 0111' sincere hope that the unanimous adoption of this draft resolution will conlribute to the
creation of an atmosphere of good will and mutual
conftdence as the fir~t step towards a satisfactory agreement on disarmament.

74. Nous esperons sincerement que ce projet de resolution sera adopte a l'unanimite, ce qui contribuerait
a creel' une atmosphere de bonne volonte et de connnnce mutuelle, premier pas vel'S un accord satisfaisant
sur le desarmemen l.

75.

As for the new draft resolution submitted by the
delegation of the Soviet Union [Sj399?'] we notice that
all the points on whicll our opposition to the original
draft was based have been retained in the new one.
Our position on this, therefore, remains basically unchanged. My delegation may have more to say on this
draft resolution at a later stage.

75. En ce qui concerne le nouveau projet de resolution
presente par la delegaLion de rUn ion sovietiqne [Sf
3997], nons constntons qu'on y rctroltvc taus les points
sur lcsquels se fondait natre opposition au texte initial.
Notre position a l'egard de celui-ci reste done essentiellement la meme. La delegation irakienne se re.serve
le droit de revenir sur ce projet de resolution.

76.

Turning to the Swedish amendment, my delegation
believes that it deserves careful consideralion by the
Council, and thus we :;hall in due course cxplain our
position on it.

76. En ce qui concerne l'amendement presente par
la deh~gation de la SuMe, nous estimons qu'il merite
un examen attentif de la part du Conseil el: nous ferons
connaitre notre position sur ce textc en temps opportun.

77. The PRESIDENT: I should like to speok briefly
in my capacity as representative of the UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

77.

78. Let me say, as our meeting draws towards it,
close, that the support accorded to our draft resolulion
today is very gratifying.

78. Qu'il me soit permis de dire, alms que nous approchons de la fin de cettc seance, que l'appui accorde
aujourd'hui a notre proiet de resolution est fort encourageant.

79.

The amendment of the representative of Sweden
will receive our careful study. We are most obliged
[or what he said.

79. Nous etudierons attentivement l'amendement prcsente par le representant de la Suede que nailS remcrcions vivement de sa dec!ar<l tion.

80. I also agree with what has been said about the
deprei!>'Sing and discouraging nature of the Soviet
statement. If persistt'.d in without change, it would be
a heartbreaking response to what the United Kingdom
representative called a serious and valuable proposal.
We hope that the passage of a few days will result in
a change of mbd.

80. Je souscris egalement it ce qui a Cte dit quant au
caractcre deprimant et decQurageant de la declaration
sovietique. Si l'attitude qu'elle traduit persistait, l'ac~
cueil fait a ce que le representant du H.oyaume~Uni a
appele une proposition serieuse et utile serait aflligeant.
Nous esperons que cette attitude pourra se modiflCr
cl'ici quelques jours.

81. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I recognize the
Secretary-General.

81. Parlan"! maintenant en tant que PRESIDENT,
je donne la parole au Secretaire general.

72.

Le PRESIDENT (lraduil de I'anglais) : Jc
\'oudrais dire quelques mots en qualite de representant
des E:rATS-UNIS D'A:i\OlERIQUE.

16

82. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Mr, President, I
thank you for granting me the floor. It is most unusual,
as you know, for the Secretary-General to intervene
in a debate of the Security Council. Indeed, it would
be out of order and rightly criticized if such 2n intervention on his part would mean the taking of sides in
a conflict before the Security Council.

82. Le SECR:t:TAIRE GENERAL (lraduil de l'anglais) : Je vous remercic, Lvfonsieur le President, de
m'avoir donne la parole. Il est tout a fait exceptionnel,
comme vous le ~avez, que le Seenitaire general intervienne dans un debat du Conseil de securiLe. A vrai
dire, U!l(' telle intervention de J;;a part serait deplac<ie.
et forL justement critiquce, si elle consistait a prendre
parti dans un con niL dont le Conseil de securite est
saisi.

83. However, on a previous occasion I have stated
as my opinion that the Secretary-General has not only
the right but the duty to intervene when he feels
that he should do so in support of the purposes of this
Organization and the principles laid down in the Charter. Of course, he cannot assume for himself any kind
of right to, so to say, «speak for man," but /te must
subordinate himself to his duty to express the significance of the aspirations of man, :Is set out in the
Charter, for problems before this Council or the General
Assembly.

83. J'ai cependanL indique Ulle fois deja qu'a mon
avis le Secretaire gen~ral a non seulement le droit,
mais aussi le devoir d'intervenir lorsqu'il juge necessaire de le faire pour scrvir les buts de l'Organisation
et les principes enonces dans la Chartc. Naturellement,
il ne peut en aucune fa90n s'arroger le droit de parler,
pour ainsi dire, ( au nom de l'hllmanite )), mais iI doit
s'acquitter du devoir qui lui incombe de signaler I'incidence des aspirations de l'humanite, telles qn'elles sont
exprimees dans la Charle, sur les probH:mes dont le
COllseil ou l'Assemblte generale s'occupe.

84. You may recall that some time ago, in a pre~s
conference, I found reason to welcome the decision of
the Soviet Union to suspend unilaterally tests o[
atomic bombs. I did so solely on the basis of an evaluation of the possible impact of this move on tlle
stalemate reached in the disarmament debate. In the
same spirit and on the same basis, I wish tod<lY to
welcome the initiative taken by the United States in
presenting a proposal which might break '.lp the stalemate from the angle of a limited system of inspection.
I note that this is in response to the expressions by the
Soviet Union of its fear for the possible consequences,
in a direction of immediate concern to it, of the prestnt
state of extreme preparedness in the field of armaments.

84. Vous vous rappellercz peut-etre qu'il y a quelque
temps, au coul's d'une conference de presse, iI m'esl
apparu justiiil~ de louer la decision prise par l'Union
sovietique de stlspendre unilateralement les essais de
bombes atomiques. Je ne l'ai fait qu'en pensant aux
repercussions cVfutuelles de cette decision sur l'impasse
dans laquelle se trouvent les discussions reJatives au
desannement. le voudrais aujourd'hui, dans le meme
esprit et en m'inspinmt des memes considerations.
rendre hommage a I'initiative que les Etats-Unis
ant prise en presentant Hne propositiDn qui pOllrrait
permettrc de trotlvcr une issue en ce qui concerne UIl
systeme d'inspection Iimitc. le note que cette proposition est faite en reponse aux craintes exprimees par
l'Union sovietique touchant les consequence!! que
l'etat de preparation en matiere d'armements, actuellement POllSSe au plus hant point, risque d'uvoir dans.
un secteur qui l'interesse immediatement.

85. It would be against my rights and duties to comment on the background of the Soviet initiative or
of the United States response. I am here concerned
only with the consequences. The stalemate in the field
of disarmament has been permitted to last far too long.
Attempts to break it through negotiations have so
far proved of no avaiL I think there are reasons of difTerent kinds behind this deeply worrying failUre. One
is that in a sense Governments have been too ambitious,
not being satisfied with just making a dent in this
intricate and vital problem from which a rift could
develop, opening up the possibilities of a true exchange
of views.

85. J'outrepasserais mes droits et fuillirais a mes devoirs si j'cvoquais l'ongine de l'iniLiative sovietique.
ou de la reponse des Etuts-Unis. Jc ne pense id qu'a
leurs consequences. L'impasse en ll1atierc de desarmement n'a que trop longtemps dun~. Lcs efforts,
dcployes pour s'ell degager grace it des negociations.
se sont reveles vains jusqu'it. present. Je crois qu'il
ya a eet echec profonctement inquietant des raisons
de plusienrs ordres. L'une d'elles est quI.'. les gl':lUvernements, ont etc, en un sens, trop ambiticux et n'onl pas.
voulu se contenter d'introduire, dans cc probleme
complexe et capital, llll coin qui leur aurait permis
ensuite de faire une veritable breche, ouvrant la voie:
a un reel echange de vues.

86. Another reason has been a tendency for each
Government to wait for others to take the first step.
Still another reason, and of course the basic one, is
the crisis of trust from which all mankind is suffering
at the present juncture and which is reflected in an
unwillingness to take any moves in a positive direction
at their face value and a ter;.dency to hold back a positive response because of a fear of being misled.

8G. La deuxiemc raisoll a Cte la tendance de chaque
gouvernemenl a a1.tendrr qu'autrui fasse le premier pas.
Line autre raison enJin, qUi est, bien entendu, la principale, c'est la crise de conHance dont -toute I'humanite
soufTre actuelJement et qui se traduit par de la rePllgnance a considcrer comme ne enchant rien tOlLte
mcsurc positive et par une tendance it. difIerer toute.
reaction pO:'iitive, de crainte de se faire duper.

87. Such initiatives as those to which 1 have referred,
one of which is Loday being considered by the Security
Council, are steps which could make a dent in the disar-

87. Des initiatives comme celles dont rai parle, et
dont l'une est examinee aujourd'hui par le Conseil de
securite, pOllrraient avoir pour eilet d'entamer le pro-

17

,

,

mamcnt problem. They might have ~ major impact if
treated in good faith which is, of cour~e. not the same
as to let down one's guard. And they could, ir fonowed
through, provide a first frail basis for the development
of some kind of trust.

bleme du desarmement. Elles pourraient avail' une ind
dence profonde si on les acueillait en toute bonne
foi _. cc qui, bien entendu, ne signirJe pas baisser sa
garde - et elles pourraient, si on leur donnait suite,
jeter les bases, fragiles encore, d'une certaine forme
de coniiance.

88. Each Go\'emmerr~ i~ in close contact with the
opinion of the man in the sLTeet in its own country.
For that reason, ] am sure that all Governments are
in a position to confirm my statement that the peoples
are eagerly ll.Ild anxiously expecting leadership to
bring them out of tlte presellt nightmare. The Government taking a frnitflll initiative will be hailed as a
benefactor by the peoples. The Governments responding ill a posiLive spirit so as to give efIect to such an
attempt to reverse present developments will share
the merit with the one who took the first step,

88. Chaqlle gouvernement sait fore bieH quelle est
l'opillion de l'!lomme de la rue dans son propre pays.
C'est pourqlLoi je suis certain que to us les gou\'ernemCllls sont en mesure de confirmer que les pellples
attendent avee impatience et anxiete qu'on les fasse
sorbr du cauchcmar actucl. Tout gouvernemcILt prenant line iniliative fructueuse sera con~idt~re par les
pel1plcs c.omme un bienfaiteur. Les gauvernemt'.uts
qui accueilleront une ~elle initiative dans un esprit
positif, de manie.re a faire abontir cetl;e tentative de
renverser le conrs actud des chases, en partageront le
merite avec celui qui aum fait le premier pas.

89. I have felt it incumbent on me to state these
few simple reactions. I have done so, as I said, under
my obligations to the peoples whose voice is reflected
in the Charter nnder which I am aeUng. I trust that
my intervention will not he misinterpreted as a taking
of sides, but merely as an expression of profound feelings which are current all over tlte world and which
have a right to be heard here also, ontside the framework
of Government policies.

89. .J'ai pense qu'il (Hait de mon devoir d'exposer
ces quelques rCflctions simples. Je l'ai fait, comme je
vous I'ai dit, par sOllci des obligations qui m'incombent
a I'egard des peuples dontla voix se fait clltendre dans
cette Charle meme qui guide mes aetes. J'espere que
man intervention ne sera pas intcrpretee Et tort comme
une prise de position entre les theses en presence, mais
simplement comme I'expression de sentiments profOllds
qui existent dans le monde entier et qui ant le droit
de s'exprimcr id aussi, hors du clldre des politiques
nationalcs.

90. I hope that each onc of the Governments represented around this table will wish to try out thc line
of trust as a wa)' out of the disintegration and decline
under which we now all suffer,

90. J'espere que chacun des gouvernement__ reprcsentes
autour de cetle table souhaiteru explorer les possibilites
qu'ofrre la conftance, comme moycn de mettre fm Et la
desinll~gration et au declin dont nOllS souarons taus
aducllement.

91. The PRESIDENT: There are no more spcakers
on the list, Is there any suggestion as to adjournment?

91. Le PRES1DENT (iradllit de l'allglais) : Il n'y a
pas d'autre orateur inseril. Quelqu'un a-t-il des suggestions a faire en Cl.'. qui concerne l'ajournement de la
discussion 1

92. Mr. GEOHGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): This morning we received a USSR draft resolution. At the end of the morning we received the text
of a Swedish amendment to the draft resolution tabled
by the United States, Several delegations have reserved
the riglJt, as I did, to speak later on these two texts
w]len they have ~tudied them and have been able to
receive instructions from their Governments. Finally,
we have just heard a very important statement by the
Secretal'y-General of the United Nation~, whicT) rellects
his customary impartiality and objectivity and his
constant care to ensure the application of the principles
of the Charter. I thillk this statement deserves careful
study, not only by each one of us but also by our Governments, and this wjI] probably take two days. [ would
therefore propose, if my colleagues in the Council agree,
that we adjourn until Friday moming, 2 May,

92. M. GEORGES-PICOT (France) : Nous avons
re<;u communication, cc matin, d'un projet de resolution
de l'Union des Republiques socialisees sovietiques.
Nous avons ret;ll, en fm de matinee, le texte d'un projet
d'amendement de la Suede au projet de resolution deposc
par les Etats-Unis, Plusieurs dcll~gations ont indiquc
qu'elles se reservaient, commc je I'ai fait d'ailleurs,
de reprendre la parole ulterieurement sur ces deux
textes, apres les avoir etudies et avoir de en mesure
de recevoir des instructions de lenrs gouverncments.
Enfm, nous venons d'entendre lJne declaration tres
importante du Secretaire general, qui rel1ete son impartialite et son objectivite habituelles, son souci constant
dc faire progresser l'applica lion des principes de la
Charte. .le crois que cette declaration mcrite d'etre
etudiee soigneusement, non seulement par chacun
d'el1tre nous mais par nos gouvernements et que cela
prendra hien un delai de 48 heures, C'est pourquoi je
proposerai, si les mcmbres du Conseil sont d'accord,
que nous nails ajournions a vendredi matin, 2 mai.

93. The PRESIDENT: The t~l'lll of the present occupant of the Chair will expire at midnight tomorrow
night, at which time he becomes fundus officio. The
·date which is suggested by the representative of

Le PHESrDENT (traduit de l'anglais) ~ Man
mandat presidentiel expire demain a minuit. A la date
proposee par le representant de la France, c'e.st le
representant du Canada qui occupera le fauteuil pre-

M

93,

18

.. ,'

France will fall within the time during which the representative of Canada will be President. I should like,
therefore, to ask him whether that date is suitable to
him.

sidenticl. le voudrai~ (lone demander au representant
du Canada si cette date lui convient.

94-. Mt. RITCHIE (Canada): The date 2 MIlY iii quite
agreeable 'Lo me. It is, of course, for the members of
the Council to decide whethet' that will be the date
chosen.

94. M. RlTCHIE (Canada) [lraduil de rang/Ilis] :
La date du 2 mai me convient parfaitement. 11 appartient, bien entendu, aux. membres du Conseil de prendre
une decision a cc snjet.

95. The PRESIDENT: Does any member wish to
be heard on this subject? Since there are no objections
we will adjourn until 11 o'clock, Friday morning,
2 May.

95. Le PRESIDENT (lraduit de l'anyrais) : Quelqu'un
desire-t-i1 prendre la p[lrole sur ce point? Puisqu'il
n'y a pas d'objections, la prochaine seance aura lieu
le vendredi 2 mai, a 11 hellres.

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

La seance est levee a 17 h. 40.

,')

19
"

SALES AGENTS fOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
bEPOSITAIRES PES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
PA~I;f"'N

AIIGEN1INA,.AlGeNTlNe
Id".,lol S"d~~~,J<~n' S.lI .. ~IJi,,~ JM,
I ••"", Ai,.,.

UANCE
Edjri.e, A, Pldon"
P.rI, (V.).

I.UST~AJ.IA.AlISTRI\U~

GERMANY.ALlEMA~NE

11. A. Godd~,<l A.M,P. Bld~ .• 50 /,Il11.,

St., N.,I~ Sydr.y,

'0 Qu ... h, Melb.ur"~.
M.lbou". Uni,."lly f ..", Corlt•• N.J,
\,,1.,1•.

a. Wull,,,'.,If,M.,,<., ~11!1~",'I'.". 10,
!.l.~~ ...

IilG1U!>\·1l!lGlQUE

M.".g.';., d. I.

A~en<o It
Pr.... S.A.,
1~·22, 10. do '",oil, J'"ull...
W. H, '",llh .I. SO". 71-75, bour..,~rd

Adolph..Mox, B,uxollo,.
10LlVI...·BOUYIE
~.I"d" ••" (o,iIIo '72, l. p...

t·.,.,{"

111 .•• Porl·.u.~rin,".
~Ol>lDiJRAS

''''MBO''I'''_C'''MBO~G~
P.p-Ierl.-ll~,dr!. N•• ,.II •• A,1b,,· P.,.

cnIO~·(Hl.-<l."

~d" Shcn~hal.

COLO/<lBIA,rolOMIIE
libr..-I. A",',!,o, M.~.III".
lIn,.ri, Bu'~'olt Clol"lo, 50g.I/.
Lib,..1o No,i, •• 1 lId•., g""."~"'tI
C05lA RI~A·COSIJl·~ICA
f,.io< 11","~001, ,\portad. 1313, Son

•.

J.II'. -

CUBA.
10 l::OJ. h)~., o·lo.'ny 4J5, la Hoi.co.
CU(1I0l10VAKIA-rCHiCOllQV AeUIE
C.,k.,[o,on.'y Sp;'.volo[, Na,odn· TrI~.
t, P,.h. 1.
D£NMA,RK·OANlM_RK
flna' M.ok,~ou,d, lfd., N.".~.d. 6,
Kobor.ho.o, K,
DOMINICAN lIil'UlUC·
U'UUIOUE POMI'lICAlfon
Llb,.rlo Oom;.T,a.", M.".d., ~~. Clu.
dod T'ulll[o.
[CU.o\lIOR.EQUAnUR
~lbrc,{o CI,n,lfi,a, Cu~y"q,1I c.d Q.uTt~.
1'1 5ALVADOR·sALVAOOI!
-Man,.) No"" y C'o" 10. A... i<l" ,",
lr, S,n ~ol,odo',
fINLANll·tINLANll[
A'<ot.eml ,e" Kirjok.upp., 2 I( .",,\otu,
l1.hln'i.

,dill".

lib,.[,l. "A I~ Ca,o""lle", Boil. pe,'o[.

UA2lL·BR~S1t

I~ro.to,

W. E, S.a'bo,h, Go,e""',a". 25_2'.
nln 112').
aReECE_GRtl:E
KO.tt"'~M mao~,h.,., 2D Sl~dion S,,..I,
AI,"".,.
GUATEMAlA
Sod.dod oCII.oml,. fin.o,I.""
1,1•. D.'po<l,~ 207, 60 A".ida 14-33,
Zo," 1, Guetornolo CIIy.
HAITI

".,.rlo Agl" 1;0 d. lo",!ro. 56. fo.l.
ud B~~ flo",.n'•.

:.ke cou .. !o"klh op , Th. A"o,:ol.<l
N.""pop'" of C.ylo., Ltd,. r. O. mu
244, Col.",bo.
OHILE_(HllI
.,m,,';.1 ~.I Pocl1;'a, Ah"rnod. 'i,
S.. nfl.,o.
'.Ibro,j, I·',n" c",;II. 205. S""lr"ll•.
rHIN4·CHINE
Th. Wori~ Book Co" lld" 91 Chu",
king Rood. l,t 5"11.... lolpeh, Toi... n,
Th. Corn"'.,,;o' p"" L'~" 211 H.oo.

R. !;"n,,~midl, 1(0!!0"I,.". 40, f,onl.
I"r'/ ....,o; •.
EI...rllk Me.r.', HOIJp,t,o"e 101,Eerli••
S,hon,b.rl/'
Al••"".", />Iom, 5.,~190'" " WI •••
ba~.o.

AlISlRIA·AUTRlCHl
Coe.ld 50 C." G,.b., 31, Wlo., 1.

ton. 14, O . . nO. h"lI"h., f'•• ",·Ponh.
CAIiADA
~ye"o" ~"'" 199 0""0. ~f. w.. t,

n, ,~. so.rn.l.

Llb'.r!o P~,,,,m.,;,ono, Ttgu"gr>lp •.
~ONG

KONG·t10NC;,1I0NG

Th, Swl,don Baok Co., 25 NOlhol R.od,
K."loo•.
IC£lANO_'SIANDE
lako,."lol\ S;gl.,or EyClund",nor H.
f., A"tu"h".11 ll, R.f~",,,;k.
INOI ..·iNOf
0,1.01 lo.g,,~"., (01'0110, B.",bay, Mo
cl,~. and t-..w Oolhi,
N.",
O,I",d 8••• " S,o(;onory Co.,
O.lh; ••d (ol,"lfD.
P. \I.'ndo,~orY It.(o.• M.drc••
INDPNEStll_INDO~ES:I[

Po"Lonau"o., Itd., G"'''09 S.'ari .'.
Di·korlo.

"'"

"G'i!'y", d2, 0'·.0\1' f ..<lo..,I, -.h"an.
IRAQ_IRA~

Moo~.".I.·, Bo"k,~op, Boah•• d.
ISRAEL
II"n"lein', hak'lo'o, U,).. :J~ Alle"~y
R•••• T&I·"'.I,.
ITALY·ITALI'
Llb",;o C.m">l":,,",,,!o 5u""n;, Y"
Gin, Cap!","1 26, FI",.•.
JAPAN_JArON
M.",". eo"'pon,·. 11,1.," To<l.NIc~am ••
Nibonba,h, T.kyo.
l.~ANON_1 tRAN
Llb<uirj. Unl""e1[., .'1r.utlo.
LII9IIA
J. Momolu Kom';r•• M."ovi.,

LUXEMBOURG

Lib'a;';. J. 5,hu",,,,.,, tI~.mboulg.
ME~KO·/I;~KIQlJt

Eoihr;oT He'mo' S.A., l~n.cI. /'\o,l,co;
Al, Mo,i,., D,f.
NllHEIlIANDS.f,l;. VS·BA'
N.Y. M~,t ,,", N;i~olf. loog. "o~rhoul
9. ·,.G,ovonhooe
N~\'I UAIAND·NOUVELlE.2£lAN[H
Unit•• N.,;"o, ......"ot;'n.1 N,W Z.o.
land, c.P,O_ 1011, W.I;nglon
NOlW"Y·NORY'Oe
Jt>han c;'>ndr r••"rn Fo,l.g. Kr. ;,0.
g.'·,gl. 7 ... 0,10.

n, Po,I.,on Co-o"."n!,. Boo. s,,<lof)I,
0",,,,,, E,,~ ~"ki.lon (~"~ ~l Chl·lagong).
"'obli,h." Unit.d L'd., lah?r•.
Th''''o' & Jh.", ••, X.,o,1», J.

PANAMA
Jo"

Man'.dot, PI••• d. A'''''go. 1',,_

nam",
P""A<illA'f

Age"c;. d. libr.,lo. d, Solvod., 1'11=,

1',,,",. N•. J9·A3. A,"n"~n.

Co'l. Pto.
PERU.PEROU

till,.,;. '"toroodonol d.1 l""~. 5..1..,
ti",o ,,.,cl A'eq_i"".
PHILlPPIl'lES
....,.m.".' a",," S'.'o, 7/9 R;•• I Ave""",
Monlla.

PORTUGA~

LI,,"rlo Rodr;~"••,
bo •.

n. Rua Au,"", lie

SINGAPORE·SINGAPOUR

Th. CHy Bo.' ~t.,., lid., Wl",h.,,",
Hou". Collyo, Q.or.
SPAII~·ESPAGl'Il

libT.,I" iOl<h, I J Ro'do Un'•• "ld"d,

Ra".'"",.

11/:",(0 Myno;·>,o.,o, t090'<O 38, Mo.
Md
5WEDEi',l·SUEOE
C, c, rdl,~'. K,ng!. IJo,bokh'Nle"J A.JI,
f .. d'nofon 2. So<~hol,".
SWlf7.ERlANO_\UI~H

Uhro;.1e Poy.f 5, ..... t.V'OM'. G.nh••
finn' R"""i,,,,,1!, I(;,d,~o"o 17, Z"d,~ 1.
THAllAND·TI14ILANOI
Pr",""on Mil Lid •• 35 Cho~,ow~' Roed,
Wo, Tu~, ~~".k"k
TUR~n_TllRQ\JIE

lIbroltl. lIo".lfo, 461 I,lik]ol (add.,;,
B.y"glu. t.to"bul.
UN)QN 01 5QUTH Af~I(A_
UNION 5UD_A'RICAtNf
Van ~,h<>lk'. 9o~].,IQ" (~fy.1. l,d., a.~

7H, ~,.tor1o.
UNITW ARAB RePUBliC.
RlPUBLIQUE ARABE UNIE
lbralri. "~o ~ •• ol",o" d·'gypl.Y, ,
So, Adl y Po>l.", Colro.
Llbro;';. U"'",,.II., Ooma'.
UNITED KINGOOM.ROYAUI~E.lJNI
Ii, M. Sfot;o,",y Om,., P,C'. b~ 569.
l."d.", 5.E.I (."d 01 H,M,S.O. '~'P').
UNIUD 5TAU5 OF AMERII:A_
IiTAn_UNIS D'AMERIQUE
1'!.'n~lion"[ lloo"",.'" 5.,,:, .. (.lu",.
~i. Uni".e,lly Pro", 19"'0 Brood .... y,
N." York 27, N. Y.
URUQUAY
b~, .... to<;~c d. EJI!o'/ol", Pro'. H.
O'[I'a. A,. n d. J.lio 1113, M,nla.
,id.",
I'EI'~WnA

"b,e,lo <1..1 E,'•• A, M;r.""., "" 5~,
'dl. G.lip&n, Cora'"'.
YIH.N,\M
1'0/'.t.,I•.1il>,,;,;0 Nou".ile, AI"'" 1'0'·
lnll, ~~1I0 po",,]. 2$3, 5.1\Qn
YUGOSlA Vt .... YOUGOSLAVI E
C".k.,j."" Zolo.bo, lIvblja,o. Slo'·8"la.
0".'00
P.."".".
J,go.I...", ••
~.il<ln. To""·i. 271t1. hO\!rod.
(J8e~)

O,d.r, .nd ;"q~i,l" 'conI '.v.lri" w/'". '01.. 09 ..1, he"

L.. <~""'o."v'.' d~,"cn<ial <i~ """"gM",.t, ""'.0""1 d.

nor JoI b.,n .ppol.l." ,"oy b. >enl I., So,., 'nd Ci"ol.liort

ad,."Oo, 6 la S.,lIa .. of., V"""" .t cl, ;0 dbl,lbutlon,
O·qo"I<olian d" Nol,'~", 1).10,. N.,.,·YorIIElofJ.IJ"J. '£.10"".
,i~".), "v ~ I" Sool;o" d..
O,ga"i'oi,O" ~., ""o,lon,
tJ"o" r,J.j, <I., Not.,." G."..'," (Sui".).

S.,I,"., U,P." N.l'."" N,w York, /J.S.A., or S.I" S.,ltan,
U"it.~ N..,;oo.Ofl;:o, p~lol' d" Nail"""

G.n",,,, S.. ibe,;.o<l,

poy, ,,~ 11 o'ui". p.' 0"00'. <I. ",op.,;I.I,e. p.""eni IIr8

,oM.,.

.Printed in France

Price: sV.S. 0,25; 1/9 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.(or equivalent in other currf'ndes)

1948B-November 1958-1,800
