S/2015/619

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 August 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the progress made with
regard to the stabilization of and restoration of constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2203
(2015), contains an assessment of the progress made by Guinea -Bissau with regard
to the stabilization of the country and the restoration of constitutional order. Also
provided herein, pursuant to the same resolution, are recommendations on the
continuation of the sanctions regime in the post-election environment, in line with
paragraph 12 of resolution 2048 (2012).
2.
The Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat undertook an assessment,
in consultation with the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, from 22 June to 21 July 2015. Consultations were held with the
President, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Defence and military chiefs, the
President of the National Assembly and the President of the Supreme Court, as well
as with representatives of Angola, Brazil (Chair of the Guinea -Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission), China, France, Guinea-Bissau, Morocco, Nigeria,
Portugal, the Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union and
the United Nations Office for West Africa and of civil society organizations (the
Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League, the Youth Association for the Protection and
Promotion of Human Rights, the Justice and Peace Commission and t he Women’s
Political Platform). Some of the individuals designated by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea -Bissau
were also interviewed to obtain their views on the sanctions measures applied again st
them.

II. Key findings
3.
United Nations sanctions, adopted about a month after the coup d’état of
12 April 2012 in Guinea-Bissau, were a swift and decisive act of conflict prevention
by the Security Council. Three years later, the sanctions regi me continues to have an
impact on the 11 designated individuals and a deterrent effect on other potential
political spoilers. Although not completely enforced, the travel ban did make it more
15-13006 (E)

120815

*1513006*

S/2015/619

difficult for listed individuals to travel in the region for the purposes of garnering
support for another coup.
4.
Moreover, the sanctions have had a psychological and stigmatizing effect on
the designated individuals, having conveyed the opprobrium of the international
community for their unconstitutional actions in connection with the coup d’état. The
maintenance of the sanctions regime signals a continuing commitment on the part of
the Security Council to encouraging the rule of law and efforts to combat impunity.
United Nations sanctions are widely regarded as the only serious measure holding
the coup leaders accountable for their actions.
5.
Since the adoption of the sanctions regime, Guinea-Bissau has made progress.
Today, there is a legitimate, competent, inclusive and democratic Government that
has ushered in a period of optimism and hope for the country. The Government has
shown the political will to implement many of the necessary reforms in the defence,
security and judicial sectors and continues to enjoy the support of the international
community. 1
6.
While Guinea-Bissau is on a path to recovery, neither national nor
international actors can afford to be complacent. As I indicated in my report of
19 January 2015 (S/2015/37), the root causes of instability have not been addressed
and the return to constitutional order since the elections of 2014 is still fragile and
will need to be maintained. In addition to those root causes, the ability of the elected
authorities, in particular the President, the Prime Minister and the President of the
National Assembly, to work together constructively still re quires close and sustained
regional and international support.
7.
For those reasons, Guinea-Bissau will continue to benefit from the support of
the Security Council in order to deter any potential spoiler within or outside the
military who may wish to obstruct or undermine the required reform process
outlined in the Government’s Strategic and Operational Plan 2015 -2020.
8.
The current sanctions regime remains relevant to the situation in Guinea Bissau. Resolution 2048 (2012) sends an unequivocal message t o all political actors
that the sanctions framework required for the Security Council to take action against
any political spoiler is already in place. The designation criteria established in
paragraph 6 of the resolution allow the Committee to act against anyone who
undermines constitutional order, stability or the rule of law, curtails the primacy of
civilian power or furthers impunity in Guinea -Bissau.
9.
To assist the Security Council and the Committee in their work and to send a
clear signal that the Council remains vigilant against those who may seek to
threaten the country’s stability and constitutional order, the Council may wish to
consider the establishment of a two-person panel of experts, take steps to review the
__________________
1

2/8

By its resolution 2203 (2015), the Security Council amended the focus of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and extended its mandate until 29 February
2016. Donors pledged $1.2 billion at the international partners’ rou nd table for Guinea-Bissau,
held in Brussels on 25 March 2015, in support of the Government’s Strategic and Operational
Plan 2015-2020. The European Union has lifted the measures imposed under article 96 of the
Cotonou Agreement, which had limited its aid to the country following the attempted coup d’état
in April 2012, while ECOWAS has extended the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea Bissau until 31 December 2015.

15-13006

S/2015/619

listed individuals to determine whether they continue to meet the designation
criteria and establish clear benchmarks for the lifting of sanctions.

III. Sanctions in Guinea-Bissau
10. On 18 May, the Security Council adopted resolution 2048 (2012), by which it
put in place a travel ban against five high-ranking military officers of the “Military
Command” who had carried out a coup d’état a month earlier (Ibraima Camará,
António Injai, Estêvão Na Mena, Daba Naualna and Mamadu Ture). The adoption of
the resolution was preceded by an immediate condemnation of the coup by the
Council the day after it occurred and a presidential statement issued on 21 April in
which the Council demanded the immediate restoration of constitutional order, the
reinstatement of the legitimate Government and the resumption of the electoral
process of 18 March 2012 (S/PRST/2012/15). Two months later, on 18 July, the
Committee approved the designation of six additional individuals (Sanha Clussé,
Cranha Danfa, Idrissa Djaló, Tchipa Na Bidon, Tcham Na Man and Júlio Nhate), all
members of the “Military Command”. On 4 and 5 April 2014, International Criminal
Police Organization-United Nations Security Council Special Notices were issued
for all 11 designated individuals, made possible by an agreement that the Committee
signed with the International Criminal Police Organization in March 2014.
11. The adoption of the sanctions regime was particularly swift and decisive, even
as regional and international partners (all committed to a policy of zero tolerance
with regard to coups) approached the crisis from various perspectives and discussed
different courses of action. Those differences notwithstanding, the broad contours of
an approach to the crisis emerged, which included mediation efforts followed by the
brief imposition of targeted sanctions by ECOWAS 2 and the deployment of a
contingent of the ECOWAS Standby Force to Guinea-Bissau. The European Union,
a key development partner of the country, imposed a travel ban and an as set freeze
on several individuals. The African Union, the Community of Portuguese -speaking
Countries and the International Organization of la Francophonie suspended Guinea Bissau from their activities. The African Development Bank and the World Bank
suspended development operations in the country pending the restoration of
constitutional order. Throughout the next three years, the harmonization of efforts
among key regional and international partners, including the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the United Nations, ECOWAS, the African Union
and the European Union, remained a recurring theme.
12. Against that backdrop, the signing, on 18 May 2012, of an ECOWAS -mediated
political agreement by the “Military Command” and 25 political parties ushere d in a
tenuous transitional arrangement and divided the international actors supporting
Guinea-Bissau. The exclusion of the country’s largest political party, the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC), raised serious
__________________
2

15-13006

ECOWAS leaders put the military junta on notice that, if it failed to comply with the conditions
put forward within 72 hours, the organization would immediately impose targeted sanctions on
its members and their associates, as well as diplomatic, economic and financial sanctions on
Guinea-Bissau. On 29 April 2012, ECOWAS imposed diplomatic, economic and financial
sanctions on Guinea-Bissau after talks in Banjul between foreign ministers of the ECOWAS
Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau and the political stakeholders in Guinea -Bissau failed to agree
upon an arrangement to return the country to constitutional rule within 12 months. The sanctions
were lifted once such an agreement was reached.

3/8

S/2015/619

questions as to the legitimacy of the transition and was seen by some as not being in
compliance with resolution 2048 (2012). The transitional political landscape
improved only after 17 January 2013, when PAIGC and its political allies signed a
political transition pact and political agreement. In the months that followed, key
political stakeholders agreed to arrangements for the remainder of the transition,
including the adoption of a new consensual transitional pact and political
agreement, in addition to a transitional road map, the appointment of a more
inclusive transitional Government, new leadership of the National Electoral
Commission and the holding of elections.
13. The people of Guinea-Bissau voted in presidential and legislative elections on
13 April and 18 May 2014. The episodes of political intimidation and serious human
rights violations in the lead-up notwithstanding, the elections were successful and
the relative calm that followed was a crucial milestone in the return to constitutional
order. The President, José Mário Vaz, and the Prime Minister, Domingos Simões
Pereira, both belong to PAIGC, which retained its leading position in the National
Assembly with 57 of the 102 seats.
14. It is difficult to isolate the contribution of United Nations sancti ons to the
restoration of constitutional order. On the one hand, it appears that they had limited
impact on members of the “Military Command”. In the initial phases of the transition,
not only did the “Military Command” fail to relinquish its position of a uthority, but
the military also continued to involve itself in the country’s political and judicial
affairs. Subsequently, reports emerged that some of the designated individuals had
even travelled to countries in the region. General Injai and many of his fellow officers
also remained in their positions throughout the transition period, while eight
sanctioned individuals were promoted. At the time of writing of the present report,
6 of the 11 designated individuals (Ibraima Camará, Sanha Clussé, Tcham Na M an,
Estêvão Na Mena, Daba Naualna and Mamadu Ture) retained the same appointment
within the military that they had following the events of April 2012.
15. However, while the implementation of the travel ban was imperfect, it was not
completely ineffective. Its application to members of the “Military Command”
prevented them from travelling easily throughout the region for the purposes of
garnering support. On 18 September 2012, following reports that General Injai had
travelled to Côte d’Ivoire and Mali, transiting through Senegal, the Chair of the
Committee wrote to both Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal, which confirmed the violation
and committed themselves to taking steps to prevent a reoccurrence. With the
exception of Colonel Idrissa Djaló (who remains in the G ambia), all the individuals
claimed that the travel was for medical reasons, for which exemptions might have
been granted by the Committee had they availed themselves of the provisions in
paragraph 5 of resolution 2048 (2012). One designated individual sou ght to travel to
a European country for medical treatment, but was denied a Schengen visa to enter
Europe.
16. Moreover, the impact of the United Nations sanctions on those 11 designated
individuals went beyond limiting their freedom of movement. Colonel Idrissa Djaló
travelled to the Gambia after he was nominated as ambassador to that country by the
Transitional Government, but his credentials were not received, although he remains
in the country. At a crucial time for the return to constitutional order, the travel ban
was used to disqualify some designated individuals from running as candidates in
the elections of 2014. On 15 September 2014, responding to national and

4/8

15-13006

S/2015/619

international pressure to reform the defence and security sector, the President issued
a decree in which he dismissed General Injai as the Chief of General Staff of the
armed forces. The Government has also taken other steps with regard to security
sector reform, most notably the launch of a national security sector reform plan by
the Minister of Defence on 14 September 2014.
17. The United Nations sanctions have also had a significant psychological impact
on the targeted individuals, who said that they felt ostracized and described the
measures as an ignominious stain on their professional and personal record. General
Injai, for example, made several public statements regarding the humiliation that he
would feel if he were intercepted if he sought to travel.
18. While many of the designated individuals continued to hold prominent posts in
the armed forces, their status as sanctioned individuals was nevertheless felt
because they were excluded from military courses, ceremonies, receptions and other
events by most embassies in Guinea-Bissau. According to a civil society
interlocutor interviewed, one sanctioned individual experienced multiple negative
consequences following the imposition of sanctions against him. He was said to
have lost friends, been unable to obtain his doctorate and even lost the lease on his
rental house.
19. By 2014, the sanctioned individuals were observed to be exhausted and were
considering leaving the armed forces, an effect attributed to the sanctions and
international pressure.
20. From the perspective of the people of Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations
sanctions also represented the support of the Security Council for the rule of law
and efforts to combat impunity. They are widely regarded as the only serious
measure holding the coup leaders accountable for their actions. Aside from the
sanctions against the designated individuals, ordinary citizens have not yet seen the
perpetrators of the coup or the perpetrators of human rights violations face serious
consequences. The sanctions are therefore seen by the public as an important
accountability measure that supports the broader reconciliation process.

IV. Progress towards the stabilization of the country and the
restoration of constitutional order
21. Since the elections of April/May 2014, Guinea-Bissau has made steady
progress in the restoration of constitutional order and a start towards the difficult
processes of security and justice sector reform. In 2014, its progress included the
launch of a national security sector reform plan and the establishment of a
committee on demobilization; the adoption by the Government of a priority plan;
the appointment of an inspector general to combat corruption; the reactivation of the
ad hoc Commission for Constitutional Review the dismissal of General Injai and
other changes at the senior command level of the military; changes at the Ministry
of Justice; the appointment of a new general prosecutor; and the appointment of a
new head of the police.
22. In the eyes of the public and the international community, those early reform
efforts were bolstered by the promulgation of a decree law that amended existing
legislation on a special pension fund for the armed forces and security institutions,
when the members of the ad hoc Commission for Constitutional Review took office

15-13006

5/8

S/2015/619

in February 2015 and when the Secretary of State for International Cooperation and
Communities was arrested in connection with an investigation into the illicit
issuance of passports during the transition. Amid those encouraging signs,
international donors pledged $1.2 billion at the international partners’ round table
for Guinea-Bissau, held on 25 March 2015, in support of the Government’s vision
and strategy and its Strategic and Operational plan 2015 -2020.
23. Those positive developments notwithstanding, Guinea-Bissau remains at a
crossroads. As I reported in my strategic assessment (S/2015/37), the potential for
relapse into instability and unconstitutionality will remain high as long as the root
causes remain unaddressed. Those root causes lie in a complex interrelation of four
main factors: political-military dynamics; ineffective State institutions and the
absence of rule of law; poverty and lack of access to basic services (in particular for
women and young people); and impunity and human rights violations. Even with
considerable international support, it will take time for the country to overcome
those significant challenges.
24. Beyond the structural root causes of instability, the ability of the elected
authorities to work together remains a key concern. For example, during the
assessment, active diplomatic efforts by key bilateral, regional and international
partners were needed to help to defuse tensions between the President and the Prime
Minister, which culminated in a motion of confidence in the Government
unanimously adopted by the National Assembly on 25 June 2015.
25. In January 2015, I reported to the Council that the President, the Prime
Minister and the President of the National Assembly held consistent views regarding
the key priorities of the country and the vision for its future. The implementation of
the Government’s priority plan will require compromise and statesmanship from
those elected authorities to overcome the predictable resistance to change.
26. A collaborative relationship among the elected authorities will be required to
steer the country with a sense of common purpose to take the decisions needed in
the reform processes. An unravelling of the political consensus within the
Government and an exacerbation of tensions between the main political leaders
could impede essential reform efforts and increase the possibility of military
interference in the affairs of the Government or, worst of all, a coup d’état.

V. Recommendations on the continuation of
United Nations sanctions
27. The State-building process in Guinea-Bissau is nascent. The country faces
extreme levels of poverty and the social contract is weak. Since its indepe ndence in
1974, the country has never seen a Government complete its term in office. The
political instability has been accompanied by repeated serious human rights
violations, including politically motivated assassinations, abductions, cases of
torture, arbitrary arrests, the detention of political opponents and civil society
representatives and restrictions on freedom of expression and assembly.
28. Given that history, the unresolved root causes of instability and the still -recent
return of constitutional order, the Security Council needs to remain vigilant to any
potential for relapse. To date, the sanctions regime has been a unique example of
conflict prevention by the Council. United Nations sanctions, complemented by

6/8

15-13006

S/2015/619

other international support and pressure, were applied when the political and
security situation in the country was critical but not yet catastrophic. In recognition
of the encouraging but fragile progress, it is my assessment that the Council may
wish to maintain the sanctions regime in order to support the consolidation of
constitutional order and stability in Guinea -Bissau.
29. The sanctions regime outlined in resolution 2048 (2012) remains relevant to
the context at hand. The designation criteria established by the Security Council
already allow the Committee to act against anyone who undermines constitutional
order, stability or the rule of law, curtails the primacy of civilian power or furthers
impunity. The Council may wish to maintain the current designations and send a
clear message to everyone in Guinea-Bissau that the sanctions regime is applicable
to all spoilers, regardless of their political or institutional affiliation, and that the
Council stands ready to adopt additional sanctions measures and designations, as
and when required.
30. To enable the Security Council to be able to take action against those who may
undermine the State-building and peacebuilding process, the Council may wish to
consider the establishment of a two-person panel of experts. Such a panel could
promote greater awareness in Guinea-Bissau of the sanctions regime. Its existence
would signal to would-be political spoilers that the Council is closely monitoring
developments. Should the Council decide to establish such a panel, it could mandate
the panel to identify those who meet the designation criteria for targeted measures.
Specific attention could be paid by the panel to those who undermine the process of
national dialogue and reconciliation, perpetrate acts of human rights violations,
impede the security sector and judicial reform processes, undermine the process of
State-building and peacebuilding through corruption and organized crime and
misappropriate the country’s natural resources.
31. A focus on corruption and natural resources by the panel would b e an important
complement to the considerable financial investment that has been and will be made
by international partners. The Security Council has taken such an approach in its
sanctions regime in Somalia. Reporting by the Monitoring Group on Somalia an d
Eritrea on financial and resource issues has been extremely useful to the Federal
Government of Somalia, the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea and the international
community to address corruption and diversion of aid in Somalia.
32. Sanctions are not an end in themselves; the Security Council could consider
establishing clear benchmarks for the lifting of sanctions in Guinea -Bissau. They
may include the completion of the retirement and demobilization process of
identified military and security personnel and the consolidation of civilian control
over the military; the completion of the national dialogue and reconciliation process;
and the establishment of a justice system that is capable of investigating and
prosecuting the serious crimes committed since 2009. The panel of experts proposed
above would be well placed to monitor progress against any benchmarks set.
33. At an appropriate time, the Security Council and the Committee may wish to
review the sanctions list to ascertain whether the 11 listed individuals continue to
meet the designation criteria. Such an approach is important to respect the due
process rights of any individuals on United Nations sanctions lists. The panel of
experts proposed above would also be extremely helpful in such an exercise,
including by informing designated individuals of the ways in which they could

15-13006

7/8

S/2015/619

apply for delisting. Such a review, and any potential removal from the sanctions list,
should take into account the ability of the national justice system to hold
perpetrators of the coup and other human rights violations to account.
34. Three years ago, Guinea-Bissau was a divided country. Today, with an
inclusive Government, it has taken its proper place on the international stage.
Continued attention by the Security Council, including through the Committee,
remains vital for the consolidation, respect for and maintenance of constitutional
order, democratic governance and stability in Guinea-Bissau.

8/8

15-13006
