S/PV.8646

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8646th meeting

Friday, 25 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Moriko
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Clay
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2019/822)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-33571 (E)
*1933571*

S/PV.8646

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

African Republic. Their contribution in the service of
peace in that country, at the cost of their own lives, will
never be forgotten.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2019/822)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security; and Mr. Stefano Tomat, Director for
Integrated Approach for Security and Peace, European
Union External Action Service.
Mr. Chergui and Mr. Tomat are joining the meeting
via video-teleconference from Addis Ababa and
Brussels, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/822, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ndiaye.
Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): I would first of
all like to thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me
to take the floor this morning to present the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic (S/2019/822) in the run-up
to the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), which, as
the Council is aware, will expire in a few days’ time.
First, let us for a moment turn our thoughts to the
Blue Helmets — 10 military officers and one police
officer — and the three civilian staff members who lost
their lives this year in the line of duty in the Central
2/10

25/10/2019

Over the past year, MINUSCA has worked to
implement the complex, multifaceted mandate that
the Security Council entrusted to it in its resolution
2448 (2018), of December 2018, paying, as always,
particular attention to the protection of civilians, the
restoration of State authority, the promotion of human
rights and justice, and good offices in the context of the
peace process.
As the Council is aware, 2019 began with hope for a
new era for the people of the Central African Republic
through the Khartoum negotiations conducted under
the auspices of the African Union (AU) and with the
support of the United Nations and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), which
led to the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
on 6 February in Bangui. Beyond the implementation
of our mandate, support for the implementation of
the agreement has involved a great deal of effort on
the part of MINUSCA, working hand in hand with
the Government and with the guarantors, the African
Union and ECCAS.
Since my most recent briefing to the Council in
June (see S/PV.8558), the process of implementing the
agreement has seen progress and faced challenges,
which I would very briefly like to share with the
Council so as to inform its deliberations on the renewal
of MINUSCA’s mandate.
Concerning the progress made, the monitoring
mechanisms that exist at the national and local levels
are now largely operational. These mechanisms have
helped to avert or contain crises at the level of the
prefectures and sub-prefectures. In Bossangoa, for
instance, the meetings of the prefectural implementation
committee allowed for Muslim residents to return
to the town, and they can now move around freely
for the first time since the tragic events of 2013. The
first joint security unit, one of the key elements of the
agreement’s implementation, was officially launched
by the President, Faustin Archange Touadera, in Bouar,
in the north-western part of the country, on 16 October.
The Government plans to launch similar units in the
north-eastern and south-eastern parts of the country
as soon as possible, which will help to keep the armed
groups engaged in the peace agreement.
19-33571

25/10/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

National disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts have also continued in recent
months, bringing to 583 the number of fighters who
have been disarmed and demobilized since December
2018. But the reluctance of the Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation (3R) armed group to participate in this
process represents a major challenge that delayed the
launch of the first joint security unit. I am pleased,
however, that the robust posture adopted by MINUSCA
has helped to slow the repeated violations of the
agreement by 3R and helped to compel its leader, Sidiki,
to be more cooperative.
Additional progress has been made in the area
of justice and reconciliation. National consultations
on the law on the creation of the future justice,
reconciliation and reparations commission, launched
on 6 June, are continuing in several cities in the country
with the support of MINUSCA. These participative
consultations are also contributing to the process of
national reconciliation. The inclusive commission that
was established to analyse the causes of the conflict
and to propose judicial measures is continuing to
gather information across the country and is supposed
to present its report next month. However, these two
institutions alone will not be able to bring full justice to
the many victims of the conflict in the Central African
Republic. That is why MINUSCA is continuing its
tireless support of the activities of the Special Criminal
Court and to capacity-building for ordinary Central
African courts and the criminal justice chain in
its totality.
I would also like to underscore the work done by
MINUSCA, with the support of UN-Women and the
Peacebuilding Fund, to promote awareness of the peace
agreement across the country among civil society,
including women, young people and religious leaders.
This should automatically allow for better national
ownership of the peace agreement.
Progress has also been made in the development
sphere, where the implementation of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan has seen significant
headway with the disbursement of nearly $2.4 billion
on 1 October, bringing the financial delivery rate
to 67 per cent. Four hundred projects in various
socioeconomic sectors are under way, with the chief
objective of tangibly improving the living conditions of
the Central African people.

S/PV. 8646

All that progress has been made possible by
the commitment of the Government, supported by
MINUSCA, and of guarantors and other partners.
Restoring State authority remains a collective
priority. Thus far, prefects have been designated
in all the country’s 16 prefectures, as have 66 of the
71 sub-prefects, and the number of officials deployed in
the field has more than doubled as compared to 2015. In
addition, 1,346 members of the Central African Armed
Forces have been deployed across the national territory,
including in Kaga Bandoro, Bria and Birao, and 1,050
police officers and gendarmes have been deployed
in 15 prefectures, some of whom are co-located with
MINUSCA. Those redeployments, together with the
encouraging progress made in reforming the Central
African security apparatus, have, as the members know,
led the Council to ease the embargo and sanctions
regime on the Central African Republic.
We all know that, despite this progress, important
challenges remain, which, let us admit, seriously
hamper our collective efforts to stabilize the Central
African Republic. Violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law continue, although the
number of incidents, attacks against civilians, sexual
violence, restrictions on the freedom of movement and
kidnappings has been halved over the past year. I remain
particularly concerned by the tense situation prevailing
in the north-east of the country since July. Several
serious incidents sporadically opposed members of the
Mouvement des libérateurs centrafricains pour la justice
to members of the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique in July, September and October.
The clashes between the two armed groups, which
signed the peace agreement, have produced dozens of
victims, mainly among combatants, and one civilian
victim. However, the number of displaced persons is
now considerable, more than 10,000, which is having a
significant socioeconomic, health and security impact,
particularly in Birao near the border with the Sudan.
MINUSCA, the African Union and the ECCAS, in
support of the Government, have mobilized to stop the
violence and prevent the conflict, which has already
taken on a regrettable ethnic character, from leading to
direct intercommunal clashes and spreading throughout
Vakaga prefecture, with an impact at the regional level.
I am also concerned about other challenges that
threaten our efforts, including the risks of violence in
connection with population movements, which will soon
begin with the arrival of the dry season, the persistence

19-335713/10

S/PV.8646

The situation in the Central African Republic

of illegal taxation, the radicalization of some actors’
political discourse and, to a lesser extent, delays in
the adoption of certain bills provided for in the peace
agreement, including those on decentralization and the
status of former Heads of State. I take this opportunity
to reiterate the outcomes of the high-level meeting on
the Central African Republic held on the margins of
the General Assembly on 26 September, as well as of
the tripartite United Nations-AU-European Union (EU)
visit to Bangui from 4 to 7 October. I also urge the
signatories to redouble their efforts to implement all
the commitments made under the peace agreement. In
accordance with its mandate, MINUSCA will continue
to lend the signatories all its political and technical
support, but it will also not hesitate to assume all its
responsibilities, as demonstrated in Operation Anvil in
the west, and adopt a robust stance against those who
threaten the civilian population.
The context in which MINUSCA will be discharging
its next mandate will be dominated not only by continued
support for the implementation of the peace agreement
of 6 February but also by the preparation of the 2020 and
2021 presidential and legislative elections. I would like
to point out that resolution 2448 (2018) could not foresee
the extent of the logistical and technical means required
for the implementation of the peace agreement, which
was signed almost two months after the resolution was
adopted. Therefore, in addition to MINUSCA’s good
offices and the many tasks that will be assigned to it, it
is essential that the Mission be provided with a mandate
and adequate resources to support the implementation
of the peace agreement, as the only path to lasting peace
in the Central African Republic.
Similarly, the elections in 2020 and 2021, like those
in 2015 and 2016, will mobilize a great deal of energy and
effort from the international community, as they will
enable the consolidation of democratic achievements
in the Central African Republic. The electoral calendar
published by the national electoral authority provides
for voter registration from January 2020, a first round
of coupled presidential and legislative elections on
27 December 2020 and a second round, if necessary,
on 14 February 2021. Local elections, which have not
been held since 1988, are scheduled for 21 November
2021. They should help to address the root causes of
the Central African crisis and strengthen democratic
governance and decentralization.
I am pleased that the Central African authorities
have already begun preparations for the elections. A
4/10

25/10/2019

new electoral code was adopted in July by the National
Assembly and promulgated on 20 August by the
country’s President. The Government has disbursed
just over $2 million for the financing of electoral
operations, in addition to the $17 million pledged by
the European Union and the $2 million pledged by the
United Nations Development Programme, out of a total
budget of approximately $41.8 million. Preparations
are also under way for electoral mapping, a prerequisite
for voter registration.
However, despite those encouraging steps, the
holding of elections on the scheduled dates remains
threatened by insufficient technical, financial and
human resources. The lack of financial resources,
the absence of an appropriate logistical mandate for
МINUSCA and the persistence of insecurity in various
places raise concerns among part of the Central African
political class about the feasibility of countrywide
elections within the deadlines provided for in the
Constitution. Indeed, a serious delay in holding the next
elections could create a vacuum at the highest echelon
of the State and lead to another political transition that
some political actors are strongly calling for but which
would, I am convinced, be harmful to the consolidation
of democracy, stability and peace in the Central
African Republic. It is important that the international
community band together to ensure that the elections
take place according to the planned timetable, in a free,
inclusive and fair manner throughout the country.
Accordingly, I request the Security Council,
as recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report, to endow MINUSCA with an appropriate
mandate so that the Mission can provide the necessary
technical, logistical, security and operational support
for the conduct of the elections within constitutional
deadlines. I also appeal to the generosity of all partners
and friends of the Central African Republic to make
contributions as soon as possible, as funds are lacking
to start the process.
(spoke in English)
Finally, allow me to conclude with a strong appeal
to the countries in the region, whose contribution to
the stability of the Central African Republic remains
crucial. The recent crisis in the north-east of the
country has shown again how essential it is for the
region to support the Central African Republic in its
efforts to achieve lasting peace and stability. In that
regard, I commend the Governments of the Central
19-33571

25/10/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

African Republic, Cameroon and the Republic of
the Congo for the revival of their respective joint
commissions. I encourage sustained efforts aimed at
launching similar joint commissions with Chad and
the Sudan. I also welcome President Paul Kagame’s
State visit to the Central African Republic last week,
which will enable the country to strengthen ties with
Rwanda. The Central African Republic needs all its
partners and friends in order to transform the dream
of peace, prosperity and development of millions of
Central Africans into a lasting reality. I know they can
also count on the unanimous and generous support of
the Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Ndiaye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: First of all, allow me to reiterate
to you, Mr. President, my dear brother Ambassador
Matjila, my sincere congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and your
excellent leadership of the work of the Council this
month. At the African Union we greatly appreciate
the importance given to Africa’s priorities under
your presidency, particularly through the strategic
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations. In that respect, I welcomed the successful
thirteenth annual United Nations-African Union joint
consultative meeting between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
that was held in Addis Ababa earlier this week. I want
to say once again what an honour and pleasure it was
to welcome the Council here in Addis Ababa. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in the
Central African Republic and specifically on the joint
visit to Bangui of the African Union, United Nations
and European Union from 4 to 7 October.
(spoke in French)
The situation in the Central African Republic
has generally seen a significant decrease in violence
throughout the country, an undeniable and tangible
result of the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. In
that context, we welcome the progress that has been
made in setting up the implementation and monitoring
mechanism’s structures, which are now operational,
including the executive follow-up committee for the
Agreement, which is chaired by the Prime Minister of
the Central African Republic and the African Union’s

S/PV. 8646

Special Representative in Bangui, whose work is
proceeding normally. We should also highlight the
establishment of the committee’s technical secretariat,
the national implementation committee, the prefectural
implementation committees, the technical security
committees, and the inclusive commission, which
began work on 28 May.
The Government’s presence is gradually being
re-established in areas that the central authorities
were previously unable to access. As a result, all 16
prefectures and 66 of the 71 planned sub-prefectures
are already in place on the ground, and the defence
and security forces are in the process of being
deployed throughout the national territory. In addition,
the formation of the joint security units began on
16 October in Bouar in the north-west of the country
in the presence of President Touadera, members of the
Government and representatives of the international
community. I also want to commend the Central African
Government for its efforts, including the finalization
of the electoral code, which has been approved by the
Constitutional Court. We expect that other legislative
texts will be adopted soon, particularly those related to
decentralization, the status of former Heads of State,
and political parties.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank and pay tribute to the countries of the region
that have continued to support the implementation of
the Agreement and provide assistance to the Central
African Republic, particularly through the meetings of
the Central African Republic-Cameroon and Central
African Republic-Congo mixed commissions, and
soon those of the Central African Republic-Chad and
Central African Republic-Sudan mixed commissions.
On the humanitarian front, the situation is encouraging.
Between January and September the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
facilitated the voluntary return of more than 357,000
refugees and displaced persons to their respective
regions. The need for humanitarian assistance has
therefore been significantly reduced, and according to
humanitarian reports some 30,000 people will return to
their regions in 2020.
Despite the improved security situation, we have
unfortunately seen several cases of violations of the
Agreement, including in Paoua on 21 May and in
September and in Birao in October, which resulted in
considerable loss of life and which we have firmly and
collectively condemned. Those clashes have in no way

19-335715/10

S/PV.8646

The situation in the Central African Republic

slowed the implementation of the Agreement, and the
African Union continues to encourage the Government
and stakeholders to maintain the existing dialogue
framework while stressing the importance of promoting
a climate of trust, especially in view of the elections
scheduled for 2020 and 2021.
That was the context for my joint visit to Bangui
from 4 to 7 October with my friend Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service, our second visit to the Central African
Republic, following the one in April. At the end of
our consultations with President Touadera and the
actors involved, we called for scrupulous respect for
their commitments regarding the implementation of
the peace agreement. We also clarified grey areas,
reaffirmed our common commitment to ensuring strict
respect for electoral deadlines and urged the Central
African Republic’s partners to mobilize to ensure the
creation of the necessary conditions for that. To that
end, we are once again counting on the members of the
Council to provide the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) with the mandate it will need to
ensure its support during the process. I would like to
conclude by making some recommendations.
First, it is important to welcome the convergence
of the positions and coherence of the actions of the
African Union, the United Nations and the European
Union and — if I may assume it — the entire
international community in all of our interactions with
the stakeholders of the Central African Republic and
the international community in general. It is therefore
imperative that we collectively continue to support the
implementation of the Agreement, which remains the
frame of reference for the country’s return to stability.
Let me be very clear that there can be no plan B.
Secondly, I welcome the commitment of the
Central African Republic’s neighbours and the
Economic Community of Central African States to that
effort and urge them to continue to support the Central
African Republic.
Thirdly, the start on 16 October of the formation of
joint security units in the western part of the Central
African Republic is a major development and a clear
achievement. It is now time to launch the units planned
6/10

25/10/2019

for the country’s other regions in order to consolidate
reconciliation and inclusiveness.
Fourthly, while the African Union is deploying
military observers who are responsible for supervising
the joint security units, I am counting on MINUSCA’s
usual collaboration and assistance in supplying
the logistical support, particularly in terms of
accommodation and transport, that is needed to ensure
the success of this operation.
Fifthly, while, as I mentioned, there has been
progress on the humanitarian front, the situation
remains precarious and requires the international
community’s sustained attention if we are to respond
to the expectations of both the humanitarian observers
and people in vulnerable situations. I want to stress the
importance of focusing particularly on the situation of
women and children in the Central African Republic
and to solemnly and firmly reiterate our common
policy of zero tolerance for all forms of sexual violence
and the exploitation of children.
Finally, I would like to stress once again that there
can be no alternative to holding general elections in
2020 and 2021, and we have emphasized to all the
stakeholders in the Central African Republic that every
possible effort will be made to ensure that they are held
on time. I therefore call for the Council to support us
by bringing all of its influence to bear to ensure that all
the stakeholders concerned will respect the deadlines
and contribute positively to the effective organization
of the elections.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing
and his kind words addressed to me. I also thank the
African Union Peace and Security Council for the
excellent arrangements and hospitality extended to my
colleagues on the Security Council during our fourth
informal meeting and the thirteenth joint consultative
meeting of the Security Council and African Union
Peace and Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tomat.
Mr. Tomat: I am honoured to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the European Union (EU).
We note the progress made in the implementation of
the peace agreement since it was signed in Bangui. We
have also identified important areas for action and are
concerned at some challenges in terms of the security
commitments of certain parties. In terms of progress, it
is important to underline that the agreement is the sole
19-33571

25/10/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

collective road map. The momentum it generated needs
to be maintained and strengthened. All actors should
implement it in good faith.
The Government of the Central African Republic,
under the leadership of the President and the Prime
Minister, continues to deliver on its commitments.
They deliver despite challenges and the difficulties of
the process. State authority is slowly being restored.
The Central African Armed Forces and internal
security forces are being deployed. The first batch
of special mixed security units has been established
in the west. The Security Council has recognized the
progress achieved in security sector reform, which led
to the easing of the arms embargo. We see this as a
most welcome move. We are also pleased to see that
neighbouring countries are actively contributing to
creating a positive climate for the implementation of the
peace agreement. This needs to be further encouraged.
In certain areas, we look to the Government to
take further action with greater determination. Such
issues include transitional justice, which is an essential
element of reconciliation and the fight against impunity.
We also encourage the authorities to make progress, in
parallel, on such issues as decentralization, the status of
former Heads of State and the law on political parties.
Government action could also be more cohesive by fully
associating members of armed groups with the peace
agreement and integrating them into its implementation.
Taken together, these measures, along with the broad
awareness-raising about the peace agreement, would
send a clear signal to the wider population that the
political tide has definitively turned to the better. If the
people of the Central African Republic are to benefit
from the peace agreement, we also need to do more
with respect to including civil society, political parties,
the military and women in the peace process.
Let us now consider some challenges. Even if have
seen improvements in terms of security, the overall
security situation remains fragile. Several armed groups
continue attacks against civilians and against each
other. The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation (DDRR) process is essential and
should be accelerated. The peace agreement provides
for all the necessary mechanisms to respond to
violations. The guarantors of the agreement should not
shy away from using the provisions of article 35 thereof
to engage non-compliant armed groups. In particular,
we support the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African

S/PV. 8646

Republic (MINUSCA) in its recent robust responses.
MINUSCA’s assertiveness sends a positive signal to the
civilian victims of the conflict, particularly in the face
of the recent arrests of members of some armed groups.
In this context, I would also like to take a moment
to offer my sincere condolences, on behalf of the
European Union and myself, to both MINUSCA and
the families of those brave soldiers who recently lost
their lives in a tragic accident.
The special mixed security units are part of the
security set-up. As mentioned by previous speakers, the
first such unit was recently launched in Bouar, which is
very good news. The launch of the first unit will have
a significant impact. Several groups are now asking
to join. Their members see a concrete and immediate
opportunity to be reintegrated and return to normal life.
Like our partners in Government, the African Union
and the United Nations, we want to see more such units
deployed. Demobilization, disarmament, vetting and
training of combatants identified for participating in
these units are critical steps for their establishment.
A few weeks ago, the European Union, the African
Union and the United Nations successfully conducted
a trilateral joint high-level mission to the country,
which I had the pleasure of accompanying. It was
encouraging to see that all three organizations agreed
on the principles for the special mixed security units to
work successfully. The European Union will continue
funding such units under these conditions. Our initial
contribution of €3.4 million since May is already with
the African Union in support of special mixed security
unit members.
The European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic (EUTM-RCA) has trained
Central African Armed Forces trainers in charge of
training the special mixed security units. We are also
funding AU military observers, who will monitor the
deployment and activities of the special mixed security
units. We stand ready to mobilize further support for
the next phases. For that, MINUSCA’s mandate must
foresee the capacity to support the special mixed
security units. Putting these units in place is clearly
important. At the same time, this operation should not
divert attention from the DDRR process and ongoing
security sector reform.
Previous speakers mentioned the critical juncture
we are facing with the elections in 2020 and 2021.
Only a peaceful, inclusive and transparent process

19-335717/10

S/PV.8646

The situation in the Central African Republic

will help consolidate the country’s democratic record.
The constitutional calendar should be respected.
Postponement is not an option, and we hope political
parties will act responsibly. The EU is ready to provide
financial and technical support, and we encourage
other partners to join our efforts. Most important
will be MINUSCA’s support for the whole electoral
process in terms of security and logistics. We request
that MINUSCA’s mandate be explicitly amended to
that effect.
I should like to add some final words to update
the Council on other aspects of EU support to the
Central African Republic. The EU Training Mission
I just mentioned is leading the defence sector reform,
providing strategic advice and operational training.
To date, the EU Training Mission has trained five
battalions of the national armed forces. On 16 October,
more than 1,000 recruits graduated from this training.
Altogether, 4,000 members of the armed forces staff of
all grades and ranks have benefitted from EUTM-RCA
operational training. Another 1,500 have completed
courses in such military areas as human resources,
logistics, planning and information technology.
The EUTM-RCA will continue to work hand in hand
with MINUSCA and other players, in full transparency.
We would like to see MINUSCA’s mandate include
provisions relating to its support for members of the
Central African Armed Forces personnel trained
by EUTM-RCA. In parallel, we are supporting the
strengthening and countrywide deployment of the
internal security forces. Following President Touadera’s
request, the EU is currently planning the deployment
of a European advisory mission to the Central African
Republic to further support the internal security forces.
All instruments combined, the EU has mobilized,
since 2014, an envelope of €850 million. We have taken
measures to accelerate and, where needed, realign our
programmes so that the population can rapidly benefit
from peace dividends.
I should like to share just three figures relating to the
Bêkou trust fund, in terms of health care alone. Over the
last reporting period, 1.7 million medical consultations
were given, helping people, including more than 80,000
children and pregnant women, to recover. Around
170,000 births were assisted by skilled birth attendants.
Similar figures can be seen in the areas of primary
education, animal health, microfinance and textiles.
8/10

25/10/2019

Thousands of small farmers and their groups have been
equipped and helped to access the local markets.
A few months ago, Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy and Vice-President of the European
Commission, went on an official visit to the Central
African Republic. Both she and the President Touadera
confirmed our shared commitment to working together
for the ultimate benefit of the people of the Central
African Republic. We know that the situation remains
complex and fragile, with humanitarian problems and
structural weaknesses. We will continue to work with
our partners in the Government and in civil society, the
African Union, the United Nations and the countries of
the region. We will remain fully engaged in the Central
African Republic in order to support our friend and
partner at this important juncture.
The President: I thank Mr. Tomat for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the African members of the Security Council: South
Africa, Equatorial Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire.
The three African members of the Council
welcome Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Central Africa (MINUSCA), and thank
him for his briefing on the sociopolitical, security and
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic
and on the activities of MINUSCA. Our thanks also go
to Mr. Smaїl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, and Mr. Stefano Tomat, Director
for Integrated Approach for Security and Peace of the
European Union External Action Service.
The three African members of the Council welcome
the tangible progress made by the Central African
authorities in the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, signed on
6 February between the Central African Government
and armed groups, including the operationalization
of several mechanisms for its implementation and
monitoring the agreement. The fulfilment of this
essential requirement for the gradual restoration of State
authority throughout the national territory, as well as
for the provision of basic social services and improved
19-33571

25/10/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

living conditions for the population, constitutes a
genuine source of hope for the return of lasting peace,
security and stability in the Central African Republic.
While welcoming the constructive engagement of
the signatories, in particular President Faustin-Archange
Touadera and his Government, the three African
members of the Council welcome the decisive support
of the agreement’s guarantors and facilitators, the
African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS). We also acknowledge
the important role played by the United Nations through
MINUSCA and the support of bilateral and multilateral
partners, without which the encouraging progress we
have seen so far would not have been possible.
Despite this progress, the Central African Republic
is still facing numerous challenges, particularly
violence against civilians and clashes between armed
groups that are signatories to the peace agreement for
control over natural resources. The events that took
place in Paoua on 21 May and in Birao on 1 September
are a clear example of this. Moreover, the feeling of
mistrust surrounding the peace agreement, particularly
among the political opposition, is a source of concern in
the light of preparations for the presidential, legislative
and local elections scheduled for 2020 and 2021. These
elections are crucial and indispensable in achieving
peace and political stability in the country.
Furthermore, there is an urgent need to strengthen
the protection of civilians, find appropriate responses
to humanitarian challenges and strengthen peace and
development initiatives, with a particular focus on the
major projects currently being implemented. These
include support for the process of restoring State
authority through joint security operations conducted by
MINUSCA and the Forces armées centrafricaines and
the operationalization of special mixed security units
with a view to protecting civilians, which is urgently
required. We welcome the launch of activities in Bouar
on 16 October in that regard. The implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme for ex-combatants and reform
of the security sector also require special attention.
The three African members of the Council believe
that all stakeholders must work together to make up for
the delays in implementing some of the key political
and security provisions of the peace agreement. In this
respect, we welcome the meeting of the signatories of the
peace agreement held in Bangui on 23 and 24 August,

S/PV. 8646

in the presence of the guarantors and facilitators,
notably the African Union and MINUSCA, in order
to take stock of progress made and develop common
approaches to overcome the challenges to implementing
the agreement.
Local peace and reconciliation initiatives across
the country that support the peace agreement should
also be commended and encouraged. Supporting these
initiatives with the appropriate means will contribute
to creating and maintaining an environment conducive
to reconciliation and lasting peace. To this end, the
three African members of the Council encourage the
involvement of civil society, particularly women and
youth, in accordance with the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document S/2019/822. We hope that
the outcome of the consultations among the population
launched in June will lead to the establishment of an
effective truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation
commission that responds to the needs of victims of the
violence, in the spirit of the peace agreement.
The unwavering commitment of the international
community to the security dimension will undoubtedly
contribute to the stabilization of the situation on the
ground. Resolution 2488 (2019), which we welcome
and support, reflects that commitment perfectly. It
authorizes the easing of the arms embargo on the Central
African Government, thereby enabling it to acquire the
resources necessary to accelerate the restoration of
State authority throughout the national territory. The
three African members of the Council therefore intend
to play an active role in the implementation of the
resolution and the mechanisms to resolve the conflict in
order to accompany the Central African people on their
quest for peace and stability. We take this opportunity
to recall that the support of the countries of the region
is essential. That is why we welcome the fact that the
Central African authorities have relaunched the bilateral
commissions with Chad, Cameroon, the Congo and the
Sudan, with a view to addressing cross-border issues.
Preserving the gains made in the context of the
peace agreement depends without a doubt on the
successful holding of the upcoming elections in 2020
and 2021 in a peaceful social climate. All Central
African sociopolitical actors must contribute to creating
that atmosphere.
MINUSCA’s contribution to peace efforts in the
Central African Republic should be commended, but
it must continue to play its full part in this endeavour

19-335719/10

S/PV.8646

The situation in the Central African Republic

and utilize the range of tools at its disposal. In this
regard, the three African members of the Council
share the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on the scope of MINUSCA’s
electoral support mandate. We hope that this issue will
be taken into account when MINUSCA’s mandate is
renewed next month.
In conclusion, South Africa, Equatorial Guinea and
Côte d’Ivoire call once again on subregional, regional
and international organizations, particularly ECCAS,
the African Union and the United Nations, as well as
partners of the Central African Republic, to maintain
their support for the country so that it can return to peace
and stability. We reiterate our support for MINUSCA
and the efforts of President Faustin-Archange Touadera,
whose commitment and leadership will undoubtedly
contribute to the return of lasting peace and stability in
the Central African Republic.
Mr. Cohen (United States): I would like to start
by thanking our briefers today. We offer Special
Representative Ndiaye our condolences following the
loss of four Senegalese peacekeepers in the helicopter
accident last month.
I will make five brief points.
First, the United States is deeply concerned that
some armed groups continue to violate the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic with impunity. We call for all
signatory parties to commit to fully implementing the
peace agreement.
Secondly, we would like to highlight the fact that the
top priority task of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) is the protection of civilians.
There is no contradiction between protecting civilians
and using MINUSCA’s good offices to support the

10/10

25/10/2019

success of the peace agreement. In fact, we believe that
these two efforts are mutually reinforcing.
Thirdly, we must break the cycle of violence in the
Central African Republic by ensuring high standards
for vetting, disarmament, demobilization and training
for former combatants who choose to enter the
mixed brigades or participate in other disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes.
Vetting should complement the work of the Special
Criminal Court, which the United States supports, to
ensure accountability for the most serious crimes and
atrocities, in keeping with the Bangui Forum.
Fourthly, during the recent trip of the Security
Council sanctions committee to Bangui, it was clear
that the Government of the Central African Republic
now has sufficient arms to supply its troops but still
needs to develop defence institutions to provide their
troops with logistical support and salaries when
deployed in the field. We hope that the Government of
the Central African Republic can make more progress
on the arms embargo benchmarks so that its military
can be counted on to defend the borders and protect
Central Africans.
Finally, the United States would like to recognize
the attention paid in the Secretary-General’s report of
15 October (S/2019/822) to performance optimization,
particularly the new short-loop casualty evacuation
process and actions taken in response to violence in
Alindao. Such efforts make peacekeeping safer by
simultaneously protecting the lives of both peacekeepers
and civilians.
The United States will continue to press for improved
peacekeeping performance reporting in MINUSCA
and in all peacekeeping operations according to the
standards set in the Action for Peacekeeping initiative
and in resolution 2436 (2018).
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

19-33571
