United Nations

S/PV.5500

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5500th meeting
Monday, 31 July 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Ikouebe
Ms. Løj
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Pereyra Plasencia
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mlynár
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
Non-proliferation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-44964 (E)

*0644964*

S/PV.5500

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif (Iran)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. von UngernSternberg (Germany) took the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/589, which contains a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to two letters from the representative of
France contained in documents S/2006/521 and
S/2006/573.
I should like also to draw the attention of Council
members to the reports of the Director-General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency dated 27 February
and 28 April 2006, contained in documents S/2006/150
and S/2006/270, respectively.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Russian Federation,
Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America
Against:
Qatar
The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 14 votes in favour and one
against. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1696 (2006).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): In life
people behave in ways that best suit them. The results
of their behaviour are sometimes beneficial, and
sometimes negative — which can lead to destruction.
The same thing can be said of natural phenomena.
When circumstances oblige people to live in a volcanic
area, where some volcanoes are actually erupting,
some are active and might erupt at any moment, and
some are dormant but might suddenly become active,
uncertainty prevails because people do not know when
such
phenomena
might
occur.
In
difficult
circumstances, therefore, one must act in a manner that
takes fully into account the behaviour of human beings.
For more than two decades, our region has been
surrounded by fires. No sooner does one die down than
another breaks out. Troubles and sectarianism fan the
flames of such fires.
Ever since the question of Iran’s nuclear
programme was brought before the Council, we have
repeatedly underscored the importance of finding a
political solution to this problem and of giving
diplomacy enough time to bring about a peaceful
solution. Such a solution can be reached only if all
parties concerned show flexibility, wisdom and a sense
of responsibility.
We are grateful for the efforts made by the six
States in order to reach a peaceful solution through
offering Iran a comprehensive package. We deem this a
bold and commendable step. However, we believe that

06-44964

S/PV.5500

Iran is also called upon seriously to address the
concerns of the international community about the very
nature of its nuclear programme, to ensure that it is
used exclusively for peaceful purposes.
There is no doubt that this is a legitimate demand
that we all are making. However, we do not agree with
the submission of this draft resolution at a time when
our region is inflamed. We would have seen no harm in
waiting a few days so as to exhaust all possible ways
and means in order to determine Iran’s real intentions
and the degree of its willingness to cooperate,
particularly since Iran has not rejected the package that
was offered to it; it has simply asked for a period of
time in which to consider it. This prompts us to ask
members of the Council to accede to this request. We
have been patient, and, indeed, our Council has waited
longer to act on much more burning issues.
The State of Qatar is fully committed to the unity
of the Council, particularly when it comes to very
sensitive issues. We have reiterated our intention to
join in this unity. However, the fact that this draft
resolution was submitted at this critical time serves to
achieve neither the stability of the region nor the unity
of the Council. On the contrary, whether we like it or
not, it will only intensify the conflagration in our
region. Do we really want to see another volcano
erupting in this region?
My country, which is not very far away from this
area — no more than 200 kilometres from the nuclear
reactors — is fully committed to ensuring that the
Middle East becomes a nuclear-weapon-free zone. But
given the special circumstances surrounding our
region, the failure to take on board our concerns and to
take account of the issues to which I have just referred
will not help us to achieve the unity of the Council to
which we all aspire.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): Four
months have passed since the Security Council called
upon Iran to fully and verifiably suspend its nuclear
programmes, and nearly two months have passed since
the European Union three (EU-3) plus three made its
generous offer, inviting Iran to enter into negotiations
and avoid further Security Council action. Let us not
forget that this diplomatic activity was preceded by
more than three years of Iranian non-compliance with
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and its International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Safeguards Agreement. Sadly, Iran has

06-44964

consistently and brazenly defied the international
community by continuing its pursuit of nuclear
weapons, and the continued intransigence and defiance
of the Iranian leadership demands a strong response
from the Council. The resolution adopted today does
just that.
We are pleased that the Council has taken clear
and firm action in adopting this resolution. The pursuit
of nuclear weapons by Iran constitutes a direct threat to
international peace and security and demands a clear
statement from the Council in the form of a binding
resolution.
This resolution also demands action. It sends an
unequivocal and unambiguous message to Tehran: Take
the steps required by the IAEA Board of Governors,
including full and sustained suspension of all
enrichment-related
and
reprocessing
activities,
including research and development, and suspend
construction of your heavy-water reactor. It also calls
upon Member States to prevent the transfer of
resources to Iran’s nuclear and missile programmes,
and Iran should understand that the United States and
others will ensure that the financial transactions
associated with these proliferation activities will be
subject to scrutiny as well. The United States expects
that Iran and all other States Members of the United
Nations will immediately act in accordance with the
mandatory obligations of this resolution.
This is the first Security Council resolution on
Iran in response to its nuclear weapons programme,
reflecting the gravity of the situation and the
determination of the Council. We hope the resolution
will demonstrate to Iran that the best way to end its
international isolation is to simply give up the pursuit
of nuclear weapons. We look forward to Iran’s full,
unconditional and immediate compliance with the
resolution. We hope that Iran makes the strategic
decision that the pursuit of programmes of weapons of
mass destruction makes it less, not more, secure. We
need to be prepared, however, that Iran might choose a
different path. That is why it is important that the
United States and other member States have expressed
their intention to adopt measures under Article 41 in
the event that Iran does not comply with the resolution.
In closing, I would like to thank all members of
the Council for their efforts in helping us to secure a
strong resolution.

3

S/PV.5500

Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is one of the Security Council’s vital roles
in carrying out its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Iran’s nuclear
activities and its history of concealment raise pressing
questions about whether Iran’s programme is, as it
claims, solely for civil purposes. The United Kingdom
commends the continuing investigation of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and is
very deeply concerned about Iran’s failure to cooperate
fully with the Agency. As today’s resolution notes,
after more than three years, the Agency is still unable
to conclude that there are no undeclared nuclear
materials or activities in Iran. Important questions,
including on activities with a possible military nuclear
dimension, remain unanswered.
The international community has shown great
patience. We have given Iran many opportunities to
show that it has no intention to develop nuclear
weapons. Regrettably, Iran has not taken the steps
required by the IAEA Board and the Security Council
that would help build confidence.
The United Kingdom remains fully committed to
working for a negotiated solution. On 6 June, the
European Union High Representative, Javier Solana,
presented to Iran, on behalf of China, France,
Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United
States, a new set of far-reaching and imaginative
proposals for a comprehensive agreement that we
would negotiate with Iran. The proposals offer Iran a
way forward that would enable a solution based on
mutual respect and cooperation. They would give Iran
everything it needs to achieve its stated ambition of
developing a modern, civil nuclear power industry,
including active support in the building of light-water
power reactors in Iran, participation in a uranium
enrichment facility in Russia and legally binding
assurances relating to the supply of nuclear material;
address Iran’s concern that it should not depend on a
single foreign supplier; and provide a substantive
package of cooperation in less proliferation-sensitive
nuclear research and development. In addition, the
proposals would also offer Iran significant political and
economic benefits, including a trade and cooperation
agreement with the European Union.
When Javier Solana presented those proposals, he
made clear that it was essential for Iran to take the
steps required by the IAEA Board in its repeated

4

resolutions and by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 29 March. Those include the
full suspension of all uranium enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities, including research and
development, to be verified by the IAEA. For our part,
we said that if Iran suspended all enrichment activity,
we would be prepared to suspend further action in the
Security Council. Suspension will not hinder Iran’s
development of a modern, civil nuclear power industry
in any way, but the continuation of enrichment-related
and reprocessing activities, including research and
development, would allow Iran to develop the knowhow to produce fissile material suitable for use in
nuclear weapons. Given the concern about Iran’s
ambitions, that is not a risk that we can afford to take.
Our proposals suggest a procedure for reviewing the
moratorium once international confidence in Iran’s
intentions has been restored.
The United Kingdom is deeply disappointed that
Iran has neither given any indication that it is ready to
engage seriously on our proposals nor taken the steps
needed to allow negotiations to begin. We concluded
that there was no alternative but to seek today’s
resolution, which creates a mandatory obligation on
Iran to suspend fully all uranium enrichment-related
and reprocessing activities, including research and
development, to be verified by the IAEA. A full
suspension is required to help build confidence and to
create the atmosphere of trust necessary for
negotiations. Negotiations cannot succeed if Iran is
continuing the activities that are the main source of
international concern.
We have adopted a Security Council resolution
that makes the IAEA-required suspension mandatory.
Should Iran refuse to comply, we will work for the
adoption of measures under Article 41 of Chapter VII
of the Charter. Should Iran implement the decisions of
the IAEA and the Security Council and enter into
negotiations, we would be ready to hold back from
further action in the Security Council.
We reaffirm that the proposals that were
conveyed to Iran by the six countries on 6 June 2006
remain valid. The choice is now for Iran to make. We
urge and encourage Iran to take the positive path by
implementing the steps required by the IAEA Board
and the Security Council and to return to talks on the
basis of the ambitious package which we have put
forward.

06-44964

S/PV.5500

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The resolution just adopted reflects the view
of the Security Council regarding the need for Iran to
establish full, transparent cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) so as to
clarify outstanding questions regarding its nuclear
activities and restore confidence in its nuclear
programme. The main goal of the resolution is to
support the efforts of the IAEA to resolve Iran’s
nuclear problems. The Agency possesses all the
necessary capacity to that end and should continue to
play a central role in resolving non-proliferation issues
in the context of Iran’s nuclear programme. We hope
that, with the support of the Security Council in the
form of today’s resolution, it will be easier for the
IAEA to do that job.
By acting under Article 40 of the Charter, the
resolution makes mandatory the demand of the IAEA
regarding Tehran’s suspension of all uranium
enrichment and reprocessing activities. If Iran does not
comply with the provisions of the resolution, members
of the Security Council have expressed the intention to
take appropriate action under Article 41 of Chapter VII
Charter. It is crucial that, as follows unambiguously
from the resolution, any additional measures that could
be required in the future in order to implement the
resolution rule out the use of military force. The
suspension by Iran of all enrichment and reprocessing
activities, which is called for in the resolution, is not a
goal in itself. It should help to clarify outstanding
issues with regard to the nuclear activities of Iran and
to restore trust in its nuclear programme. Thus, this
measure, in accordance with Article 40 of the Charter,
should be viewed as an interim measure during the
period necessary for resolving the issue. If Iran, as we
hope, complies with the Security Council resolution
and the demands of the IAEA and enters into
negotiations, members of the Security Council would
be prepared to refrain from any further action in this
context. We believe that, if negotiations yield a
positive — solution to the problem in terms of the
implementation of the demands of the IAEA, then no
additional action against Iran would be taken in the
Security Council.
It is important that the resolution has a provision
that opens the door for Tehran’s establishment of broad
international cooperation to meet Iran’s energy
requirements on the basis of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. We reaffirm the proposals that were

06-44964

transmitted to Iran by the six countries on 6 June 2006.
We hope that Tehran will properly and seriously view
the contents of this resolution and will take the
necessary steps to redress the situation regarding Iran’s
nuclear programme. We call upon Teheran to respond
positively to the proposals of the six countries.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since the beginning of this year, the Iran nuclear issue
has attracted increasing international attention. The
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has
conveyed to the Security Council a number of reports
and resolutions related to the Iran nuclear issue.
China has all along indicated that purpose of the
Security Council reviewing this issue is to safeguard
the international nuclear non-proliferation mechanism,
strengthen the authority and role of the IAEA, support
the endeavours of the IAEA Director General and his
team to clarify the outstanding issues relating to Iran’s
nuclear programme, promote diplomatic efforts and
resolutely commit itself to finding an appropriate
solution to this issue through political and diplomatic
means.
In line with that purpose, the Security Council
issued a Presidential statement on 29 March 2006
(S/PRST/2006/15) and has just adopted a resolution.
Regrettably, the Iranian side has yet to respond
positively to the requests of the IAEA Board of
Governors and the calls of the Security Council. The
resolution adopted today explicitly demands that Iran
suspend all enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities. It has expressed the intention that, in the
event that Iran fails to comply with the resolution, the
Security Council will work to adopt appropriate
measures under Article 41 of the United Nations
Charter to persuade Iran to comply with the resolution
and the requirements of the IAEA. On the other hand,
in the event that Iran fulfils the aforementioned
obligation and returns to the negotiations table, it will
not be necessary for the Security Council to adopt
additional measures.
This resolution stresses in many of its paragraphs
the importance of finding a negotiated solution through
political and diplomatic efforts. It underlines the
irreplaceable key role of the IAEA in handling this
issue. It endorses the package of proposals put forward
by China, France, Germany, Russia, the United
Kingdom and the United States in early June. It also
emphasizes that these proposals constitute an important

5

S/PV.5500

effort for a comprehensive arrangement which would
allow for the development of bilateral relations and
cooperation based on mutual respect and the
establishment of international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme.
The fact that an appropriate solution to the Iran
nuclear issue is late in coming is due to lack of trust
among the main parties involved. It needs to be
emphasized that, whether it is now or in the future, the
Security Council cannot handle this issue singlehandedly. Dialogue and negotiations are the only way
out. The IAEA should always be the main mechanism
for dealing with this issue. The solution requires allaround diplomatic efforts; any measures adopted by the
Security Council should serve the purpose of
diplomatic efforts.
According to Article 25 of the United Nations
Charter, all United Nations Member States are obliged
to accept and carry out Security Council resolutions. In
the current circumstances, China urges Iran to practice
restraint, attach importance to the extensive appeals
and expectations of the international community,
earnestly implement the requirements of this resolution
and make early response to the package of proposals,
so as to create conditions for increasing trust and
promoting dialogue and negotiations.
We also wish to call upon all the other parties to
adopt a highly responsible attitude towards world
peace, security and stability and the international
nuclear non-proliferation mechanism, and to remain
confident and calm, practice restraint, explore new
ways of thinking and continue to creatively carry out
diplomatic efforts for the settlement of the Iran nuclear
issue. We welcome any ideas and efforts conducive to
conducting talks, breaking the stalemate and reaching
compromises.
During this sensitive period, it is essential for
Iran and all the other parties concerned not to take any
steps that will harm the aforementioned diplomatic
efforts and that may lead to complications or even loss
of control. We call upon all the parties to resume
dialogue and negotiations as soon as possible for the
proper solution of the Iran nuclear issue.
China will, as always, continue its efforts to help
to maintain world and regional peace and stability,
safeguard
and
strengthen
the
international
non-proliferation mechanism and enhance political and

6

diplomatic efforts for the solution of the Iran nuclear
issue.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour of the
resolution we have just adopted. We voted thus while
regretting the failure of diplomatic efforts intended to
engage the Islamic Republic of Iran and to achieve a
suitable outcome that would have protected the right of
Iran to pursue peaceful nuclear activities.
As a matter of principle, the United Republic of
Tanzania is opposed to nuclear weapons, whether held
by friend or by foe. We are therefore opposed to
nuclear proliferation and strongly support the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the nonproliferation regime it establishes under the auspices of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), to
which the Islamic Republic of Iran also subscribes.
The United Republic of Tanzania firmly believes
in the right of the people of Iran to civilian nuclear
energy. This resolution does not in any way seek to
constrain that right. However, it seeks to bring any
such programme under a verifiable inspection regime
of the IAEA. In our view, that is as it ought to be.
The United Republic of Tanzania is mindful that
the Islamic Republic of Iran had offered to respond by
22 August 2006 to the package of proposals presented
by the Permanent Five plus one. We regret that that
Isranian offer was not accommodated. We hope,
however, that the willingness for dialogue that was
demonstrated by that offer can still be reciprocated. In
our view, engaging the Islamic Republic of Iran needs
to be continued by all the parties, including the IAEA.
The United Republic of Tanzania also voted in
favour of the resolution essentially because it precludes
the use of force as an option in engaging the Islamic
Republic of Iran. It is our hope that, even in the
resolution’s current form, additional measures will be
unnecessary.
In conclusion, it is also the hope of the United
Republic of Tanzania that the adoption of today’s
resolution at this point in time will not serve to further
complicate matters in an already volatile region.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): The Japanese delegation
views the resolution just adopted as a balanced text. Its
adoption represents endorsement by the broad
international community of the efforts by France,
Germany and the United Kingdom (the EU-3) and

06-44964

S/PV.5500

other partners to achieve non-proliferation in a vital
region of the world. Japan appreciates the efforts of the
EU-3 to work out the package that was presented to
Iran in early June and to undertake the subsequent
dialogue with the Iranian authorities.
Japan believes that the important issue of nonproliferation should be resolved through diplomatic
and peaceful means. The adoption of today’s resolution
constitutes, in our view, a path of such diplomatic
efforts. Japan sincerely and earnestly hopes and
expects that Iran will take seriously the message from
the Security Council as formulated in the resolution
and respond positively to it within the defined timeline.
Japan — as a country that has traditionally had a
close,
friendly,
important
and
wide-ranging
relationship with Iran, and as a country deeply
committed to nuclear non-proliferation and to the nonproliferation of other weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery — has undertaken its own
diplomatic initiative with the Iranian authorities
towards the peaceful resolution of this issue. Japan is
committed to continuing to make its own efforts to
contribute to the resolution of the issue through
continuous dialogue and engagement with Iran.

willingness to seriously discuss the substance of the
proposals made on 6 June on behalf of China, France,
Germany, the Russian Federation, the Russian
Federation and the United States. Under such
conditions, the six countries had no choice but to
resume the activity that had been suspended in the
Security Council. We welcome the international
community’s support, through this vote, for the efforts
of our countries.
France — in a position shared by Germany,
which co-sponsored the text — emphasizes the
following elements.
The resolution that we have just adopted makes
mandatory the suspension requested by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA); it does
not mean an end to negotiations. We reaffirm the
proposals made to Iran on 6 June by our six countries.
If Iran should refuse to comply with the resolution, we
will then work to adopt measures under Article 41 of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. If
Iran should implement the decisions of the IAEA and
the Security Council and enter into negotiations, we
will be prepared to abstain from further action in the
Council.

Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina voted in favour of today’s resolution bearing
in mind that the text adopted reaffirms the right of
every State signatory of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, in conformity with
articles I and II of the Treaty, to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination.

Once again, we appeal to Iran to respond
positively to the substantive proposals that we made
last month.

Furthermore, my delegation earnestly hopes that
a diplomatic solution negotiated with the Government
of Iran will be achieved. That is why we call on the
parties involved to resume the dialogue in order to find
a solution within the framework of arrangement, with
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and by the Security Council with
regard to the Iran nuclear issue.

Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): In my letter
of 28 July 2006 addressed to the President of the
Security Council, I requested an opportunity to speak
before the Council took action so that the Council
would be apprised — for the first time, I might add —
of the views of the concerned party before it adopted a
decision. Members may recall that my previous request
to speak before the Council, when it adopted its
presidential statement on 29 March, was also denied. It
is indeed indicative of the degree of the Council’s
transparency and fairness that it has adopted a
presidential statement and a resolution without even
allowing the views of the concerned party to be heard.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.
Resolution 1696 (2006), which the Security
Council has just adopted, was made necessary by the
fact that Iran, despite three meetings between
Mr. Javier Solana and Mr. Ali Larijani, has shown no

06-44964

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.

Be that as it may, I will make — for the record, I
presume — the statement that was intended for
presentation before action. Before I do so, however,

7

S/PV.5500

allow me to express our profound appreciation to our
neighbour Qatar for its negative vote based on its
position of principle as well as its legitimate concern
for the stability of our region.
This is not the first time that Iran’s endeavours to
stand on its own feet and make technological advances
have faced stiff resistance and concerted pressure from
some Powers permanently represented in the Security
Council. In fact, contemporary Iran has been subjected
to numerous injustices and prejudicial approaches by
those Powers. In a draft resolution submitted on
12 October 1951 by the United Kingdom and supported
in the Council by the United States and France, the
Iranian people’s struggle to nationalize their oil
industry was touted as a threat to international peace
and security. That draft resolution preceded a coup
d’état organized by the United States and the United
Kingdom in a less-veiled attempt to restore their shortsighted interests. The coup, which was obviously no
longer disguisable in the language of the Charter or by
diplomatic subterfuge, restored the brutal dictatorship.
The people of Iran nevertheless succeeded in
nationalizing the oil industry, thus pioneering a
courageous movement in the developing world to
demand their inalienable right to exercise sovereignty
over their natural resources.
More recently, Saddam Hussein’s aggression
against the Islamic Republic of Iran on 22 September
1980 and his swift advance to occupy 30,000 square
kilometres of Iranian territory did not trouble the same
permanent members of the Security Council enough to
make them consider it a threat to international peace
and security or even to make the routine call for a
ceasefire and withdrawal. I wonder if I can still call it a
“routine call” these days. Nor did they find it necessary
even to adopt a resolution for seven long days after the
aggression, hoping that their generally held, utter
miscalculation that Saddam could put an end to the
Islamic Republic within a week would be realized.
Sounds familiar these days, does it not?
Even then, and for the following two long years,
they did not deem fit to call for a withdrawal of the
invading forces. The first Security Council resolution
calling for withdrawal came in July 1982, only after
the Iranian people had already single-handedly
liberated their territory against all odds. Nor was this
Council allowed for several long years, and in spite of
mounting evidence and United Nations reports, to deal

8

with the use of chemical weapons by the former Iraqi
dictator against Iranian civilians and military personnel
because, as a former United States Defense Intelligence
Agency official told the New York Times, “The
Pentagon was not so horrified by Iraq’s use of gas… It
was just another way of killing people.” Just another
way. Some 20 years later, tens of thousands of Iranians
continue to suffer and die from that “just another way”.
Over the past several weeks, this body has been
prevented from moving to stop the massive aggression
against the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples and the
resulting terrible humanitarian crisis. Diplomatic words
fail to describe the way the massacre in Qana was
addressed yesterday. Nor is the Council given the
slightest chance of addressing the aggressor’s nuclear
arsenal, despite its compulsive propensity to engage in
aggression and carnage.
Likewise, the Security Council has been
prevented from reacting to the daily threats of resort to
force against Iran, even threats of using nuclear
weapons uttered at the highest levels by representatives
of the United States, the United Kingdom and the
lawless Israeli regime, in violation of Article 2 (4) of
the Charter.
On the other hand, over the past few years, a few
big Powers have spared no effort in turning the
Security Council, or the threat of resorting to it, into a
tool for attempting to prevent Iran from exercising its
inalienable right to nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes, recognized explicitly under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The intention
to use the Council only as a tool for that or even more
dangerous ends could not have been made clearer than
in the statement by the permanent representative of the
United States at the meeting of the American Israel
Public Affairs Committee on 5 March this year:
“It is critical that we use the Council to help
mobilize international public opinion. Rest
assured, though, we are not relying on the
Security Council as the only tool in our toolbox
to address this problem.”
The people and the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran are determined to exercise their
inalienable right to nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes and to build on their own scientific advances
in developing various peaceful aspects of that
technology. At the same time, as the only victims of the
use of weapons of mass destruction in recent history,

06-44964

S/PV.5500

they reject the development and use of all those
inhuman weapons on ideological as well as strategic
grounds. The leader of the Islamic Republic has issued
a public and categorical religious decree against the
development, production, stockpiling and use of
nuclear weapons.
Iran has also clearly and continuously stressed
that nuclear weapons have no place in its military
doctrine. The President of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
in his statement before the General Assembly last
September, also underlined Iran’s fundamental
rejection of nuclear weapons, as well as the need to
strengthen and revitalize the non-proliferation Treaty.
He also stressed that “continued interaction and
technical and legal cooperation with the International
Atomic Energy Agency will be the centerpiece of our
nuclear policy” (A/60/PV.10, p.8).
In order to dispel any doubt about our peaceful
nuclear programme, we enabled the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to carry out a series of
inspections that amounts to the most robust inspection
of any IAEA member State. It included more than
2,000 inspector-days of scrutiny over the past three
years; the signing of the Additional Protocol on 18
December 2003 and its immediate implementation
until 6 February 2006; the submission of more than
1,000 pages of declaration under the Additional
Protocol; allowing over 53 instances of complementary
access to different sites across the country; and
permitting inspectors to investigate baseless allegations
by taking the unprecedented step of providing repeated
access to military sites.
Consequently, all reports of the IAEA since
November 2003 have been indicative of the peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. In November
2003 and in the wake of sensational media reports on
the so-called 18-years of concealment by Iran, the
Agency confirmed that “[t]o date, there is no evidence
that the previously undeclared nuclear material and
activities… were related to a nuclear weapons
programme” (GOV/2003/75, para. 52). We all
remember how that statement was received by the
United States Under-Secretary of State of the time.
The same conclusion can be found in other IAEA
reports, even as recently as that of February 2006,
which states that, “[a]s indicated to the Board in
November 2004, and again in September 2005, all the
declared nuclear material in Iran has been accounted

06-44964

for” (GOV/2006/15, para. 53). The Agency reaffirmed
once again in paragraph 53 of the same report that it
“has not seen any diversion of nuclear material to
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices”
(ibid.).
Much has been made, including in today’s
resolution, of a statement by the IAEA that it is not yet
in a position “to conclude that there are no undeclared
nuclear materials or activities in Iran” (GOV/2005/67,
para. 51). But the sponsors have conveniently ignored
the repeated acknowledgment by the Director-General
of the IAEA that “the process of drawing such a
conclusion… is a time consuming process” (ibid.).
They also ignored the addendum to the 2005 IAEA
safeguards implementation report, released in June
2006, which indicates that 45 other countries are in the
same category as Iran, including 14 Europeans and
several members of this Council. I might add that, out
of three sponsors of today’s resolution, two are
obviously in the privileged class, self-immunized from
any scrutiny, but the third is in the same category as
Iran.
Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme poses no
threat to international peace and security, and therefore
dealing with that issue in the Security Council is
unwarranted and void of any legal basis or practical
utility. Far from reflecting, as advertised, the concerns
of the international community, the approach of the
sponsors flouts the stated position of the overwhelming
majority of the international community, clearly
reflected in the most recent statements by the foreign
ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement and of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), and
partly reflected in the June 2006 IAEA Board
Chairman’s conclusion.
The 57 members of the OIC, in their recent
ministerial meeting in Baku, expressed their
“conviction that the only way to resolve Iran’s nuclear
issue is to resume negotiations without preconditions”
(A/60/915, annex, enclosure 2, para. 12). They
welcomed “the readiness of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to settle all remaining outstanding issues
peacefully”; recognized that “any attempt aimed at
limiting the application of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy would affect the sustainable development of
developing countries”; rejected “discrimination and
double standards in peaceful uses of nuclear energy”;
and, finally, expresssed

9

S/PV.5500

“concern over any unwanted consequences on the
peace and security of the region and beyond of
threats and pressures on Iran by certain circles to
renounce its inalienable right to develop nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes”.
The Non-Aligned Movement, comprising an
overwhelming majority of the Members of the
Organization, in the recent statement of its ministers,
meeting in Putrajaya, “stressed that there should be no
undue pressure or interference in the Agency’s
activities, especially its verification process, which
would jeopardize the efficiency and credibility of the
Agency” and that “nothing should be interpreted in a
way as inhibiting or restricting this right of States to
develop atomic energy for peaceful purposes”. They
also reaffirmed that “States’ choices and decisions in
the field of peaceful uses of nuclear technology and its
fuel-cycle policies must be respected”.
But, claiming to represent the international
community itself, the European Union three (EU-3), in
their so-called package of incentives last August, asked
Iran to “make a binding commitment not to pursue fuel
information
circular
cycle
activities”
(IAEA
INFCIRC/651, attachment, para. 34). A cursory look at
the chronology of events since last August indicates
that Iran’s rejection of that illegal and unwarranted
demand has been, and continues to be, the sole reason
for the imposition of resolutions and statements on the
Board of the International Atomic Energy Agency and
on the Security Council. Today’s proposed action by
the Council — which is the culmination of those
efforts aimed at making the suspension of uranium
enrichment mandatory — violates the fundamental
principles of international law, the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and IAEA
Board resolutions. It also runs counter to the views of
the majority of Member States, which the Security
Council is obliged to represent.
The IAEA Board, in its November 2004
resolution, ironically drafted by the very same sponsors
of today’s resolution, declared that suspension “is a
voluntary, non-legally binding, confidence-building
measure”. That was repeated as recently as 15 June
2006, in the IAEA Board Chairman’s conclusion.
The Non-Aligned Movement, in its recent
ministerial statement referred to earlier, stressed “the
fundamental distinction between the legal obligations
of States to their respective safeguards agreements and

10

any
confidence-building
measures
voluntarily
undertaken to resolve difficult issues” and “that such
voluntary undertakings are not legal safeguards
obligations”.
The sole reason for pushing the Council to take
action, as highlighted in the resolution, is that Iran
decided, after over two years of negotiations, to resume
the exercise of its inalienable right to nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes by partially
reopening its fully safeguarded facilities and ending a
voluntary suspension. Iran’s right to enrich uranium is
recognized under the NPT. Upholding the rights of
States parties to international treaties is as essential as
ensuring respect for their obligations. Those regimes,
including the NPT, are sustained by a balance between
rights and obligations. Threats will not sustain the NPT
or other international regimes; ensuring that members
can draw rightful benefits from membership, and that
non-members are not rewarded for their intransigence,
will.
Yet, exactly the opposite is the trend today. Today
we are witness to an extremely dangerous trend. While
members of the NPT are denied their rights and are
punished, those who defy the NPT, particularly the
perpetrators of the current carnage in Lebanon and
Palestine, are rewarded with generous nuclear
cooperation agreements. This goes so far that, when it
suits the United States, even the acquisition of nuclear
weapons by non-NPT members becomes “legitimate”,
to quote the United States Ambassador. That is one
awkward way to strengthen the NPT or ensure its
universality.
That trend has reached such a horrendous, and
indeed ridiculous, state that the Israeli regime — a
non-member of the NPT, whose nuclear arsenal,
coupled with its expansionist, repressive and Stateterror policies and behaviour are repeatedly
recognized, including by NPT Review Conferences, as
the single most serious threat to regional and
international peace and security — finds the audacity
to cry wolf about Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme
and to lead a global campaign of threats, lies,
deception, pressure, blackmail and outright extortion.
Yet, in spite of the massive political and propaganda
machine, no one in today’s world can accept the
convoluted logic that it is okay for some to have
nuclear weapons while others are prevented from
developing nuclear energy.

06-44964

S/PV.5500

Another destructive trend is the imposition of
arbitrary thresholds, which are often a function of
bilateral considerations rather than objective or
technical criteria. It should be interesting to recall that
the United States began by trying to deny Iran any kind
of nuclear activity. Even as late as 31 January 2003, the
State Department spokesman was saying that “we have
consistently urged Russia to cease all such cooperation
with Iran, including its assistance to the light water
reactor at Bushehr”.
The new threshold regarding enrichment is as
arbitrary as the previous ones, and is simply another
excuse to begin a trend to prevent the realization of the
rights of the members of the NPT to peaceful use
while, according to the United States Ambassador,
non-members could legitimately continue producing
nuclear bombs.
It has been argued that intervention by the
Security Council is needed to ensure cooperation by
Iran with the Agency and to bring Iran back to the
negotiating table. I suggest that Security Council
involvement is not needed to achieve that goal. In fact,
involvement by the Council hinders rather than helps
this ongoing process, because it is designed as an
instrument of pressure.
As I indicated earlier, Iran’s cooperation with the
Agency was far more extensive and comprehensive
before action was imposed on the IAEA Board to
engage the Security Council. That cooperation enabled
the Agency to conclude, last September, that good
progress had been made “in the Agency’s ability to
confirm certain aspects of Iran’s current declarations,
which will be followed up as a routine safeguards
(IAEA
document
implementation
matter”
GOV/2005/67, para. 43).
As for returning to the negotiating table, Iran has
always been ready for negotiations. For almost three
years, Iran tried to sustain, and even to resuscitate,
negotiations with the EU-3. Iran offered far-reaching
proposals to address concerns as well as to usher in a
new era of cooperation: in August 2004, in January
2005, in March 2005, in April 2005, in July 2005, in
September 2005, in January 2006, in February 2006
and in March 2006. Throughout that period, Iran
adopted extensive and extremely costly confidencebuilding measures, including the suspension of its
rightful enrichment activities for two years, to ensure
the success of those negotiations. All along, it has been

06-44964

the persistence of some in drawing arbitrary red lines
and deadlines that has closed the door to any
compromise. This tendency has single-handedly
blocked success and in most cases killed proposals in
their infancy. This has been Washington’s persistent
strategy ever since Iran and the EU-3 started their
negotiations in October 2003. Only the tactics have
changed.
All along, the threats by some to bring this issue
before the Council and to take it out of its proper
technical and negotiated structure have loomed large
over the negotiations and have impeded progress,
derailed discussions and prevented focus on a mutually
acceptable resolution. The manner in which
negotiations over the recently proposed package have
been conducted is a further indication of the same
propensity to resort to threats and the lack of genuine
will to reach a mutually acceptable resolution.
Iran, publicly and in a show of good faith, reacted
positively to this initiative and indicated its readiness
to engage in fair, non-discriminatory and resultoriented negotiations about the package within a
mutually agreed time frame and without preconditions.
Yet, an arbitrary deadline was set, ex post facto,
without any justification and only to serve the totally
ulterior objective of maximizing pressure.
Indeed, it is informative to note that it took the
EU-3 nearly five months, from March to August 2005,
to consider a very serious proposal made by Iran last
year. And even then the EU-3 came up with a response
that did not address any elements of that proposal. And
yet, while the Islamic Republic of Iran has clearly
stated that it requires three more weeks to conclude its
evaluation of the proposed package and come up with a
substantive reaction, it is astonishing — and indeed
telling — to see that the EU-3 and the United States are
in such a rush to prematurely hamper the path of
negotiations by imposing a destructive and totally
unwarranted Security Council resolution. This rush
becomes even more suspect if one takes into account
repeated statements of the Director-General of the
IAEA, numerous United States experts and even the
United States intelligence community about the
absence of any urgency.
Compare this rush to the fact that some of the
very same Powers have for the past three weeks
prevented any action — not even a 72-hour
humanitarian truce — by the Security Council on the

11

S/PV.5500

urgent situation in Lebanon, which has been officially
and publicly interpreted by the aggressors as a green
light to continue their onslaught, unfortunately
including the recent carnage in Qana. Security Council
members can be the judge of how much credibility this
leaves for the Council. Millions of people around the
world have already passed their judgement.

people and the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran are not seeking confrontation and have always
shown their readiness to engage in serious and resultoriented negotiations based on mutual respect and on
an equal footing. They have also shown, time and
again, their resilience in the face of pressure, threat,
injustice and imposition.

So, it is pertinent to ask: What is the motive
behind this long-standing urge of some permanent
members to bring Iran before the Security Council?
And what is the current rush? Is it anything but
pressure and coercion? I would suggest that this
approach will not lead to any productive outcome and
that in fact it can only exacerbate the situation. The

The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

12

The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

06-44964
