S/2022/882

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 November 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 28 November 2022 from the Permanent Representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council
I am writing to you in response to the letter dated 22 November 2022 from the
representatives of France, Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/878), wherein its authors have once agai n
desperately attempted to establish an unrelated and fictitious link between p aragraph 3
of annex B to Council resolution 2231 (2015) and the launches by the Islami c
Republic of Iran of certain ballistic missiles or space launch vehicles by repeated l y
making flawed and fallacious assertions and resorting to arbitrary and mislead i n g
interpretations of the resolution.
The Islamic Republic of Iran categorically rejects all unsubstantiated allegatio n s
made against it in the aforementioned letter and reiterates that it has not conduc t ed
any activity inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
As has been stated on numerous occasions, including in the letter dated 26 May
2022 (S/2022/438), paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015), which call s
upon Iran “not to undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles designed to be
capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including launches using such ballistic missi l e
technology” is unambiguous and does not require interpretation. Contrary to the
claims made in the above-mentioned letter (S/2022/878), paragraph 3 of annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015) does not concern nor does it apply to space launch vehicl es
for a number of reasons. First, there is no explicit reference to “space launch vehicles”
therein. Second, space launch vehicles do not incorporate technologies identical to
“ballistic missiles designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons”. Third ,
“space launch vehicles”, which are exclusively designed to place satellites into orbi t ,
are not “designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons”.
The Security Council must take into account the exact provisions and contex t
of resolution 2231 (2015), including the negotiating history and, in particular, the
rationale for including the phrase “designed to be capable” in paragraph 3 of annex B
to that resolution as well as the Council’s subsequent practice in dealing with the
implementation of that paragraph.
In the aforesaid letter, the authors have also invoked non -consensual and
non-universally-agreed-upon Missile Technology Control Regime definitions and, in
connection with their unfounded claims, made a reference to the terminated and obsolete
Security Council resolution 1929 (2010) and to relevant outdated reports in entirel y
different contexts. To that end, the authors have disseminated technical misinformat i o n

22-27038 (E)

021222

*2227038*

S/2022/882

to reach their arbitrary conclusion regarding resolution 2231 (2015) and its
implementation based on an arbitrary and misleading interpretation of that paragraph.
The Missile Technology Control Regime is an exclusive “informal political
understanding” among only 35 States, and its criteria are not legally binding, even fo r
its members. As a result, any attempt to characterize the Missile Technology Control
Regime and its criteria as the universally accepted definition or an international
consensus-based agreement is unethical, deceptive, suspicious and will not be accepted .
Moreover, in his report dated 23 July 2002 (A/57/229), the Secretary-Gen e r al
clearly stated, “There is no universally accepted norm or instrument specifical l y
governing the development, testing, production, acquisition, transfer, deployment o r
use of missiles”. This fact has also been acknowledged by the High Representat i v e
for Disarmament Affairs in her remarks before the Security Council on 22 Augu st
2019 wherein she stated, “there remains no universal norm, treaty or agreemen t
regulating missiles” (S/PV.8602 ).
The Islamic Republic of Iran has stated time and again that its missile and space
programmes, including its launches of ballistic missiles or space launch vehicles, fal l
outside of the purview or competence of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) and
its annexes.
The respective governments of the authors of the aforement ioned letter must
fully and genuinely comply with all of their respective legal obligations under that
resolution, including by refraining from any actions that undermine its
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), particularly its annex A, rather than
engaging in such an unethical exercise while also repeatedly making politicall y
motivated unfounded claims against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
We caution against any politically driven approach used by certain developed
countries with space programmes that seek to demonize the use of space technolog y
for peaceful purposes by developing countries under absurd pretexts, such as
proliferation concerns. This hypocritical approach seriously jeopardizes the exerci se
of States’ inherent right to access space and celestial bodies as well as their freed o m
to explore and use outer space for peaceful purposes, including their free access to
space science, technologies and applications without discrimination of any kind.
We reiterate, once again, that Iran is determined to continue its activities relat ed
to ballistic missiles and space launch vehicles, both of which are within its inheren t
rights under international law and are necessary for the preservation of its security as
well as socioeconomic interests.
Given the mandate outlined in the note by the President of the Security Counci l
on the Council’s tasks pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/44), the Secret ary General is expected to take his mandate seriously and to refrain from reporting on
such irrelevant activities in his subsequent reports on the resolution’s implementat i o n .
Instead, the Secretary -Gen eral is kindly urged to report the non-compliance of Fran ce,
Germany and the United Kingdom with their obligations under the resolution, based
on the aforesaid terms of reference.
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter circulated as a documen t
of the Security Council.
(Signed) Amir Saeid Iravani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

2/2

22-27038
