A/60/341–S/2005/567

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

General Assembly
Sixtieth session
Item 111 of the provisional agenda*
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organization

Distr.: General
8 September 2005
English
Original: English and French

Security Council
Sixtieth year

Identical letters dated 29 August 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
The sixth high-level meeting between the United Nations and regional and
other intergovernmental organizations was convened at United Nations
Headquarters in New York on 25 and 26 July 2005. The theme of the meeting was
“United Nations-regional organizations: partnership for a more secure world”.
Twenty delegations from regional, subregional and other intergovernmental
organizations, thirteen at the level of head of organization, took part in the meeting.
The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the findings of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565) and my report entitled “In larger
freedom” (A/59/2005) and in particular, the recommendations related to regional
organizations. The participants agreed that the relationship between the United
Nations and the regional and other intergovernmental organizations should be
significantly strengthened. They also agreed that the results of the meeting should
be conveyed to the High-level Plenary Meeting that will be held from 14 to
16 September in New York.
In that connection, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the
conclusions of the meeting, which reflect my understanding, as Chairman, of the
various proposals and comments (see annex I). I also attach the text of my opening
remarks (see annex II). I shall keep you informed of further progress made by the
United Nations and regional and other intergovernmental organizations in this
increasingly important field.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

* A/60/150.

05-48331 (E) 090905

*0548331*

A/60/341
S/2005/567

Annex I
[Original: English]

Conclusions of the Chairman of the sixth high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional and other
intergovernmental organizations
25 and 26 July 2005
1.
The sixth high-level meeting between the United Nations and regional and
other intergovernmental organizations was held on 25 and 26 July 2005 at United
Nations Headquarters. Twenty organizations participated in the meeting, of which
13 were represented at the level of head of organization. A list of participating
organizations is included in paragraph 11.
2.
In his opening statement the Secretary-General noted that the meeting was
being held at a unique moment for the international community. There was a crisis
of confidence in the ability of multilateral institutions to meet the challenges of our
times. Yet moments of crisis carried the seeds of opportunity, and it was necessary
now to reinvigorate the multilateral system through the adoption of far-reaching
reform measures such as those proposed in recent reports to be discussed at the
sixtieth anniversary session of the General Assembly (namely, the report of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565) and the report of
the Secretary-General entitled “In larger freedom” (A/59/2005). The relationship of
the United Nations with regional and other intergovernmental organizations was a
critical part of this effort. He called for a common vision of a global architecture of
peace and security with interlocking capacities based on the comparative advantages
of the global and regional institutions.
3.
Participants condemned the spate of terrorist bombings of recent months,
which had shaken the peoples of the world. Never before had the security of the
individual citizen and the security of the global community been so starkly and
closely connected. It was, in their view, clear that the human security of all citizens
of the planet and the State security of members of both the United Nations and
regional and other participating organizations depended on combating terrorism
while also respecting civil liberties and addressing the root causes of conflict and
terrorism. Structural prevention needed also to be complemented by effective
operational prevention, based on effective regional-global cooperation in conflict
prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. To that end, the
systemic weaknesses of the global system, such as absolute poverty, natural resource
depletion and environmental degradation, health pandemics and the social ills of
crime and corruption needed to be seriously addressed as issues of international
peace and security.
4.
Participants recalled the challenge articulated by the Secretary-General at the
fifth high-level meeting to develop a regional-global mechanism of peace and
security. They expressed satisfaction at the work done in the two years since then on
strengthening the United Nations-regional organizations partnership. In this respect
they endorsed the proposals, with modifications agreed upon at the meeting, put
forward by the six working groups that had been established in the areas of
peacekeeping, civilian protection, respect for human rights in counter-terrorism,

2

A/60/341
S/2005/567

dialogue among civilizations, disarmament and the implications of United Nations
reform for the partnership. They supported the further development of
organizational capacities in conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding at both the regional and subregional levels. In this respect they
supported in particular the proposed 10-year capacity-building plan for the African
Union. Future meetings would include special attention to African needs.
5.
In the light of the trauma experienced by peoples of so many regions of the
world in the wake of the Asian tsunami and other recent natural disasters,
participants agreed to include disaster relief and disaster risk-reduction on their
agenda for future cooperation.
6.
It was recognized that a need existed for a more structured relationship
between the United Nations and regional and other intergovernmental organizations
if a genuine complementarity based on their comparative advantages was to be
realized. Participants endorsed the intention of the Secretary-General to conclude
agreements of appropriate kinds with individual organizations.
7.

Participants also agreed upon the following measures:
• To convene on an annual basis to monitor developments in international
security and promote the goals of the United Nations
• To ensure that their high-level meetings coincide with the meetings held by the
Security Council with regional organizations for better efficiency of
participation and for substantive complementarity of agendas
• To establish a standing committee that would act, under terms of reference
agreed upon by all participating organizations, as an initiator of ideas, a
mobilizer of political will and sustainable direction and a monitor for ensuring
the implementation of decisions made
• To identify one high-level official in each organization for the purpose of
liaising with the United Nations and with one another
• To recognize that interested regional and subregional organizations will pursue
joint activities under the umbrella of high-level meetings under Chapter VIII
of the Charter while other intergovernmental organizations will partner with
the United Nations under the other Charter provisions, in response to the
distinction made by the High-level Panel to that effect
• To strengthen both the secretariat of the high-level meetings in the Department
of Political Affairs and its research partner (Comparative Regional Integration
Studies, United Nations University) in order to provide continuous assistance
for the new standing committee and the working groups.

8.
Participants supported the establishment of a Human Rights Council and a
Peacebuilding Commission, while stressing the latter’s role also in conflict
prevention. They adopted a statement on a partnership among civilizations (see
appendix).
9.
Participants recalled with appreciation the conference immediately preceding
the high-level meeting, organized by Max van der Stoel, on “quiet diplomacy” as a
method of conflict prevention and resolution under Chapter VI of the Charter.

3

A/60/341
S/2005/567

10. The detailed record of the sixth high-level meeting and the decisions reached
on the results of each working group will be distributed to participants for comment
and will thereafter form the basis of work in preparation for the seventh high-level
meeting.
11. Participating regional and other intergovernmental organizations were as
follows:
African Union
Caribbean Community Secretariat
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Commonwealth of Independent States
Commonwealth Secretariat
Community of Portuguese-speaking countries
Council of Europe
European Union; represented by the Presidency of the Council, the Council
Secretariat and the Commission
Economic Community of Central African States
International Criminal Police Organization
International Organization of la Francophonie
League of Arab States
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Organization of American States
Organization of the Islamic Conference
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Pacific Islands Forum
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Southern African Development Community

4

A/60/341
S/2005/567

Appendix
Statement on a partnership among civilizations
1.
The participants in the sixth high-level meeting between the Secretary-General
and the heads of regional and other intergovernmental organizations commend the
dialogue among civilizations, launched in 1998 by the United Nations. The dialogue
was born of the existence of two different perceptions of diversity: diversity as a
threat or diversity as an instrument for betterment and growth. The need still exists
to overcome divisiveness deriving from prejudice, intolerance, misconceptions,
enmity and lack of knowledge. The dialogue thus continues to require institutional
support.
2.
To foster this, we agree that it is necessary to proceed towards a partnership
among civilizations, involving all stakeholders — Governments, intergovernmental
organizations and civil society. This partnership will represent a powerful response
to those who feed on exclusion and arrogantly claim the sole ownership of truth.
Indeed, a new “narrative” is called for at a time when old paradigms of international
relations are increasingly questioned. Forging common ground requires a global
narrative based on our common spiritual and cultural insights.
3.
We are determined to strengthen the global agenda-setting role of the majority
of humankind. A global agenda intrinsically embraces us all. Thus, a partnership
among civilizations is possible. Our increasingly interdependent societies and our
common identity as individuals should foster this.
4.
We also believe that advocacy of a global civilization with all its diversity,
including every citizen of the planet, is needed to pursue the partnership among
civilizations project. We intend to establish a group of leading personalities from
various sectors of society to play that advocacy role. Our organizations, including
those of the United Nations system and transnational organizations, can play a
leading role in this endeavour and institutionalize it by taking appropriate steps.

5

A/60/341
S/2005/567

Annex II
[Original: English]

Statement of the Chairman at the opening of the sixth high-level
meeting with regional and other intergovernmental organizations
I am pleased to welcome you to the United Nations for the sixth high-level
meeting between the United Nations and regional and other intergovernmental
organizations.
We meet at a unique moment for the United Nations and the multilateral
system. The events that have shaken the international community so profoundly in
recent years have produced a crisis of confidence in the ability of our multilateral
institutions to cope with the challenges of our time.
Yet moments of crisis carry seeds of opportunity — offering us the chance to
react with a positive spirit, innovative mindset and decisive political will. In this
way, we can open the door to action for much-needed renewal of our multilateral
institutions.
In September, the world’s leaders will meet here at the United Nations for
what is expected to be one of the largest gatherings of heads of State and
Government ever. As of today, 175 heads of State and Government have indicated
that they will attend the summit. I believe we will have a once-in-a-generation
opportunity to address some of the most pressing challenges of our era.
It will be a test of our ability to act on the understanding that development,
security and human rights are not only ends in themselves — they reinforce each
other and depend on each other. That in our interconnected world, the human family
will not enjoy security without development, will not enjoy development without
security, and will enjoy neither without respect for human rights. And that to
promote progress in all three, we also need to reinvigorate our multilateral
institutions.
We have a solid foundation for doing this. Building on the far-reaching
proposals of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change and the
Millennium Project, I proposed to United Nations Member States an agenda for the
September summit in my report “In larger freedom: towards development, security
and human rights for all”.
Ongoing discussions, under the very able leadership of the President of the
General Assembly, are building consensus over a range of issues — on financing for
development, comprehensive national development strategies, health and
environmental issues; on terrorism and non-proliferation; on post-conflict
reconstruction, human rights and reform of the United Nations itself.
The United Nations relationship with regional organizations is a critical part of
the discussion.
That is why this meeting is so timely. It gives us an opportunity to provide
concerted input to the process.
Indeed, there are a number of interesting proposals on the table. The aim is
clear: we need better-structured and more efficient channels of cooperation between

6

A/60/341
S/2005/567

the United Nations and regional organizations. We need agreements between the
United Nations and individual organizations to govern the sharing of information,
expertise and resources. We need flexible interaction that recognizes the diversity of
mandates and means of regional and other intergovernmental organizations and
avoids a one-size-fits-all approach.
To that end, I intend to invite more regularly regional organizations to
participate in meetings of United Nations coordinating bodies on issues of particular
mutual interest. From now on, I also believe that we should implement what has
been suggested before and hold a meeting like this every year. If possible, our
annual meeting could be arranged so as to coincide with meetings between regional
organizations and the Security Council.
As you know, a key point in my reform proposals is the creation of a
Peacebuilding Commission, which could help ensure that peace agreements do not
collapse and yield to renewed violence.
The Commission would bring together all relevant international and regional
actors, from within and outside the United Nations system. It would afford the
possibility for regional organizations to have a seat and a voice at the table during
the critical rebuilding stage in countries emerging from conflict. It would allow for
more cohesive results-oriented planning, taking into account valuable regional
expertise and dividing up tasks on the basis of comparative advantage. We should
discuss forms and options for your participation during our deliberations later today.
On international peacekeeping, the needs remain great. The demands of warstricken countries often outstrip the United Nations capacity to deal with them.
Moreover, other organizations may be better-suited to respond to certain situations.
For example, the African Union is trailblazing a leadership role in Darfur.
We wholeheartedly welcome an overall increase in global peacekeeping
capacities and strongly support their further development at the regional and
subregional levels, including through the proposed 10-year capacity-building plan
for the African Union.
Our challenge now is to articulate a common vision for a global architecture
interlocking such capacities based on comparative advantages and clear divisions of
labour. We must step up our dialogue on what that system should look like over the
coming decades, of course always recognizing the central role of the Security
Council in all this, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Also on the agenda is the question of how to increase the participation of
regional organizations in multi-pillar peace operations under the overall United
Nations umbrella.
All these proposals will add value to the complementary roles which regional
organizations can play as true partners of the United Nations in peace, security and
beyond.
There are many areas in which we are cooperating and where we can improve
our interaction to better results: strengthening democratic institutions, good
governance and the rule of law; providing electoral assistance; promoting respect
for human rights; responding to humanitarian emergencies, including natural
disasters; dealing with terrorism, organized crime and corruption; and supporting
the development efforts of weaker nations.

7

A/60/341
S/2005/567

Let us spare no effort to work more closely and more efficiently together for
the mutual benefit of our organizations and respective Member States and, above all,
for the peoples of every region in the world.

8
