S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9250th meeting

Thursday, 26 January 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane/Mrs. Shino. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Figueiredo Sobral Torres
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Mrs. Sanchez Izquierdo
Ms. Fériaud
Mr. Nanga
Ms. Barnor
Mr. De Bono Sant Cassia
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Suprunenko
Mrs. Chanda
Ms. Alameri
Mr. Weld-Blundell
Ms. Strainic

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Investment in people to enhance resilience against complex challenges
Letter dated 5 January 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/19)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-02585 (E)
*2302585*

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I give the floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Jurečko (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
In my intervention, I will focus on the following
three aspects: investment, inclusiveness and partnership.
Peacebuilding is about rebuilding trust and governance.
It is about healing and building resilient societies. And
with today’s complex challenges and growing number
of conflicts, the importance of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding is evident.
My first point concerns investment. While we
agree that investing in peacebuilding means investing
in sustainable peace, financing continues to be a
critical challenge. Sustainable and predictable funding
is key. Slovenia will continue to contribute to the
Peacebuilding Fund and work towards multiannual
planning to increase its predictability. Integrating
sustainable development in peacebuilding provides
the basis for reconciling and rebuilding communities.
It promotes inclusive socioeconomic growth, access
to education and health care, and environmental
protection. Addressing people’s needs and investing
in promoting and protecting their human rights
paves the way for building peaceful and resilient
societies. Investing in efforts to enhance sustainable
water, food security and environmental management,
combat climate change, and ensure good governance,
the empowerment of women and young people, and
education on human rights has been at the forefront of
Slovenia’s development cooperation.
My second point concerns inclusiveness. An
inclusive approach is the key to peacebuilding, and
involving local communities and all parts of society is
essential — it validates the peacebuilding processes.
A sustainable and socially just economic model must
involve young people and women. However, the latter
remain underestimated and overlooked, and their rights
continue to be violated. We are especially concerned
about the situation in Afghanistan, where women’s
and girls’ rights to health, education and work are
2/43

26/01/2023

being denied on a daily basis. We all need to do more
to support women’s rights and ensure their full, equal
and meaningful participation in all decision-making
processes and leadership positions. Societies that
empower women are more peaceful, and when women
are included, peace is more sustainable. During our
30 years of statehood, we have been steadily raising
the bar on women’s political leadership, which has
undeniably contributed to Slovenia being the seventh
most peaceful country in the world, according to Global
Peace Index 2022.
My third and final point concerns partnerships.
Successful
peacebuilding
demands
inclusive
partnerships with regional, national and local actors.
Such partnerships provide specific knowledge and
understanding of regional challenges. We need to
empower local and regional actors and lean on them to
prepare, implement and evaluate projects.
The growing number of conflicts today demand
innovative and more integrated approaches to
maintaining peace and security. When addressing
the complexities and interconnectedness of global
challenges, the Security Council should make better
use of existing tools and expertise, including the
tools on environmental peacebuilding developed by
the United Nations Environment Programme and the
Climate Security Mechanism. The Council can benefit
from working in synergy with other United Nations
bodies and agencies. Strengthening linkages and
cooperation between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council is also essential.
The rules-based multilateral system, with the
Charter of the United Nations at its heart, remains the
bedrock of global peace and security. And promoting
peaceful and inclusive societies focused on good
governance, equal opportunities and education has
always been a priority for Slovenia. We stand ready
to do our part as we continue our collective search to
end suffering and achieve lasting peace and prosperity
for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I would like to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the civil society
representative for their briefings.
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The crafters of the Charter of the United Nations
sought to secure international peace and security using
three interlinked pillars: the collective defence of peace
and security; the protection of human rights; and the
promotion of development. They understood that there
was little hope of success if Member States were not
bound by those three commitments — not as isolated
activities but instead as linked and complementary
aspects of the policies and operations of the United
Nations and its Member States. That profound insight
was inspired by the bitter memory of States, as well
as the failed League of Nations, which had ignored it.
Today we know that the major threats to our countries
and humankind at large interact dynamically with each
other and also become greater than the sum of their
parts. We also have ample evidence that they respect no
one country’s borders, wealth or military power.
It is only by rededicating ourselves to the founders’
insights that we will all become safer. There is no true
defence of human rights in countries and regions beset
by entrenched poverty, armed conflict and disregard
for the inclusive and equitable management of diversity
as a core competence. There is no way to sustainably
protect the peace when so many citizens have no
decent livelihood and are marginalized in governance
and development. There is no way to truly promote
peacebuilding through investment in people-centred
development while cutting the core budgets of United
Nations development agencies, as is now happening.
There is no way to effectively prevent protracted
armed conflict without financing peacebuilding in
line with General Assembly resolution 76/305, adopted
in September last year. The New Agenda for Peace
will not meet our expectations without an agenda for
development that enables countries to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals as a minimum.
A return to the Charter’s core insights will be
greatly aided by our embracing the innovative spirit of
the early decades of the United Nations. Peacekeeping,
for instance, was invented to further the defence of
international peace and security for the great benefit of
millions of lives. Today we can use that same spirit to
harness the potential of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). Many lives would be saved and conflicts
prevented and mitigated by the Council becoming more
responsive to the advisory competencies of the PBC.
We can further innovate peacekeeping, particularly
by mandating, funding and equipping regional
peace operations.

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Greco (Italy): I thank Japan for organizing
today’s debate.
To build and sustain peace, we must truly believe
in a rules-based international order, with the United
Nations at the forefront of efforts to ensure peace
and security, safeguard human rights and achieve
sustainable development. As today’s event suggests, we
must invest in people and, I would add, communities.
We must do so by engaging societies beyond political
elites; grounding our action in a deep knowledge of the
communities and peoples we serve; restoring the trust
of young people in national authorities and international
governance; centring our action on the needs and
knowledge of people; and promoting peaceful, just and
inclusive societies centred on human rights and a solid
relationship between peoples and their territories. We
must also integrate a gender perspective in all policies
and take measures to advance the participation and
protection of women, young people and marginalized
groups or communities, while always prioritizing the
safeguarding of their rights, and align international
support with the priorities of communities themselves,
including equal access to work opportunities, youth
employment, quality education, high-quality and
resilient infrastructure, the eradication of poverty,
environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient
economies and communities and the reduction
of inequalities.
Italy believes that investing in people also means
investing in multilateralism. It means revitalizing the
mechanisms contained in Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations and investing in national capacities
for prevention. It also means addressing the root causes
of tensions and potential conflicts, and building on the
role of regional and subregional organizations. It means
respecting the national ownership and the heritage of
local communities and forging a more sustainable
relationship between human settlements and the
environment. It means delivering on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. It means defeating global
food insecurity — ensuring access to food, starting
with those most in need, is an international and moral
obligation that we must fulfil. It means strengthening
global cooperation across all regions and among all
Member States, prioritizing the needs of the most
vulnerable countries and regions, including in relation

23-025853/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to the devastating effects of climate change and its
direct consequences for peace and security.
Investing in people means providing peacebuilding
with sustainable, adequate, predictable and flexible
financing, including through significant assessed
contributions, and increasing investments to support
climate-resilient peacebuilding and conflict-sensitive
adaptation measures. It means working for a more
ambitious and structured collaboration between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council. It
means recognizing that multilateralism is the best tool
for conflict prevention, which, in turn, is most effective
when solidly grounded on a regional approach.
We need international cooperation, yet we face
fragmentation. My final and main point in today’s
debate is that we cannot divide ourselves between the
North and the South of the world. Italy intends to bridge
that increasing, devastating divide to restore trust and
to find common ground. We owe it to our peoples, our
communities and our territories.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the Japanese presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this open debate
on peacebuilding.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) plays a
crucial role as an advisory body and as a knowledgeable
guide to countries emerging from conflict. We
welcome the participation of the Chair of the PBC
in this debate and reiterate our support for a more
systematic consideration of the PBC’s work and advice
by the Security Council, as well as for more regular
interaction between the Council and all peacebuilding
actors, including on the issue of climate and security.
The New Agenda for Peace proposed by the SecretaryGeneral should allow for a stronger link between the
Security Council and the PBC.
In order to be sustainable, peacebuilding must
involve the whole of society. The inclusion of women,
young people and vulnerable and marginalized groups
is essential. Luxembourg supports efforts in that
field within the framework of its feminist foreign
policy, which also includes development cooperation
and humanitarian aid. The importance Luxembourg
attaches to a participatory and inclusive approach is
reflected in its humanitarian strategy and its long4/43

26/01/2023

standing partnership with the International Center for
Transitional Justice in Tunisia, Colombia, Ethiopia
and the Sudan, which promotes inclusive transitional
justice processes.
Investing in people’s capacities is essential to
fostering resilient institutions and people’s access to
quality public services, especially access to education
and other basic social services, as well as to protecting
the human rights and security of citizens and building
citizens’ trust in their Governments. It is with that in
mind that Luxembourg’s cooperation efforts support
education in emergency situations in Burkina Faso,
in particular the enrolment of young girls, in response
to the closure of schools under threat of attack by
armed groups.
In order to consolidate peace, a wide range of
partners are called upon to invest alongside the
United Nations and the countries concerned. Regional
organizations, the private sector and civil society actors
have an important role to play. Luxembourg will continue
its annual financial support to the Peacebuilding Fund.
We support the Secretary-General’s proposal to finance
the Fund partly through assessed contributions.
Luxembourg will continue to contribute in a
constructive and targeted manner to prevention and
peacebuilding efforts in a spirit of solidarity with all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I thank Japan for
organizing this timely debate and providing excellent
briefers. It helps our preparations for discussing the
New Agenda for Peace as an important building block
of the Summit of the Future.
Peace evolves in the same way that our world does.
Cybersecurity and climate change are good examples.
We therefore need new ways to maintain sustainable
peace and deal with new threats. We need inclusive,
networked multilateralism that does not operate in
silos, and that should apply to all our work at the United
Nations. We believe that the New Agenda for Peace
proposed by the Secretary-General should reflect those
points. Yes, every entity of the United Nations has a
different mandate, but that does not mean that they
should not cooperate, coordinate and complement one
another’s work. An example was the special meeting
of the Economic and Social Council two days ago that
discussed the root causes of atrocity crimes, where the
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Presidents of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Human Rights Council and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission came together
to discuss the issue.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
clearly states that there can be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development. We therefore need to forge
that nexus linking peace, security and sustainable
development. And that also means that when we look
at peace and peacebuilding, we should centre them
around people and invest in them. We need to think
about preventive action and resilience and be proactive.
Inclusive and sustainable development anchored in
human rights and gender equality and in ensuring that
no one is left behind is the best structural prevention
of conflicts and atrocity crimes. The Peacebuilding
Commission can be very helpful in that regard, as a
bridge-builder providing advice and recommendations
linking peace and security with socioeconomic
development and environmental protection. It can bring
together actors from various pillars and work with
the countries concerned to achieve a more coherent
and coordinated approach to strengthening peace and
security, while at the same time addressing the root
causes of conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark. At the outset, I would like to
thank Japan and His Excellency Ambassador Ishikane
for convening us today.
In order to succeed in preventing conflicts and
building and sustaining peace, we must invest in
resilience against the shock waves that are disrupting
delicate balances in fragile areas of the world. That
is more important than ever, as our resilience has not
only been tested but hampered by the coronavirus
disease, the climate crisis and ongoing conflicts. And
it has been further weakened by the consequences of
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. The New Agenda
for Peace is not just an opportunity for the United
Nations to gain new impetus in enhancing resilience
and sustaining peace. It is our window of necessity.
The Nordic countries would like to stress three crosscutting elements that should guide our work moving

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

forward — climate sensitivity, inclusivity and the
integration of United Nations efforts.
First, the effects of climate change on peace
and security are indisputable. We must integrate
climate-related security risks as a central component
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding strategies,
programmes and mandates, reflecting the needs and
experiences of people and communities. If we fail, our
responses and efforts will be hamstrung from the outset.
Secondly, inclusivity is key to sustaining peace.
We must protect the rights of women and promote
their full, equal and meaningful participation, ensure
that young people play a meaningful role in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding, enhance civil
society’s involvement across all three pillars of the
United Nations and improve the diversity of the voices
that brief the Security Council, including by engaging
closely with the Peacebuilding Commission. The
cooperation between the Council and the Commission
has improved, but there are still synergies to reap and
potential to fulfil. We need all stakeholders at the table
if we are to make the changes we need.
Lastly, our joint ability to adequately address our
challenges requires an integrated approach across the
pillars of the United Nations and the humanitarian,
development and peace nexus. That will require
greater coordination through systematically financing
and building the capacity of the Resident Coordinator
system, as well as closer collaboration between the
United Nations and regional organizations. It also
requires adequate, predictable and sustained financing
for prevention and peacebuilding, including funding
for local women’s and young people’s organizations
and assessed contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund. We need a well-financed and well-integrated
United Nations.
In conclusion, the world is undergoing tectonic
changes, and a New Agenda for Peace has never
been more urgent. Investment in climate sensitivity,
inclusivity and stronger, more integrated United Nations
approaches increases the effectiveness of our collective
efforts to prevent conflict and build and sustain peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, and the Japanese presidency for convening

23-025855/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

this important debate. Peacebuilding remains more
important than ever in the current geopolitical context.
The proliferation of multidimensional crises and
our countries’ increased interdependence make the most
compelling argument for adopting a comprehensive
approach to peace and security, human rights and
sustainable development. The ability of our institutional
infrastructure to prepare and show resilience are vitally
important and represent the real way to address the root
causes of conflict and help to prevent it. Romania’s
support for collective peacebuilding efforts is based on
a series of priorities that involve long-term investment
in institution-building and human security.
First, investing in people entails ensuring equal
opportunity and access to education, which is the
pathway to achieving healthy and resilient societies.
Education is our primary tool for building institutional
capacity. In that regard, Romania has continued its
sponsorship of scholarship programmes provided
by the Romanian Government and universities to
foreign students, particularly citizens of the countries
of Africa, Asia and Latin America. For example, the
Eugène Ionesco doctoral and research scholarship
programme, which has funded the education of more
than 1,200 students from Francophone countries
throughout the world since its inception in 2007, truly
fosters sustainable development in those regions.
Secondly, strengthening States’ capacity to
effectively address the causes of conflict is also linked
to the establishment of strong institutions capable
of withstanding tensions, emerging threats and risk
multipliers. The work of the Euro-Atlantic Resilience
Centre, recently established in Bucharest, reflects
Romania’s continued commitment to advancing
Sustainable Development Goal 16, on building more
resilient societies. The Centre’s mission is to increase
strategic planning and strengthen cooperation among
States and stakeholders in order to be better able to deal
with the complex challenges in the current international
context. The Centre’s upcoming activities related to
dealing with the consequences of Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine are a case in point.
Thirdly, building sustainable and lasting peace can
be achieved only through inclusiveness and the active
participation of every segment of society. Romania
is committed to promoting the women and peace and
security and youth, peace and security agendas. To
that end, together with the United States, Romania
6/43

26/01/2023

will co-chair the Women and Peace and Security Focal
Points Network this year. We remain open to discussing
the subject with all Member States in order to advance
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda over the course of the year.
More generally, we would like to point out that
financing remains one of the key challenges in the
area of effective peacebuilding and building States’
capacity and resilience. Together with our African
partners, the European Union has led consultations on
the importance of investing in peacebuilding, and we
stand ready to engage constructively in a resumption
of discussions on the financing of the Peacebuilding
Fund. Romania commends the work of the Fund as the
United Nations financial instrument of first resort.
In conclusion, strengthening cooperation within
the United Nations system is critical to ensuring more
effective peacebuilding and tangible results on the
ground. Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) is a concrete
step in that direction. In addition, Romania is one of the
most committed promoters of resolution 1631 (2005) on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations and recognizes the added value of these
partnerships in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): At the outset, allow
me to commend Japan for convening this pertinent
open debate on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Numerous protracted conflicts are further
exacerbated by the increasing food insecurity, the
adverse effects of climate change and debt crises. Yet
despite the shared analysis and continued pledges,
we have not done enough to put conflict prevention
and peacebuilding at the centre of our efforts. I will
therefore focus my recommendations along two key
lines of effort within the United Nations peace and
security architecture.
First, we need to make greater investments in
peacebuilding and prevention. Many resources are
going into the management of conflicts and the
alleviation of the humanitarian consequences of
conflict, which are continuously rising. However, our
investments to prevent the outbreak of new conflicts
and support countries emerging from conflict in their
quest to build and sustain peace are still very limited.
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

This must change. Germany plays its part in support
of nationally owned and regionally owned prevention
and peacebuilding efforts, first, as the largest voluntary
donor to the Peacebuilding Fund, having contributed
over $130 million to the Fund in the last three years
alone, and, secondly, through its numerous bilateral
programmes and targeted contributions to such United
Nations stabilization and peacebuilding mechanisms
as the United Nations Development Programme’s
stabilization facilities in Liptako-Gourma or Lake Chad.
In parallel, we are investing in local and regional
early-warning and conflict-mitigation mechanisms.
One example is our support for the climate-mitigation
initiatives in West Africa announced at the twentyseventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, in Sharm el-Sheikh.
The emerging consensus on the introduction of
assessed contributions for the Peacebuilding Fund
is encouraging. It would not only contribute to the
Fund having more adequate, predictable and sustained
financing, but it would also increase the joint political
ownership by all Member States of this core mission
of the United Nations. Let us heed the call of the
Group of African States and numerous conflictaffected countries and finally get this done. However,
an increase in funding for peacebuilding cannot be a
substitute for additional efforts by the United Nations to
produce more impact assessments of its peacebuilding
programming, demonstrating how and under which
circumstances it can contribute to impactful reductions
in violent conflict.
Secondly, we should build upon the success of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to enshrine
peacebuilding in the work of the Security Council and
beyond. The increasing number of countries seeking the
PBC’s support to implement their national peacebuilding
strategies is a testament to the Commission’s success.
The PBC’s approach is based on national ownership and
inclusiveness, which seeks to enable a direct dialogue
between local, national, regional and international
stakeholders. As a consequence, the PBC is ideally
placed to raise the Council’s awareness on local
communities’ understanding and expertise as well as
the cross-border dimension of conflicts.
We welcome and strongly support the continued
exchange between the PBC and the Council, and the
PBC’s written advice and statements of the Chair

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

to the Council should be even more focused and
provide concrete recommendations for the Council’s
consideration. In this context, national and regional
priorities reflected in PBC recommendations should
not be censored for political or ideological reasons. To
cite one concrete example, if affected countries and
regions call for a stronger focus on their efforts aimed
at preventing and mitigating risks to peace and security
stemming from climate change, members of the PBC
should pay full respect to national priorities and refrain
from blocking those recommendations in its reports to
the Council.
The Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace
provides a great opportunity to further strengthen and
develop the United Nations peacebuilding instruments
and give them a more central role. We firmly believe
that early warning, conflict prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding should be at the core of the New
Agenda. We welcome the fact that the Peacebuilding
Commission will discuss and actively engage on the
New Agenda for Peace in the coming months, and we
are looking forward to actively supporting this process.
As co-facilitator, together with Namibia, of the process
stemming from Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
Germany will ensure that the outcome of the New
Agenda for Peace will be properly reflected in the draft
outcome document of the Summit of the Future in 2024,
if that is so desired by the membership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): It is my pleasure to begin by
thanking the Permanent Representative of Japan and
his team for organizing today’s important open debate.
Jordan emphasizes the central role of the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and security
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. We are committed to supporting
and advancing the Organization’s endeavours and
initiatives aimed at empowering the United Nations
to deal with threats to peace and security in the light
of evolving challenges. In this regard, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s initiative on the New Agenda for
Peace and look forward to engaging with other Member
States to make progress on efforts in the areas of
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Today the world faces new threats and challenges
that require further investment in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. Such investment is well considered

23-025857/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

in the Secretary-General’s report entitled Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), which puts forward the New Agenda
for Peace, as has been mentioned. We consider its set of
proposed commitments to be crucial for providing the
resources necessary for prevention, and which aim to
ensure sustainable social spending, focus on root causes
of conflicts, uphold human rights and further address
disarmament. In this regard, the Security Council and,
as appropriate, other United Nations organs and bodies,
should provide greater resources to and ensure a broader
mandate in the concerned United Nations entities
and missions in order to contribute to peacebuilding
outcomes and support the development agenda.
Greater resources and autonomy for the relevant
United Nations entities and missions would enhance
the Organization’s ability to address, from a prevention
perspective and in a holistic manner, cross-cutting
issues, including security, climate change, health,
gender equality, youth empowerment, development
and human rights. We also need to revisit the concept
of peacebuilding in order to move beyond conflict
management to a level where peacekeeping missions
could further support the development agenda of the
countries in conflict zones by providing capacitybuilding programmes, developing national institutions
to accomplish sustainable peace and guaranteeing
the effective and sustainable implementation of
peace agreements.
As peacekeeping is the first step in the peacebuilding
process, it should be part of an overall approach based
on a clear strategy to ensure that peace and stability
are maintained in the conflict areas. However, it is
unfortunate that, over the last three decades, the
concept of peacebuilding within the United Nations
system has achieved mixed results, which is due in
part to the tendency of the Organization to focus, as I
said, on conflict management as opposed to addressing,
through an effective and sustainable approach, the root
causes of conflict and investing in the future of public
and Governmental institutions in the States affected
by conflict. This must change if we want to be serious
about peacebuilding.
In that regard, we consider the SecretaryGeneral’s New Agenda for Peace as a starting point
for constructive discussions and dialogue on a holistic
and sustainable approach to peacebuilding between
the concerned Governmental and non-governmental
interlocutors. The upcoming Summit of the Future
should be the appropriate platform to advance a
8/43

26/01/2023

new direction for promoting peace in a manner that
addresses the existing challenges in accordance with
the rules of international law and the United Nations
Charter. Platforms such as the Summit provide a
unique opportunity to discuss challenges, including,
inter alia, gender disparity, youth disenfranchisement,
food insecurity and climate degradation, as well as
the means to overcome such challenges in the context
of peacebuilding. Accordingly, the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 1325 (2000)
on women, peace and security, and resolution 2250
(2015) on youth, peace and security, should be fully
implemented to promote policies that advocate increased
political participation and peacebuilding efforts. Such
policies must be inclusive and people-centred in order
to achieve successful outcomes that address the needs
of all.
More work is needed to deal with modern-day
conflicts in a sustainable manner. We must all work
together and cooperate with the Secretary-General in
supporting change in our Organization on issues related
to peacebuilding, in order to maintain and advance
world peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegation of Japan,
as President of the Security Council, for the informal
preparatory meeting ahead of today’s open debate,
promoting transparency and inclusivity in the work of
the Security Council.
We also thank the various briefers for their briefings
and welcome the concept note (S/2023/19, annex) as the
basis of our deliberations.
In the context of peacebuilding resolutions, the
Security Council reminds us of the determination of the
peoples of the United Nations to save future generations
from the scourge of war. It is also a reminder of our
determination to establish just and lasting peace
across the world, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
However, the Russian Federation, a permanent member
of the Council, has completely failed to comply with
those principles, unjustly attacking a neighbouring
country and thereby directly affecting international
peace and security. Such unilateral actions only
weaken the rule of law and undermine the norms
of international law and international humanitarian
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

law. We reiterate that nobody and no country can be
above the rule of law. We want to remind the Council
that the Russian Federation has acknowledged that
peacebuilding mandates include activities aimed at
preventing the outbreak, intensification, continuation
and recurrence of conflicts. In that regard, Guatemala
reiterates its firm condemnation of Russia’s unjustified
and unprovoked attack on Ukraine.
Guatemala agrees with the content of the concept
note, considering that while the Security Council has
helped to resolve some armed conflicts or at least
prevent them from becoming more intense over the
years, we are still dealing with many of those conflicts
in various parts of the world. Every one of them
deserves equal attention and effort from the Council.
The importance of peacebuilding is more important
than ever, and that is reflected in the complex risk
multipliers in today’s world, which include food
insecurity, pandemic diseases and the adverse effects
of climate change. We cannot speak of peace without
sustainable development or of sustainable development
without peace. Respect for human rights must inform
and guide both of those efforts at the same time. As a
result, financing is crucial to honouring international
commitments and obligations, especially regarding the
climate and development agendas. Guatemala believes
that where prevention is concerned, the benefits that
financing provides are essential to maintaining peace
and security, in particular through capacity-building
and cooperation in the area of equipment transfers,
project development and the identification of relevant
early-warning information on natural disasters.
Guatemala believes that the Security Council must
take into account the various strategic instruments
that can be used at the operational level in order to
include a peacebuilding component in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. In addition, the Council can
and should benefit from greater interaction with States
that are not members of the Council and with other
United Nations organs. That is why we acknowledge the
added value of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as
an advisory body to the Council. Its convening power
must be maximized to bring together various groups and
to facilitate dialogue, thereby promoting the peace and
security, development and humanitarian action nexus.
We acknowledge the value of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and hope that the members of the PBC
will reach the consensus needed to strengthen the

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

relationship between the Organization of America
States and the PBC.
In conclusion, Guatemala supports every initiative
aimed at improving the coherence and mutual
understanding of the various approaches, instruments
and key principles of peacebuilding. The Security
Council should implement its mandate in line with the
realities of the twenty-first century and contribute to
the New Agenda for Peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): People are
everything. They are the ultimate beneficiaries of our
initiatives and the main raison d’être of our policies.
People, their welfare and their future are the primary
reasons for the existence of our United Nations. That is
why I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and Japan
for putting the focus back on people here in the Security
Council with today’s open debate on “Peacebuilding
and sustaining peace: investment in people to enhance
resilience against complex challenges”. I congratulate
Japan on its able leadership of the Council this month and
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed,
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
briefers for their valuable insights and suggestions.
At a time when the global community continues
to face multiple challenges, with wide-ranging and
detrimental effects on people’s welfare, livelihoods and
lives everywhere, it is important to prioritize holistic,
people-centred approaches in tackling those challenges.
That approach underscores the interlinkages and
reinforces the complementarities among three important
goals — sustained peace, sustainable development and
human security. As we seek to invest effectively in
putting people first in order to strengthen the resilience
of States and communities in facing humankind’s
complex challenges, there are four points to consider.
First, at the strategic level, addressing the root
causes of conflict and violence invariably comes down
to tackling issues affecting people, whether those
issues arise from poverty, social strife or unmanaged
political discord and dispute. It is therefore important to
promote policies that matter to people, such as closing
income gaps, promoting universal health coverage
and implementing the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) — all things that matter to people. Such efforts,
promoting human security and sustainable development,
help increase the chances for peacebuilding and

23-025859/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

26/01/2023

sustained peace. That is why we should incorporate
concepts of human security, including the next
generation of human security issues developed by the
United Nations Development Programme last year,
into the ongoing efforts to develop a New Agenda for
Peace. It is also important to factor in efforts to rescue
the SDGs.

complex challenges that are likely to persist in areas
of conflict. It is therefore our hope that the Security
Council will attach importance to such an approach
in its deliberations. People-centred approaches matter
because people matter.

Secondly, at the tactical level, it is important to
quickly and effectively recognize and address pressing
humanitarian concerns and alleviate human suffering
immediately. If we do not tackle those immediate,
urgent challenges, it is almost impossible to generate
sustained support for sustained peacebuilding efforts
from stakeholders, both within and outside the countries
affected, with the ultimate goal of achieving sustainable
peace. Respect for international humanitarian law
should guide our humanitarian assistance efforts, which
should not themselves be subject to politicization.

Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and Japan. I thank you for organizing
this important open debate, which will provide a good
opportunity to share the insights and experiences of
different actors and how those can inform the practical
pursuit of institution-building and resilience in conflictaffected countries. We know that this issue has been
dear to your delegation. We worked very closely with
you in the same spirit and in the same direction. The
debate is certainly part of that useful context.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.

Fourthly and lastly, at the local level, it is essential
to ensure that national institutions are strong and
effective and that they cater to people’s needs and
national priorities. Putting people front and centre
in policymaking will have long-term dividends. It
strengthens the social contract between Governments
and various stakeholders in society and enhances a
society’s immunity to strife, giving sustainable peace
a better chance.

The number of conflicts and crises is on the rise,
and more people than ever have been forced to leave
their homes owing to the absence of political settlements
and capable institutions. Weak State capacities and
institutions often fail to provide basic security,
services and economic opportunities and are unable
to maintain citizen confidence and trust. I believe
that investing in strengthening the self-organizing
capacity of communities and societies, helping them
to foster their social institutions and social networks,
will help to build the resilience, adaptive capacity
and social cohesion that conflict-affected countries
need in order to prevent or recover from conflict. In
that context, it is important to underline the primary
responsibility of national Governments and authorities
in identifying and directing priorities and strategies
for sustaining peace. Inclusivity is key to advancing
national peacebuilding processes in order to ensure
that the needs of all segments of society are taken into
account. The national responsibility to drive efforts to
sustain peace must be broadly shared across all key
social strata and divides.

In conclusion, there will be other factors, of course,
from complex geopolitical considerations, to balancing
interests among various stakeholders, to unique
socioeconomic circumstances and the political history
of any conflict or conflict-prone area. All those elements
have a bearing on peacebuilding and efforts to sustain
peace. But a people-centred approach to supporting
peacebuilding and sustaining peace is certainly an
important complementing tool to help to address the

We welcome the strengthening of the PBC’s
advisory, bridging and convening roles in support of
nationally owned priorities and efforts in the countries

Thirdly, at the operational level, those engaged in
peacekeeping should seek ways to perform the role of
early peacebuilders. That may include working with
host countries and local communities in areas of local
development in accordance with their specific needs.
For example, in South Sudan, Thai peacekeepers in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan established a
Sufficiency Economy Philosophy learning centre in
their camps to share Thailand’s homegrown development
approach to agriculture, water and land management
with local communities in their areas of operations, so
that people’s livelihoods could be improved.

10/43

I would like to underline our continued commitment
to the peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda. As
a former member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) from 2020 to 2021, we worked closely with all
partners to enable people in fragile countries to live in
peaceful, inclusive and resilient societies.

23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and regions that seek its support. It is vital and important
that the PBC further serve as a multi-stakeholder
platform for Governments and local actors to share
their perspectives on peacebuilding priorities. In fact,
someone quite recently mentioned that the unique
value of the PBC persists with regard to the fact that
such engagements and dialogues do not happen in the
context of speaking about those countries, but that
they actually create opportunities for us to speak with
the countries concerned, which is an important aspect
that we should keep in mind. Assessing the impact of
peacebuilding support on country-specific issues can
be done only through dialogue with the countries in
question. A wide spectrum of political opinions and
national actors, in particular women, young people and
civil society representatives, must be heard. The PBC
should continue to invite such actors to meetings, listen
to their recommendations and translate their advice into
policy and action, including on the basis of its advisory
role and by further transmitting that to the Council and
turning it into practical solutions that can be designed.
Slovakia is convinced that the security sector is
a key component in the Government response to the
various challenges in fragile countries and regions. The
direct experience of many countries clearly shows that
nationally led and inclusive security sector governance
and reform are key to developing security sector
institutions that are capable of effectively responding
to the specific security needs. Let me assure Member
States that, as co-Chair of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform, together with South Africa, we
are ready to provide continued support and commitment
to the security sector reform agenda. In January, we
organized an ambassador-level meeting of the Group of
Friends on the most recent developments regarding that
agenda. We look forward to discussing the same issue
in the Security Council, hopefully in March, when the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on security
sector reform will be available.
I believe that the Secretary-General’s New Agenda
for Peace is an important opportunity to advance a
comprehensive and integrated approach to prevention,
peace and security, as proposed in the report Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982). It is critical that all the
relevant United Nations bodies and organs take part in
further discussions on how to advance and intensify our
collective work to enhance resilience against complex
challenges related to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. In that regard, promoting peaceful and inclusive

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

societies for sustainable development and building
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all
levels are of the utmost importance. We need to join
forces to achieve practical results in that context.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
expresses its profound gratitude to Japan for organizing
this open debate, sparking a much-needed discussion
on ways to revitalize and strengthen United Nations
efforts to sustain peace. The fact that this debate, which
we hope will be strategic and constructive, takes place
in the Security Council — the United Nations organ that
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security — is of significant
importance. Continued divisions have clearly weakened
the Council’s capacity to act in unison, but, if we are
to ensure the maximum chances of success for the
New Agenda for Peace, with the United Nations at its
centre, we need to revitalize the multilateral consensus
around the importance of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. There is a strong incentive to do that.
Threats to peace abound in many places, and
violence is on the rise, causing death and the forced
displacement of millions of people, including civilians.
The cost of violent conflict is huge. It has enormous
human and economic costs for countries.
The United Nations and the Security Council have
registered innumerable achievements in their efforts to
promote the peacebuilding agenda, successfully leading
global campaigns to ban anti-personnel landmines
and creating the International Criminal Court. Those
initiatives led to the wider acceptance of human rights,
justice, reconciliation, good governance and the rule
of law as significant dimensions of peacebuilding. But
those efforts were not sufficient to eliminate conflict,
violence and armed confrontation.
In designing new approaches to help strengthen the
Security Council’s work on peacebuilding, we need to
thoroughly address and analyse major impediments,
including the political, institutional, operational and
financial challenges. For the sake of brevity and to
focus on some of the questions raised, Djibouti wishes
to emphasize the following observations.
First is the importance of prevention and support
for the revitalization of the mechanisms set out in
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,

23-0258511/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

namely, initiating a vigorous diplomatic effort aimed
at securing the commitment of parties to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, engaging a time-limited and
inclusive mediation initiative, with the understanding,
from the outset, that there will be recourse to another
settlement procedure listed in Article 33 of the Charter.
The fundamental objective is not mediation for
mediation’s sake, but for the settlement of the dispute.
Secondly, consistency and the full implementation
of Security Council resolutions are critical to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Thirdly, adequate resources for prevention, the
implementation of peace agreements and post-conflict
reconstruction and recovery must be ensured in
order to create conditions that minimize a conflict’s
chances of resurgence. There must be concerted,
coordinated efforts using the convening power of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to marshal resources
in support of economic policies aimed at solidifying
peace. The support of external partners and bilateral
donors, including international financial institutions,
is crucial and can catalyse financing for countries and
complement their domestic efforts to mobilize revenue.
Fourthly, enhanced and closer collaboration
between the PBC and the Security Council should be
fostered with the aim of developing common strategies
on the implementation of national peacebuilding
priorities that contribute to the formulation and review
of mandates and of drawdown and exit strategies.
Fifthly, we should foster careful and thorough
analysis of operational challenges to peace operations
and to peacekeepers facing changing conflict patterns,
the spread of terrorism and the diffusion of emerging
disruptive technologies.
While there is an urgent need to adapt the
tools of the United Nations to current realities and
emerging transnational threats, including terrorism,
global pandemics and climate change, much of the
infrastructure is already in place. The United Nations
has tools to address many of the world’s vexing
problems, but to be effective they must be utilized.
Lastly, it is through cooperation, not conflict, that
we can build a prosperous and peaceful world. The
decisions and the choices we make today will shape the
world we bequeath to future generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
12/43

26/01/2023

Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the Permanent Mission of Japan
for convening this debate and the briefers for
their statements.
In order to address conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, the Security Council must adopt a
comprehensive approach that takes into account the
economic, political and social aspects of security as
well as the military ones. That includes strengthening
international cooperation and constructive dialogue
among stakeholders, as well as strengthening institutions
and governance at the national and regional levels.
As we have said recently in the Council, it is
important to bear in mind that a fundamental component
in maintaining international peace and security is
the rule of law, ensuring inclusive societies, solid
institutions and access to justice for the population,
with institutions that fight impunity and corruption.
At the international level, it requires respect for the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, compliance with international law, human
rights and international humanitarian law. In addition,
the Council should be proactive in preventing conflicts
and working to resolve existing conflicts peacefully and
fairly. That includes supporting sustainable economic
development, promoting gender equality and women’s
empowerment and strengthening democracy and the
rule of law. Building resilient and effective institutions
in contexts of fragility or situations of war is essential
to ensuring long-term stability and development.
That also demands a comprehensive approach that
addresses political as well as economic, social and
security challenges.
It is crucial to strengthen governance and
transparency, establish accountability mechanisms and
promote citizens’ participation. That helps to ensure
that institutions serve every member of society, not
just a few. In addition, it is essential to strengthen the
capacity of institutions to respond to economic and
social challenges by supporting sustainable economic
development and investing in infrastructure and basic
services. That helps to reduce people’s vulnerability
and increase their resilience. An essential task for the
Security Council should be supporting the strengthening
of security and justice by training and equipping security
forces and strengthening judicial systems, which helps
to ensure that institutions are able to protect people and
guarantee respect for human rights.
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We stress that countries with stronger positions and
greater power should lead by example in building a more
just and balanced international system — for example
in the area of international economic and financial
governance, as the Secretary-General discusses in his
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) — which will
allow us to better and more systematically address
the conditions of fragility and vulnerability that are
affecting many countries, including middle-income
countries, which suffer from multiple deficits and as a
result are penalized in terms of access to cooperation,
making the achievement of balanced and sustainable
development more difficult.
We underscore the importance of predictable
and long-term funding to make it possible to plan
peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, we note with
interest the Secretary-General’s proposal, discussed in
his report on investing in prevention and peacebuilding
(S/2022/66), on the creation of a mechanism to
implement the recommendation of the Advisory Group
of Experts on the 2015 Review of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Architecture by strengthening the
Peacebuilding Fund.
Priority areas for investment should include
strengthening human security, which also provides
a preventive approach to addressing challenges;
local peace initiatives; community participation in
implementing ceasefires; inclusive dialogues; strategic
communication to prevent misinformation and hate
speech; supporting strong and inclusive institutions
and encouraging the participation of women and young
people in building and sustaining peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): I would like to thank Japan
for convening this very timely debate, as peacebuilding
efforts are being threatened by complex and multiple
crises. The war in Ukraine has added new challenges to
an already dire situation. As many have said today, we
are witnessing the largest number of violent conflicts
since 1945. New threats have emerged, and the world is
more unequal and more violent, especially for women
and children, and far from achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. The growing effects of climate
change and food insecurity only exacerbate the
situation, significantly heightening the risk of unrest
and conflict.

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

In 1945, the founding Members of the United Nations
gave the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
But to achieve that today, the Security Council also has
to evolve, adapt and adjust to the twenty-first century.
We need a truly representative and inclusive Council
that is capable of effectively addressing the challenges
we are facing now. We therefore need a Security Council
whose composition adequately reflects the international
community’s diversity, a Security Council that listens
to and benefits from different perspectives and valuable
solutions and suggestions from a broad range of actors
by maintaining regular dialogue and consultations
with the wider membership, as well as non-State actors
such as regional organizations, international financial
institutions, regional development banks, parliaments,
national and subnational authorities and the private
sector. All those stakeholders can bring vast knowledge
of the root causes of conflicts and help ensure local
ownership by promoting trust and dialogue. And trust
is of the essence when we are talking about building
resilient institutions and promoting social cohesion
and sustainable development. It is equally essential to
ensure that the voices of women and young people are
heard in this Chamber and that both are included and
engaged in all stages of the peacebuilding process.
The convening role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) must continue to be used to
bring together all relevant stakeholders to address the
underlying causes of conflict and to support national
peacebuilding priorities. Cooperation between the PBC
and the Security Council must be further strengthened, as
it will contribute to conflict prevention and recurrence.
The world was very different in 1993, when the concept
of peacebuilding was first introduced. Thirty years
have passed. Although we have come a long way, and
we have several good examples of successful results
in peacebuilding, we need to truly invest — and I also
mean financially — in peacebuilding and prevention.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that, even though we
are threatened by complex and multiple crises, we do
not need to reinvent the wheel. We know what we need
to do. The Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) is a valuable a road map, and the New
Agenda for Peace may further contribute to turn all our
statements about the primacy of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding into more than just words. We need to put
all our efforts into implementing it, while placing people

23-0258513/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and the environment at the centre of all our decisions,
including the ones taken by the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): The SecretaryGeneral’s Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) recognizes
that the world is moving closer to the brink of
instability. We are confronted with multiple strategic
threats — from terrorism, arms proliferation and
organized crime to hybrid threats and cyberwarfare.
In this increasingly challenging environment for peace
and security, the work of the United Nations can prevail
only if we invest in prevention and building sustainable
peace. We have rightly identified the New Agenda for
Peace as a historic opportunity to invest in prevention
and peacebuilding in order to build resilience among
societies and address the underlying drivers of conflict.
Here are some elements Austria believes merit reflection
in the discussion on the New Agenda for Peace.
First, reducing strategic risks needs to be at
the core. That goal can be attained only by adopting
a holistic approach to peace and security. As risks
are multiplied by climate change, biodiversity loss,
the lack of sustainable institutions and poverty and
socioeconomic factors, reducing risks needs to include
the peace and development and climate and security
nexus. The Security Council needs to become better at
integrating climate security, socioeconomic factors and
human rights in our work on peace and security.
Secondly, we must have system-wide coherence.
The Security Council needs to strengthen its links
with other parts of the United Nations, in particular the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The Council should
incorporate the PBC’s advice in mandate renewals
for peace operations in a more cohesive manner,
regularly engage with the PBC and seek its input on
peacebuilding efforts in specific countries or regions.
But we also need to think about ways to engage with
other parts of the United Nations, such as the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Environment Programme or the Human Rights Council,
on issues related to peace and security.
Thirdly, conflict prevention and peacebuilding
require strong partnerships. The United Nations
must foster even stronger partnerships with regional
organizations in order to better build regional and
comprehensive prevention strategies. In that regard,
we propose holding an annual multilateral meeting
14/43

26/01/2023

between the Secretary-General and the heads of regional
organizations in order to boost partnerships with
regional organizations such as the African Union and
the European Union in the area of peace and security.
Fourthly, to build resilient communities, strengthen
local ownership and prevent conflict, we need the
rule of law internationally, nationally and locally.
Assistance by the Global Focal Point for the Rule of
Law in the area of prevention and sustaining peace
currently makes a difference in 23 country situations.
Austria suggests that future rule-of-law activities in
the framework of the New Agenda for Peace focus,
to a large extent, on prevention. In view of recent
developments, let me underline that all members of
society have a vital part in building resilient societies,
in particular in recognizing the fundamental role of
women and young people in conflict prevention, peace
processes and strengthening resilience.
I would like to end by saying that, as the SecretaryGeneral has pointed out in his report, when we all face
the same threat, cooperation and solidarity are the
only solutions within societies and between nations.
Austria is committed to developing a New Agenda for
Peace that improves partnerships and leads to common
solutions to common security challenges and puts
investing in people at the centre. In that regard, we have
made a national submission to the Secretariat that takes
up many of the points mentioned today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Japan
for organizing this open debate and for your thoughtprovoking questions, guiding our debate to improve our
efforts on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Let me start by highlighting three elements that,
in our view, would help the Council to improve its
potential in that regard: listening more to voices that
are directly affected by what goes on in this Chamber,
making better use of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and ensuring adequate financing of mandates.
First, we need to hear the voices of women, youth
and civil society organizations much more often in
Security Council discussions. Hearing directly from
people affected by conflict or by the threat of conflict,
from those who have a direct stake in the subject matter
under consideration or who possess specific insights,
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

would not only enrich discussions and action-oriented
decision-making, it would also improve the legitimacy
and representativeness of this organ. Achieving stronger
results on the women and peace and security and the
youth, peace and security agendas, in particular, will
fundamentally improve building and sustaining peace
and, therefore, international stability.
Secondly, the Peacebuilding Commission is a body
that was created specifically to improve peacebuilding
and sustainable peace. As a cross-pillar, cross-cutting
and bridging forum, it has, since its inception, garnered
a wealth of knowledge and best practices. Proactively
asking the PBC to provide advice to the Council and
inviting the PBC to brief the Security Council more
frequently would create synergies and strengthen the
work of both entities.
Thirdly, on financing, decisions made in the Council
or elsewhere by Member States cannot be carried out
properly if adequate funding is not provided. To meet
those needs, the United Nations and, specifically, the
Peacebuilding Fund require adequate, predictable
and sustainable funding. It is very disappointing
that we have not yet reached consensus on assessed
contributions for the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) in the
Fifth Committee. We urge Member States to reconsider
their positions, where needed, so that we can come to a
solution where the PBF receives adequate resources via
the establishment of assessed contributions.
In conclusion, that brings me to several elements
that, in our view, should be included in a New
Agenda for Peace, in the context of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
First, let a people-centred, inclusive and integrated
cross-pillar approach be the guiding principle in
peacebuilding-related elements in the New Agenda
for Peace.
Secondly, sustainable peace cannot be built on
broken minds. Let mental health and psychosocial
support, still so often overlooked, not be forgotten in
the New Agenda for Peace.
Thirdly, history has shown us that perceived
injustices can spiral into a vicious cycle, fuelling conflict
down the line. The New Agenda for Peace should
recognize that there can be no peace without justice and
no justice without peace. Re-establishing rule of law
and improving access to justice are critical components
for peacebuilding and should be thus reflected.

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Lastly, the New Agenda for Peace should
highlight the importance of strengthening the
protection of civilians in policies and practice. That
remains particularly important after the withdrawal
of peacekeeping missions in order to prevent the
recurrence of conflict and to ensure the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding is done in the best
way possible.
The Netherlands is looking forward to playing a
constructive role in developing those crucial elements of
the New Agenda for Peace together with the Secretariat,
Member States and other stakeholders working
together towards conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): We thank Japan
and Ambassador Ishikane Kimihiro, as President
of the Security Council, for convening this very
important meeting.
In consideration of our theme, investing in people
can indeed contribute to multi-stakeholder initiatives
that foster a culture of peace as we enhance our
resilience against complex challenges. One key aspect
is strengthening the meaningful participation of
vulnerable groups, especially women and young people.
A useful model for investing in people is the case
of the peace process in the southern Philippines, during
which we put a premium on fostering an effective
peace and development road map that was inclusive and
participatory, as well as conflict-, culture- and gendersensitive, for the Bangsamoro peace process. Through
the efforts of the Government of the Philippines, the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
promoted an inclusive and participatory dialogue
involving all stakeholders, including women, young
people, faith leaders and civil society. The Philippines
forged that peace initiative in the region after many
decades of conflict among warring factions and
clansmen. Investing in people’s education was key in
sustaining the peacebuilding process in the southern
Philippines. We improved education infrastructure,
built climate-resilient classrooms, hired competent
teachers, provided a balance of Islamic and secular
education, awarded more than 18,000 scholarships for
technical skills upgrades, enabled access to higher
education through 1,400 scholarships and facilitated
Government internships for students. The incidence

23-0258515/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

26/01/2023

of poverty in the region has decreased significantly
in the past three years, from 56 per cent to 39 per
cent — the highest and only double-digit reduction
during the pandemic.

the Peacebuilding Commission to ensure that investing
in people is given the utmost priority.

The Philippines supports the Secretary-General’s
call for a New Agenda for Peace. We believe it should
include ways for the United Nations to provide tools
and resources to people in conflict-affected and
high-risk areas. Providing education in those areas is
critical, as it will make them more resilient and promote
development. To ensure robust peace institutions, we
need to further enhance the inclusion of women, young
people and civil society in the programme of work
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and create
opportunities for their active engagement in Security
Council discussions on the prevention and resolution
of conflict, the maintenance of peace and security, and
post-conflict peacebuilding.

Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica would like to thank Japan for
convening today’s open debate. Allow me to note some
key elements that could be included in the New Agenda
for Peace.

The Philippines recognizes financing as another
critical component of peacebuilding. We should bolster
our institutions for peace by infusing them with the
necessary resources and strengthening participatory
processes. The Secretary-General stated that too little
progress has been made towards securing adequate,
predictable and sustained financing for critical
peacebuilding and sustaining peace activities. The
Security Council may wish to consider the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative on investing in prevention and
peacebuilding and his proposal for the General
Assembly to approve, on an annual basis, $100 million
in contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund.
The Peacebuilding Commission is an important
institution that leads peace efforts in conflict-affected
countries. It is a key addition to the capacity of the
international community for advancing the broader
peace agenda. It is uniquely placed to promote
greater harmony among the subregional, regional and
international dimensions of post-conflict response.
Although the interaction between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission has been sustainable,
we need to consider further enhancing its effectiveness.
The Council could institute more purposeful and
results-oriented dialogues with the PBC in order to
facilitate greater interaction with non-Council members
and other United Nations bodies on matters pertaining
to building and sustaining peace. The Philippines looks
forward to the continuation of the urgent and important
collaborative work between the Security Council and
16/43

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.

In his most recent report on women and peace
and security (S/2022/740), the Secretary-General
denounced the reversal of generational gains in
women’s rights amid the continued increase in violent
conflicts, military expenditures, military coups,
displacements and hunger. The increase in military
spending has reduced the financial resources available
for investments in health, education, justice, sustainable
development and environmental protection, which are
all key elements of human security. And in the absence
of appropriate arms regulation efforts, we can expect
that situation to further increase the diversion of the
world’s resources to armaments, the very thing that
Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations seeks to
reduce, and to exacerbate the impacts on conflict and
armed violence.
It is therefore more urgent than ever for the
Security Council, with the assistance of the Military
Staff Committee, to submit plans for the establishment
of a system for the regulation of weapons, which should
include plans to strengthen efforts in the monitoring
and enforcing of Security Council arms embargoes
at the national and regional levels. Similarly, United
Nations actors, such as peacekeeping missions and
their troop-contributing countries, should occupy a
key role in the monitoring of weapons and ammunition
and share information with the sanctions committees,
in accordance with their mandates. However, they
currently do not do so systematically.
The New Agenda for Peace must recognize that
violence is an everyday reality in many people’s
homes and communities in order to ensure that our
efforts are not solely focused on inter-State conflicts
and armed insurgencies. Costa Rica encourages all
States to implement evidence-based, nationally led
violence-prevention strategies to address the multiple
and interconnected root causes of conflict that lead to
violence through an integrated response that involves
multiple stakeholders, given that the work of the United
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Nations on prevention is system-wide. Costa Rica
urges the Secretary-General, the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, among
others, to call on Member States to implement conflictsensitive policies in order to respond to major crises as
well as risk multipliers, such as the coronavirus disease
pandemic and climate change.
The New Agenda for Peace in the twenty-first
century should recognize that, while the military
may have a role in specific situations, long-term
peace requires addressing the culture of militarism
and excessive military spending. Accordingly, a
comprehensive agenda for peace should seek to address
the physical and structural violence that is committed
against groups on the basis of gender, ethnicity,
disability, religious or political expression, sexual
orientation and gender identity. As former SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan rightly emphasized in his report
entitled “In larger freedom: towards development,
security and human rights for all” (A/59/2005), ensuring
freedom from want, freedom from fear and freedom to
live in dignity is a key element of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, given that security, development and
human rights are inextricably linked.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We would like
to congratulate Japan for convening today’s very
important open debate.
The United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
in particular the Peacebuilding Commission, was
established to prevent countries from relapsing back
into conflict and to ensure that our Organization has
a holistic approach to the maintenance of international
peace and security. At the centre of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace is the need to make peace a reality for
all people. The pursuit of peace is a common agenda for
all of us at the United Nations. However, sustained peace
for all people will remain elusive unless the threats and
risks to peace are effectively and efficiently mitigated
by all involved. Moreover, there is a need to transform
the way that the drivers and root causes of conflict
and instability are addressed. Rhetorical iterations and
actions must be replaced by transformative strategies
and tangible actions.
We recognize the cardinal role of the Security
Council in advancing peacebuilding activities. We

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

commend the peacebuilding efforts undertaken
by United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions, particularly in supporting
and promoting political stability, socioeconomic
development, the rule of law, security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
as well as transitional justice. However, the success
of any peacebuilding activities will be determined by
the political commitment, leadership, ownership and
capacity of national and local actors in the countries
concerned. In that context, investing in people and
institutions becomes vital. Institution-building is
a complex and expensive exercise for countries in
transition and post-conflict situations, and it requires
the support of the United Nations and the international
community. Moreover, securing sustainable funding
for peacebuilding activities remains a challenge and a
subject of infinite discussion — understandably, because
the demand for support exceeds the available funding.
As we prepare for the 2024 Summit of the Future,
the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace provides
an opportunity to repurpose the Security Council’s
approach to peace and security, and to peacebuilding
in particular. It is South Africa’s view that the Council
should invest more in conflict prevention and preventive
diplomacy. Advancing conflict prevention for
sustainable peace will require building and enhancing
partnerships with a variety of actors at the local, regional
and international levels. For our part, we have stressed
the importance of finding innovative ways of involving
the private sector and non-governmental institutions
in peacebuilding activities. Equally, partnerships are
instrumental and desirable in responding and adapting
to global issues such as natural disasters, pandemics
and financial crises, which require resilience on the
part of people and institutions, as well as in realizing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union’s Agenda 2063.
In conclusion, it is imperative to invest not only
in people and institutions but also in addressing both
internal and external threats to peace in countries
affected. In taking such an approach, we can build
resilience to challenges that negate or reverse peace
dividends, using the collective and complementary
roles of both the Security Council and the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

23-0258517/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on a brilliant presidency, and
commend you for the enormous stamina that you have
demonstrated and that is perhaps unmatched by other
members of the Council.
Pakistan welcomes this debate on investment in
people in order to enhance their resilience in the face of
complex challenges. People are at the core of the world
order envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations,
which commences with the words “We the peoples”.
That world order was constructed on the foundation of
the central Charter principle of the right of peoples to
self-determination. The Charter’s objectives include,
as expressed in Article 55, higher standards of living,
full employment and conditions of economic and
social progress and development, as well as solutions
to economic, social, health and related problems and
universal respect for human rights.
It is obvious that over the past seven decades, the
peoples of our United Nations have been accorded
insufficient attention. Although most of the peoples
of the 193 States Members of the United Nations have
exercised their right to self-determination, there are a
number that have been prevented from doing so owing
to foreign occupation and suppression. Two of the
most intractable conflicts on the Security Council’s
agenda — Palestine and Jammu and Kashmir — continue
to fester and to threaten international peace and security
due to the suppression through foreign occupation of
their right to self-determination. Enabling the peoples
of Palestine and Jammu and Kashmir to exercise their
right to self-determination must be a priority objective
for the Security Council. We have also failed to ensure
universal respect for human rights. We are witnessing
the perpetuation of gross and systematic violations of
human rights, particularly in situations of conflict and
of foreign occupation. Efforts to promote human rights
are often eroded by the application of double standards
and by the political priorities of some who claim to
champion human rights.
Neither has the United Nations so far succeeded in
promoting higher standards of living, full employment
or conditions of economic and social progress and
development. Our world is vastly richer than it was 78
years ago, yet inequality has increased and the division
between the rich and the poor is growing. More than
800 million people live in abject poverty, cut off from
jobs and decent livelihoods, often on the edge of survival.
Over the past three years, the prospects of the poor have
18/43

26/01/2023

been devastated by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the effects of climate change and the proliferation of
conflicts. The interdependence between peace and
development is well established. It is now evident that
conflicts are proliferating in the poorest parts of the
world and that terrorism, which feeds on injustice and
deprivation, has spread to those regions. In order to
build resilient peace, we need resilient development. It is
therefore imperative that we implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) comprehensively and
universally. We must alleviate the debt burden of the
54 developing countries that are in debt distress, fulfil
the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income as
development assistance from developed countries and
rechannel the International Monetary Fund’s unutilized
special drawing rights for development. We should
recapitalize the multilateral development banks, vastly
increase concessional lending and lower the exorbitant
borrowing costs for developing countries. We must
restructure unequal trade and tax regimes and align
access to technology with the SDGs.
It is a tragic irony that those most vulnerable to the
growing impact of climate change are peoples who have
contributed the least to global warming and climate
change. The recent report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change underlines that climate
change is a “risk multiplier”, especially in areas under
stress. To achieve durable peace, it will be crucial to
implement the climate agenda for mitigation, adaptation
and loss and damage and ensure climate justice through
adherence to the principle of common yet differentiated
responsibilities, adequate adaptation support and
compensatory assistance for loss and damage suffered
by the most vulnerable developing countries.
In response to its recent devastating flooding
disaster, Pakistan has formulated a resilient recovery,
rehabilitation and reconstruction plan in cooperation
with its development partners. We are gratified by the
general support for the plan and its core objectives of
building back with resilience. Such a demonstration of
international solidarity and cooperation will, we hope,
imbue all of the international community’s efforts to
ensure that all peoples are adequately equipped to
address the complex challenges of peace, development
and climate change that we face today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Ms. Carlson (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank Japan and commend
it on its commitment to such an important topic like the
one that has brought us together today. We also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General and the other briefers.
As we begin 2023, we are already able to see
that countries in every region continue to face
emerging threats to stability and peace. The current
environment is replete with challenges, including
the growing humanitarian crisis, the security crisis,
acute food insecurity and the devastating effects
of climate change. The current challenge is how to
resolve existing conflicts and prevent the emergence
of new ones. Our responsibility is not only to prevent
the escalation of violence, but also to plan for the long
term and identify and address underlying issues. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has served as an
exemplary mechanism in that regard by enabling the
continuous exchange of ideas with various actors
on how to improve responses and support specific
countries and regions. We reiterate the importance
of the Peacebuilding Commission deepening and
broadening its advisory role and cooperation with the
Security Council. For peacebuilding to be successful, it
is imperative, in following the example of the PBC, to
maintain close relationships with the countries in which
the work is focused on national priorities and the results
achieved are country owned.
As we saw in 2022, the Peacebuilding Commission
advised the Council on several occasions. However,
the Commission can play a more important role in
calling attention to situations that might otherwise be
overlooked owing to many parallel crises or on which
the Council is unable to reach a consensus. Similarly,
the Commission can be of great help during and after
peacekeeping operation transitions. We must further
channel reconciliation efforts within the programme
of work of United Nations agencies, given the fact that
they have a vast array of experience and tools, such
as impartiality and neutrality, which can contribute
to reconciliation.
We have seen that including the voices of women
and youth increases to an even greater degree the
potential of the tools that we have as an organization
to achieve our goals. For decades, women have played
a leading role in advocating for peace and security,
including in response to armed conflict, political
crises and armed violence. Similarly, we must continue
strengthening the role of youth in peacebuilding and

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

security by increasing their meaningful participation
and developing their boundless potential with regard to
building more inclusive, just and sustainable societies.
That is why we must increase coordination and
collaboration among stakeholders to work hand in hand
with youth as agents of change and builders of a better
future in peacebuilding. Partnerships for peacebuilding
and peacekeeping are also crucial, specifically with
civil society, international financial institutions,
academia, the private sector, donors, decision-makers
and especially local communities. The Dominican
Republic continues to stress the crucial importance
of a global, coordinated and unified response among
countries and regions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone:
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate.
Sierra Leone supports the view that investing in
people is fundamental to enhancing resilience against
complex challenges, including, but not limited to, food
insecurity, pandemic diseases and the adverse effects
of climate change. For some peacebuilding proponents,
resilience is like an intermediary facilitating cooperation
among security, humanitarian and development actors
involved in protracted crises. Resilience also relates to
strengthening capacities, as opposed to fragilities or
the phenomenon of so-called failed States. A key factor
in enhancing resilience, peacebuilding and building
sustainable peace is the amount of investment in human
capital, especially in developing human capacities in
various fields of endeavour. That is often inadequately
attended to, or even undermined, by international actors
in the process of humanitarian action, development
assistance, disaster recovery and peacebuilding efforts.
Therefore, in enhancing resilience against
such challenges, it is critical for all stakeholders,
Governments, civil society, the private sector, women
and youth to be holistically engaged in order to fulfil the
potential of the people by broadening their capabilities.
In that regard, our approach in Sierra Leone to develop
human capital has been driven by our national policy on
free quality education, including the radical inclusion
of quality education for all. In order to demonstrate its
unwavering commitment to the free quality education
agenda, over the past four years, the Government
has allocated 22 per cent of the national budget to
education. The strategic policy direction emphasizes

23-0258519/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

26/01/2023

the inclusion of historically marginalized groups, in
particular pregnant girls, parent learners, children with
disabilities, children from rural and underserved areas
and children from low-income families. It provides
guidelines for decision-making and streamlining
processes so that schools throughout Sierra Leone are
accessible and inclusive of all children, without stigma,
harassment, intolerance or exclusion of any kind.

and prosperity. Investment, particularly in women and
young people, to ensure skills development, education,
health, nutrition and sanitation will go a long way to
transforming the human capital that propels countries’
economic development. Only a competent and healthy
workforce can accelerate economic prosperity and
tackle complex challenges, including external shocks,
with resilience.

In terms of the elements to be included in the New
Agenda for Peace in the context of peacebuilding,
we would suggest that women and girls be placed at
the centre of any security policy. While gender has
been acknowledged and prioritized in peace and
security policy, more work is needed to meet longestablished goals, including in providing the necessary
resources and the political will to ensure meaningful
participation and to integrate gender analysis across
all aspects of peace and security efforts. Furthermore,
we need to support youth-led prevention efforts. Young
people are important actors in achieving sustainable
peace. They must be treated as partners in the longterm work of peacebuilding, in creating a culture of
prevention, including through acknowledging their
life experiences, leadership and expertise and in the
provision of resources, such as funding and training.

Effective peacebuilding must involve the entire
United Nations system, including the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, regional
organizations and local peace actors. Regular dialogues
and robust cooperation among all organs of the United
Nations system are vital to identifying challenges and
addressing them with appropriate tools and adequate
resources. Sufficient, predictable and sustainable
financing is indispensable to peacebuilding and to
preventing countries from relapsing into conflict.
The Secretary-General’s proposal for a New Agenda
for Peace in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) calls
for everyone’s renewed commitment to delivering
prevention and peacebuilding initiatives with a
holistic approach.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): I thank the presidency of Japan
for convening this important debate.
International peace, social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom for all peoples were the
primary promises that the United Nations was created to
deliver. However, challenges to international peace have
continued multiplying. Poverty, hunger and diseases
have devastated the lives billions of people, even to this
day. Development, peace, security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. While we
emphasize respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and international law to prevent conflicts and build
peace, we cannot emphasize enough the accelerated
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
including Sustainable Development Goal 16 and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, to reduce the
drivers of conflicts. Poor and underdeveloped societies
confront security challenges arising from hunger,
poverty and exclusion. There is therefore a need for
investment in people in order to break the vicious cycle
of conflict and usher society towards a path of peace
20/43

From its own experience as a post-conflict country,
Nepal emphasizes nationally owned peacebuilding
efforts based on constant political dialogue,
accountability, inclusion and participation. The
meaningful participation of women, young people and
ethnic and religious minorities was a cornerstone of our
peace process. In terms of building peace, since 1958
Nepal has been contributing to United Nations peace
operations by providing peacekeepers to maintain and
build peace in many conflict-ridden parts of the world.
The nature of the threat to peace is multidimensional,
and our response must therefore take a holistic approach
to addressing peace and security and political and
socioeconomic development, including where climate
issues are concerned. Our response must bring together
political actors by nurturing trust and collaboration in
order to end conflict situations and sustain peace.
In conclusion, investment in people not only
reduces conflict and instability but also strengthens the
perpetual peace, stability and development to which we
all aspire.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia.
Mr. Vorshilov (Mongolia): Mongolia deeply
appreciates Japan’s leadership in convening today’s
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

timely debate on peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
and we would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
for their briefings.
The Security Council is charged with the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. United Nations-mediated peace
processes have proliferated since the 1990s and have
contributed enormously to advancing world peace. In
today’s turbulent world, beset by both traditional and
non-traditional security challenges, the role of the
Security Council in peacebuilding and sustaining peace
is therefore ever-increasing. We suggest that in order to
better address our emerging threats and risk multipliers
and to realize peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the
Security Council should pay even greater attention to
the voices of all Member States, including developing
and small countries. To give just one example, we are
all aware that Africa, Asia and Latin America provide
more than 90 per cent of military and police personnel
to United Nations peace operations and that many
countries, such as my own, Mongolia, rank high on the
list of per capita peacekeepers.
Many speakers before me have emphasized that of
the three mutually reinforcing aspects of peacebuilding,
the socioeconomic and environmental dimension is
becoming ever more significant, and that is particularly
true with regard to the realities of developing countries,
small countries and countries with special needs.
For instance, the pandemic and conflicts delayed
or even wiped out hard-won progress towards the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in
least developed and landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States, deepening their
existing vulnerabilities. Persistent structural handicaps
and the relentless climate crisis have been exacerbated
by food shortages, rising energy costs and financial
crises. We therefore need to be heard and to engage in
all dimensions of peacebuilding and sustaining peace
matters. To that end, developing or small countries
should also increase their efforts and be provided with
opportunities to constructively engage in the open
debates and other activities of the Security Council.
In that connection, I would like to express Mongolia’s
support for the Secretary-General’s initiative to develop
a New Agenda for Peace. Among the six potential areas
of the New Agenda, I want to underscore prevention
and issues related to women and girls. The fact is that
prevention and preventive diplomacy, which are at the

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

core of peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts,
need strategic foresight, investment and regional and
subregional cooperation. Moreover, all security and
peacebuilding activities need to put young people, who
are our future, at their centre, as well as women. In
that regard, we warmly welcomed and supported the
establishment during the seventy-sixth session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations Youth Office.
Mongolia is firmly committed to the implementation
of the Security Council’s resolutions on women and
peace and security and youth, peace and security, and is
actively engaged in regional activities related to those
agendas. Empowering women and young people builds
community resilience. To bring about transformative
change, we need firm commitments and concerted
efforts at both the national and international levels.
Governments should work to create a culture of peace
and a conflict-free environment. For that, we also need
leadership development programmes, and formal and
informal education should be promoted at every level of
society in order to support and empower young people.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that Mongolia will be an
active participant in the urgent and essential endeavour
of building and sustaining peace at the regional and
international levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
and foremost, I would like to warmly thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate of the
Security Council. I also want to take this opportunity
to thank Ms. Amina Mohammed and Mr. Muhammad
Abdul Muhith for their detailed and exhaustive
briefings earlier today.
Conflicts
today
involve
complex
and
multidimensional geopolitical cross-border dynamics
created by armed groups and separatists, transnational
organized crime, terrorism and the illicit arms trade. In
the light of those challenges, it is important to strengthen
multilateralism in order to maintain international peace
and security, promote sustainable development, combat
climate change and poverty and promote political
solutions to conflicts, while fully respecting the
territorial integrity and national sovereignty of Member
States and fostering post-conflict reconstruction.
Morocco supports all action taken by the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the specialized agencies of
the United Nations to ensure the equal representation

23-0258521/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of women in national, regional and international
institutions, as well as the efforts of Member States in
that regard. We also support action to promote the key
roles of women in conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding and peacekeeping, and to provide
them with the means to influence decisions at every
level. Based on that conviction and in the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000), on 23 March 2022 the Kingdom
of Morocco launched its national action plan on women
and peace and security, as part of the informed vision
of His Majesty King Mohammed VI for promoting
gender equality as the basis of a just, democratic and
egalitarian society.
Morocco also commends the Secretary-General’s
considerable efforts to promote the youth and peace
and security agenda as a catalyst for achieving new
objectives for peace, in line with resolution 2250 (2015)
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
by strengthening solidarity among generations and
promoting the genuine and effective participation of
young people in decision-making. In the same vein,
we commend the importance that the SecretaryGeneral ascribes to the role of young people and future
generations in his report on Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982).
With regard to promoting cooperation between the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies to
ensure more consistent strategies in order to strengthen
the resilience and effectiveness of institutions,
Morocco believes that there are good practices in
that regard available to the international community,
such as the relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which,
commendably, has been strengthened in recent years.
Thanks to the work of consecutive PBC Chairs,
significant progress has been made in strengthening
the Commission’s crucial role, particularly in terms
of promoting its consultative role with regard to the
Security Council, as demonstrated by the 17 times that
the Commission made recommendations to the Security
Council in 2022. Morocco is proud to contribute to that
dynamic in its capacity as Chair of the Central African
Republic configuration of the PBC.
The Kingdom of Morocco reiterates its full support
for the Secretary-General’s proposal to develop a New
Agenda for Peace, focused on investing in prevention
and peacebuilding. We are convinced that the New
Agenda will encourage Member States to develop a new
22/43

26/01/2023

set of collective responses to our common challenges,
promote the funding of peacebuilding, which remains
a critical challenge, and reaffirm our commitments
to pursuing action-oriented results in peacebuilding.
The New Agenda for Peace should take into account
certain priorities, in particular: first, further engaging
in arms control and disarmament by examining ways
in which the United Nations can help to revitalize that
goal; secondly, focusing on the security implications
of climate change, since the New Agenda provides
an appropriate platform for highlighting the key and
indispensable role of the United Nations in providing
essential information and response on that existential
threat; and thirdly, strengthening the valuable role
and capacity of the United Nations in prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace by
making use of the New Agenda to discuss how the
United Nations can use its mechanisms to address
evolving threats to international peace and security.
Furthermore, we reaffirm the critical importance
of allocating appropriate, adequate and predictable
funding for peacebuilding efforts. We reiterate our
support for the Secretary-General’s proposal to earmark
$100 million from the United Nations regular budget
for the Peacebuilding Fund.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco strongly
supports the Secretary-General’s commitment to
implementing the New Agenda for Peace, which
addresses the challenges of the twenty-first century. By
mobilizing all the tools at our disposal in a collective
manner, we can maintain a lasting and viable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada) (spoke in French): Let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having organized
today’s open debate. We are facing new threats and new,
complex challenges that undermine international peace
and security, set back global development and jeopardize
human rights. Russia’s invasion of, and illegal war of
aggression against, Ukraine are a manifestation of that
trend. The same is true of the major threats, namely,
conflicts, climate change and the coronavirus disease,
that many countries around the world are experiencing
while they also grapple with severe food, energy and
financial shocks.
Trust, truth, the law and cooperation are all
suffering from the harsh impact of broken promises,
corruption, propaganda, aggression and bad behaviour.
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We are all living with the multiple crises that surround
us. We need to show flexibility, creativity and
innovation in response. Preventing conflict, restoring
trust and reaffirming the importance of investing in
such processes with actual money are our common
challenge. I would like to put forward three observations
for consideration.
(spoke in English)
In brief, we need to leverage our comparative
advantage of all the United Nations organs and bodies. It
is true that, under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, but
it does not bear the sole responsibility. We believe that
the abuse of the veto makes it even more important that
we become even more innovative in how we respond.
We are all responding to contemporary threats that
do not recognize borders and that do not fall into neat
categories, but rather cut across all the pillars of the
Organization and the entire United Nations system.
That is where the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), to mention only three institutions, as well as all
the other agencies, can play a role that is supportive and
complementary to the efforts of the Council.
The PBC is a crucial forum, in which States
can engage in constructive dialogue on pressing
peacebuilding challenges. Through the PBC, we can
bring, and have brought, international and regional
financial institutions and the private sector to the
table. That has led to a better understanding of the
economic drivers of conflict and instability, as well as
the responses that are required to stem them. We hope
that the Security Council will meaningfully utilize
the PBC’s advice. As a member of the PBC, we will
continue to encourage the Commission to put forward
timely and action-oriented advice to the Council.
Secondly, on inclusion, women need to be included
in all matters of peace and security. Their meaningful
participation presents unique and pivotal opportunities
to create transformative solutions and, ultimately, more
inclusive societies. We must do more to remove the
barriers that prevent women from actively engaging on
issues that fundamentally affect their lives. That means
concerted efforts by the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies to give effect to the voices of
women and all those affected by conflict, who are too
often excluded in discussions on peace and security.

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Finally, with regard to resources, I have said in
other places at other times that a strategy without
resources is better called hallucination. Building peace
requires time, patience, a willingness to listen and
money. We should think of the money that we spend
on peacekeeping — in the billions — after conflicts
have broken out, and often when they are already
deeply embedded in the societies in which we are asked
to intervene. We spend a minuscule percentage of that
on prevention. That is a big mistake. We should deal
with it.
The demands on every aspect of the peacebuilding
architecture outmatch the resources that are available.
Yet we know that, if we do not do something about that,
the cost of the transition from conflict to peace is much
too high. We need renewed investments. We are proud
to have recently confirmed our pledge of $70 million
to the Peacebuilding Fund. We hope that we will move
forward with assessed contributions, which we feel
very strongly are necessary.
We have all embarked on an ambitious programme
leading up to the Summit of the Future, to be held in
2024. That includes the consideration of the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for a New Agenda for Peace. That
gives us an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to
peacebuilding and prevention, while ensuring that the
Organization is able to address the many challenges that
we face. It is time for all of us to seize this opportunity.
I can affirm that my country, Canada, will ensure,
together with all of us, that we do our utmost to engage
and succeed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon): At the outset, I would like to
express our sincere thanks to the presidency of Japan
for having convened this open debate amid the difficult
circumstances that our world is witnessing today, with
27 current conflicts breaking out in different parts of
the world simultaneously.
The topic of today’s meeting prompts us to reflect
on the following approach: are security and stability
the gateway to peace or the development and prosperity
of societies? We believe that the two components
are mutually reinforcing and cannot be envisaged in
silos. No situation can be strengthened, no society
can rise, and no peace will prevail unless an enabling
environment that embraces the minimum elements of
the steadfastness and resistance of people is established.

23-0258523/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

There is no development in isolation from stability.
There is no social justice, sense of security or equality
in rights and duties in the absence of a sound and robust
institutional apparatus, capable of withstanding the
brunt of any harsh crises.
Today I represent a country — and I say this
with bitterness and a burning heart — that lacks the
basic conditions for steadfastness in the light of an
unprecedented economic and financial crisis in its
modern history, which recently, and unfortunately,
cost us the loss of our voting right in the Organization,
of which Lebanon was one of the main pillars in its
founding and in the drafting of its Charter.
In addition, the ongoing stalemate of Lebanon’s
constitutional institutions has been compounded by
the massive influx of refugees and displaced persons
of different nationalities, the burden of which Lebanon
bears with all the significant challenges that entails.
Despite that bleak scene, the main driver of resilience
remains human resourcefulness and the ability to
adapt to crises until they subside. However, that kind
of resistance, resilience and steadfastness in the eye
of the storm cannot be relied upon in the long term,
given the absence of the basic necessities for well-being
and a decent life and the lack of conditions to ensure
continuity.
With regard to the important theme being discussed
today, we believe that the Council is invited to address
emerging threats and risk multipliers through broad
and inclusive dialogue with a wide spectrum of actors,
including but not limited to non-Council members,
United Nations specialized agencies, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
civil society in all its forms, including the private
sector. The importance of expanding consultations
to a plurality of actors is compounded by the often
transnational, interlinked and at times emerging
threats, which increasingly must be viewed in a
holistic manner. In the light of those elements, the
Peacebuilding Commission’s federating and crosscutting mandate could be expanded to all those actors
in order to potentially create new synergies among all
relevant stakeholders in order to increase the agility
and rapid-response capabilities of the Security Council
while at the same time bolstering the public legitimacy
of the Council and the United Nations as a whole.
The Security Council could make better use of the
convening power of the Peacebuilding Commission
24/43

26/01/2023

by expanding its mandate to promote more effective
interaction with non-Council members and United
Nations bodies and allowing a formalization of
partnerships with civil society entities. In doing
so, the Council would tangibly increase its efforts
to create a participatory environment in the design
and implementation of peacebuilding strategies,
which could include women, young people and other
marginalized groups, among others. A critical element
in building resilient institutions is the accurate
and advanced identification of the extrinsic and
intrinsic vulnerabilities of those institutions. Proper
consideration must of course be given to respect for
sovereign principles, as well as the unique national
specificities and cultures of each Member State.
Finally, assuming the appropriate identification
in advance of national institutional vulnerabilities,
capacity-building plays a pivotal role in creating,
strengthening and developing institutional resilience.
By building the capacity of Government officials, civil
society organizations and other key actors, Member
States can improve the effectiveness and accountability
of their institutions in the short, medium and long
terms, while promoting and cultivating essential civic
engagement. Particular attention should furthermore
be given to women and young people, as well as to
marginalized and vulnerable groups in society, in order
to ensure that institutions are both representative and
inclusive. In that regard, the women and peace and
security and the youth, peace and security agendas are
useful tools for achieving that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I want to thank Japan for
organizing this crucial debate, and I also thank the
briefers who spoke earlier today. Their briefings are a
reminder that despite the Council holding the primary
responsibility for peace and security, there are other
United Nations bodies and grass-roots organizations
that are crucial if we are to achieve that goal.
Following the recent conclusion of Ireland’s term as
an elected member of the Security Council, I would like
to identify three actions the Council can take towards
investing in peace.
The first step we must take is to focus on prevention
and early action, an area in which the Council
consistently fails to deliver. A focus on prevention
makes sense not only politically and morally but also
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

financially — saving both lives and money. That means
having the courage to act when we see the first signs of
crises and taking a more proactive role in preventing
them. The focus on prevention in the New Agenda
for Peace offers an opportunity to advance that work.
During our Council term, we saw the importance of an
early response to an unfolding crisis in Ethiopia. Right
now, the Council’s ongoing attention to the situation in
Armenia and Azerbaijan is critical. We will not always
find solutions quickly, but early responses from the
Council and prompt action and working in tandem with
regional approaches are how we can fulfil our mandate.
The longer we take to understand and heed the root
causes of conflict, the hungrier people grow, the more
destitute their poverty becomes and the more likely
conflict is to arise.
For peace to be sustained and human rights to be
protected, the drivers of conflict — such as inequality,
climate change and displacement — must be tackled.
That requires joined-up action by humanitarian,
development and peace-support actors to get back on
track towards achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. It also requires sustainable financing for
peacebuilding activities, including enhanced voluntary
and assessed contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund,
of which Ireland is a long-standing partner.
Secondly, the Security Council must respond to
the changing world around us and empower others,
including the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Every
month, the PBC empowers the Council with advice.
It is time for the Council to turn to that advice for
action, where it can. The PBC’s advice on the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel included
the need to address the adverse effects of climate
change and strengthen democratic institutions. We
believe that should be heeded in the mandate renewal
and presidential statement currently being considered.
Listening to such advice is not about overstepping
mandates but about using them to their full potential.
Pooling our strengths for the betterment of our planet
and its people is the very essence of multilateralism.
You asked us, Mr. President, whose voices should
be heard. My third point, as Member States and the
Secretary-General embark on crafting the New Agenda
for Peace, is that the Council must address inclusivity,
most notably for women and young people. For
generations of young people on the island of Ireland,
violence was a daily reality. As we approach the twentyfifth anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement, our

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

conviction remains resolute — we cannot build lasting
peace without empowering those who ultimately inherit
that peace. We must also harness the active involvement
of civil society in peacebuilding. In particular, we must
implement resolution 2594 (2021) in order to ensure
that the transition processes of United Nations peace
operations are inclusive and effective in order for them
to last.
As we craft the New Agenda for Peace, the Council
must play its part. Millions of vulnerable people are
relying on us to do just that. We cannot let them down.
The President: I now give the floor to the
represenative of Kuwait.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this important meeting on the theme “Peacebuilding
and sustaining peace: investment in people to enhance
resilience against complex challenges” and preparing
the valuable concept note (S/2023/19, annex).
The increasingly frequent crises that our world has
faced in recent years have become more complex and
interconnected than in the past. There is no doubt that
some of those crises could have been addressed and
the situations prevented from deteriorating if the tools
available to the Security Council had been used better
and more effectively.
The Charter of the United Nations includes many
tools that encourage the peaceful resolution of conflict,
specifically Chapter VI, which, in Article 33, outlines
the measures to resolve any dispute between parties
through:
“negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means
of their own choice”.
It is well known to the Council that dealing with
a crisis after its outbreak incurs a great cost upon the
international community. The Security Council must
not be exclusively preoccupied with dealing with the
repercussions of conflicts and trying to contain them
and prevent them from further escalating. There is a
need to look for ways and means to effectively prevent
the outbreak of conflicts before they happen.
In that context, we stress the need to give a greater
role to regional and subregional organizations in the
field of conflict prevention and mediation pursuant

23-0258525/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to Chapter VIII of the Charter and through boosting
strategic partnerships with the United Nations, with the
purpose of conducting mediation.
The topic of our session today revolves around an
important phrase, namely, “investment in people”. We
must place that phrase at the heart of all our efforts,
because through it we can achieve what we all seek,
which is a lasting and sustainable peace and societies
that are resilient to the political, security, economic and
humanitarian challenges that our world is facing today.
Investing in people is done in many ways, the most
important of which is by creating a general environment
that allows people and societies to achieve progress,
growth and prosperity. Moreover, there is a need to deal
with instability that might contribute to the outbreak
of political crises. As is well known, many crises are
rooted in tensions, or economic or social factors such
as poverty, hunger and unemployment, to cite but a
few examples. Here it is important to note the nexus
between peace, security and sustainable development,
as there can be no sustained peace without development,
and there can be no development without sustained
peace. Seeking to achieve sustainable development
requires providing suitable conditions, at the forefront
of which is the achievement of political security, social
and economic stability and addressing the root causes
of any obstacles which prevent us from achieving those.
In that context, we recall that the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development includes a specific
goal — Goal 16 — which calls for the promotion of
peaceful, just and inclusive societies for all. We add
to that the need to invest in development and further
consider and invest in women and youth as fundamental
elements in peace processes and the progress of societies
and their development. Moreover, we need to further
invest in policies and systems that can create societies
in which righteousness, justice and equality prevail.
The Security Council must make better use of
the tools available to it and cited in the Charter. We
also confirm the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in building and sustaining peace. It is
important to enhance cooperation, consultation and
coordination between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. We support the Secretary-General’s
report entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), which
calls for a New Agenda for Peace. We believe that such
an Agenda must be comprehensive, integrate peace and
security and work on addressing traditional challenges
26/43

26/01/2023

such as military conflicts and arms proliferation, and
contemporary challenges, such as climate change and
cyberthreats, that face our world today. Those must
be addressed in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter. We believe that it is important
for preventive diplomacy, mediation, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace to constitute fundamental elements in
that Agenda.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait firmly believes in
peace. One of the articles of our Constitution stipulates
that peace is a State objective and approach. Preventive
diplomacy, mediation and the prevention and peaceful
settlement of conflicts form the main pillars of Kuwaiti
foreign policy. The Security Council can therefore count
on the State of Kuwait as a trusted partner to support all
regional and international efforts that aim to peacefully
settle conflict and to build and sustain peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I would first
like to thank the Japanese presidency for the invitation
to participate in today’s important meeting and for
taking the initiative to convene it. This meeting gives us
the opportunity to jointly assess the need to incorporate
investment in resilience into the multilateral exercise
aimed at promoting peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
The historical practice of peace operations and
special political missions is being enriched by taking
into account the need to structure approaches to ensure
resilience in areas previously affected by conflict,
taking into account the fundamental role of the people
who inhabit those areas.
The structure of such approaches should
correspond to the processes of transition from conflict
to peacebuilding and must be considered in the
mandates of the missions determined by the Security
Council, taking into account fundamental principles
such as respect for human rights, the promotion of
gender equality, the strengthening of the rule of law, the
eradication of poverty and the construction of robust,
resilient institutions that enable the consolidation of
peaceful coexistence.
The structuring of approaches to strengthen the
resilience of people in their communities, as well as of
local authorities, must be based on their own flexible
criteria and independent indicators and benchmarks,
as well as on ethical grounds, moral imperatives and
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the fact that strengthening governance builds trust and
helps to rebuild the social fabric.
In order to be effective and coherent, investment
in resilience must therefore include the participation
of women and youth in the various decision-making
bodies and processes, especially in all aspects related
to peace and transition processes. That should involve
their leadership in communities, their increased
participation in political life and their involvement in
economic recovery and transitional justice processes.
Efforts to improve the resilience of local authorities
in their work to reduce the complexity of current risk
multipliers, such as food insecurity, pandemic diseases
and the adverse effects of climate change, are critical.
Those risks adversely affect efforts to address the
root causes of conflict and increase the likelihood of
conflict recurrence and escalation.
It is also essential to continue to promote investment
flows that contribute to reconstruction and the building
of strong institutions for the recovery of conflictaffected areas. To that end, it is important to involve
the private sector and civil society in building resilient
and viable institutions at the national and local levels.
Investment aimed at strengthening peacebuilding
should focus on improving governance, which in turn
will lead to an increase in trust, an essential component
of providing incentives for local productive enterprises
that emerge during transition processes in post-conflict
zones. Investing in productive capacities and generating
economic opportunities can help to rebuild a country’s
social fabric, in which the primary actors are local
associations and other civil society organizations.
Finally, we believe that investments in improving
the resilience of populations should prioritize
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as well
as building capacities in the areas of justice, security
and productive entrepreneurship.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): Myanmar commends the
presidency of Japan for organizing today’s open debate.
I would also like to thank all the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
Peace is the ultimate benefit that the peoples of the
United Nations hope to receive from the Organization.
Strengthening universal peace is therefore one of the

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

purposes of the United Nations, in addition to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
prevalence of international peace and the absence of
a world war for nearly eight decades can to a large
extent be attributed to the existence of the multilateral
structure underpinned by the United Nations. But
we all agree that the purposes and principles of the
United Nations are today being threatened as never
before, while millions of people are still suffering from
protracted conflicts around the world. Addressing the
root causes of those conflicts is hindered not only by
traditional factors, such as the breakdown of the rule
of law and the culture of impunity, but also by complex
challenges such as pandemics, disasters and the effects
of climate change.
Sustaining peace at both the international and
national levels takes much more than just managing
armed conflicts and preventing them from escalating.
To maintain peace at the international level, I wish to
echo the Secretary-General’s call for a New Agenda
for Peace, emphasizing in particular the necessity to
reduce strategic risks by strengthening commitment
to the non-use of nuclear weapons and their eventual
elimination. That commitment is more important than
ever before, given the eroding trust among the major
Powers. Outbreaks of armed conflict in societies can
be attributed most often to the collapse or destruction,
in whole or in part, of the political conditions that
guarantee justice and social stability. Based on our
national experience, achieving lasting peace and
establishing sustainable political systems requires a
comprehensive set of peacebuilding efforts to restore
stability and strengthen political, economic and
social institutions. Building effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions at all levels, as stipulated in
Sustainable Development Goal 16, is a key tenet of those
efforts. Every society needs such institutions, through
which investment in people can most effectively
strengthen its resilience against complex challenges.
In my country, Myanmar, the democratically
elected Government made concerted efforts to improve
national institutions by strengthening transparency
and accountability, in addition to allowing space
for the press and civil society. As a result, we saw a
significant improvement in the historically low public
trust in the country’s institutions. However, under
a political arrangement controlled by the militarydrafted constitution, the security and rule-of-law
related institutions remained unchanged under the

23-0258527/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

military. Then, on 1 February 2021, the unaccountable,
corrupted and brutal military generals exploited those
institutions for their own interests to perpetrate an
attempted coup against the elected Government. The
coup was and remains illegal, even under the military
constitution — but they corrupted it for their own
needs. Since then, the people of Myanmar have lost
trust in every institution under the illegitimate junta.
The reason for that is obvious: the security forces
have committed repeated atrocities against all the
people of Myanmar, even crimes against humanity
and war crimes, with blanket impunity. All the other
institutions in the country, including in the areas of
law enforcement, justice, immigration, finance, and
information and communications technologies, have
become tools of the illegal junta’s oppression machine
against the people of Myanmar.
All the investment in people and elsewhere made
by the Daw Aung San Suu Kyi-led elected Government
has been reversed to calamitous effect during the
two-year period since the illegal military coup began.
The rule of law has been annihilated and replaced by
corruption. The military has even created safe havens
for transnational organized crime, making Myanmar
a destination for such crime for the first time in its
history. The cost of the institutional destruction by
the military junta is extremely high, not only for
Myanmar itself, but also for the countries of the region
and beyond. Under a military dictatorship defined by
illegitimacy, brutality and disregard for the rule of
law, there is not and will never be any investment in
people’s socioeconomic development, human rights and
human security. The military dictatorship is willing to
continue to harm the people for the sake of its ambitions.
Meaningful security and justice sector reform is one of
the key goals of the revolutionary movement against the
fascist military in Myanmar, because peace can never
be sustained without making national defence and
security institutions accountable to the people.
The National Unity Government of Myanmar
expresses its deep appreciation to the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the other United Nations organs
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, as well
as individual Member States, for their ongoing efforts
to help the people of Myanmar restore democracy and
the rule of law. It is of crucial importance that the
approaches undertaken towards any eventual solution
to the current coup-inflicted disaster help create a
transition to a federal democratic union with effective,
28/43

26/01/2023

accountable, inclusive and transparent institutions. That
is the only system that can guarantee peace and justice
for all the people of Myanmar. The National Unity
Government and all democratic forces in Myanmar
stand ready to cooperate closely with the international
community towards achieving that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkmenistan.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the five countries of Central
Asia, namely Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Uzbekistan and my own country, Turkmenistan.
At the outset, let me express our gratitude to the
Permanent Mission of Japan for organizing today’s open
debate. As the States Members of the United Nations, in
addition to implementing in practice the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, our
main tasks and obligations consist mostly of taking
collective efforts to build and sustain peace with a
view to leaving no one behind. However, that process
needs agreed political mechanisms and a legal basis at
the regional and global levels in order to proceed with
further activities on the ground.
I have the honour to inform the Security Council
that, with the support of all States Members of the
United Nations, General Assembly resolution 76/299
was adopted on 28 July 2022, declaring Central Asia
a zone of peace, trust and cooperation. It is the point
from which we continue to expand our efforts to build
and sustain peace within and beyond our region,
implementing the decisions taken during consultative
meetings of the Heads of State of Central Asia. The
Central Asian countries have put forward a number of
global initiatives that have contributed to lasting peace
and stability all over the world, and I would like to take
this opportunity to mention some of them.
It was 17 years ago that our five countries
established a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia,
a significant step towards strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime. General Assembly resolution
77/70, the most recent on the subject, was adopted on
7 December 2022 (see A/77/PV.46) on behalf of Central
Asia. Through its resolution 77/51, the Assembly also
unanimously supported the initiative to proclaim
5 March the International Day for Disarmament and
Non-Proliferation Awareness. We believe that initiative
will help to strengthen international peace and security
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and improve the prospects for future generations to live
in a world without nuclear weapons.
The high-level conference held in October 2022
in Tajikistan continued the Dushanbe process on
countering terrorism and its financing, which was
launched in May 2018. In accordance with General
Assembly resolutions, we launched and completed
a global campaign in the context of the International
Year of Peace and Trust in 2021, and this year
began coordinating activities in the context of the
International Year of Dialogue as a Guarantee of Peace.
We can therefore use that impetus to accelerate our
common regional action for peacebuilding with a view
to reinforcing and accelerating the initiative of the
Secretary-General to form an ambitious New Agenda
for Peace. Alongside that agenda, we in the region are
pressing forward with the Secretary-General’s proposed
aims for reducing global strategic risks, investing in
conflict prevention and peacemaking and supporting
regional preventive measures.
But as we undertake practical steps to harness our
political will in implementing those peacebuilding
agendas, we are often brought to a halt by a lack of
available resources. Our discussion today concerns
those resources and their financial aspects in particular.
We have already set goals in that regard. On 8 September
2022, the General Assembly, in a consensus vote,
adopted its important resolution 76/305 — the first of
its kind, focused on financing for peacebuilding. The
Central Asian countries strongly believe that financing
remains a critical challenge and needs our collective
commitment to ensuring adequate, predictable and
sustained fiscal sources for peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. In that regard, we welcome the
valuable work undertaken by the Peacebuilding Fund
and international financial institutions for a catalytic,
rapid-response and flexible pre-positioned pooled
fund that provides financing for activities to sustain
peace in conflict-affected countries. We also note with
appreciation the launch of the Secretary-General’s
peacebuilding funding dashboard and its contribution to
enhancing the transparency and coordination of funds
and strengthening financial accessibility. It further
facilitates information-sharing while supporting
United Nations peacebuilding at the national, regional
and global levels.
Another important question is how and where
we can best direct all the available resources. In that
regard, the Central Asian countries are considering the

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

main opportunity gaps in addressing financial needs to
enhance investments in human capital, including the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women and
young people in peacemaking, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding efforts in order to achieve social justice.
The issue goes beyond gender equality and youth
engagement — it is a matter of updating peacebuilding,
creating solutions that reflect the needs of all people in
conflict-affected settings and addressing the underlying
conditions that drive conflict in the first place.
In that regard, a clear example of effective activities
in the prevention nexus is the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
which was established 15 years ago in Turkmenistan.
With the valuable support of the Regional Centre, our
countries established the Central Asia Women Leaders’
Caucus and the Preventive Diplomacy Academy for
young people. The Women Leaders’ Caucus became
the first platform of its kind aimed at increasing the
political, economic and social participation of women
in the Central Asian region. We marked a major
milestone in November 2022, when the Central Asia
Women Leaders’ Caucus stepped into peacebuilding
deliberations by taking part in the dedicated session
of the Peacebuilding Commission and a side event
preceding it, both held at United Nations Headquarters
in New York.
The States of Central Asia firmly believe that
by taking joint action and encouraging all Member
States and other partners to consider increasing their
contributions to peacebuilding activities and sustaining
peace in the relevant countries and regions, the
international community will ultimately succeed as it
strives to make the world a better place.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Malaysia joins others in
thanking you, Sir, for convening this important open
debate. We also appreciate the briefers for giving us
their outlook on the topic.
Malaysia welcomes all efforts towards sustaining
peace. Against a backdrop of multifaceted crises, we
believe that we need greater efforts to ensure a dynamic
equilibrium between resolving and preventing conflicts
and achieving post-conflict reconstruction. The concept
of sustaining peace should incorporate a whole system
of peacebuilding, peacekeeping and capacity-building
alongside sustainable development and humanitarian

23-0258529/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

efforts. In that regard, Malaysia commends the
Peacebuilding Commission for its vital role, whose
scope has continued to broaden since its establishment
in 2006. Malaysia continues to believe that the Security
Council has benefited from its increased interaction
with the Commission and that relations between them
should be enhanced and strengthened, given the nexus
between peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations.
My delegation reaffirms that efforts to support
countries in post-conflict situations must be premised
on the principle of national ownership. Through
national ownership, any post-conflict reconstruction
policy, institution-building and formulation of
economic development programmes will reflect the
needs of the local stakeholders and ensure inclusivity
and legitimacy. We also believe in the imperative of
regional engagement and commitment for sustainable
peace. Additionally, the role of women and young people
in peace and security should be further mainstreamed.
Malaysia considers the engagement of women and young
people, including in capacity-building programmes,
to be vital to ensuring sustainable recovery and longterm peace.
Malaysia will continue to support enhancing
resilience in peace efforts. To that end, 849 Malaysian
peacekeepers, including 85 personnel, are currently
serving in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
among them those in Lebanon, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Western Sahara. Through
the Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme,
we have also provided support in terms of capacitybuilding programmes, including in our own region, for
reconstruction and sustainable economic development.
Malaysia’s firm commitment to peacebuilding efforts
is also manifested in its support of all Security Council
resolutions related to peacebuilding efforts. Malaysia
stands ready to continue supporting the Security
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and all
partners in building a New Agenda for Peace to sustain
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Nunes (Timor-Leste): It is a distinct honour and
great pleasure for me to address the Security Council
today. I wish to congratulate you, Madam President,
and Japan on your successful presidency of the Security
Council this month. I also express our appreciation for
30/43

26/01/2023

the opportunity to present our view on the issue of
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Since the establishment of the United Nations,
the Security Council has played an important role
in maintaining international peace and security
and helping countries to navigate the difficult path
from conflict to peace. In addition to the procedural
barriers in the decision-making process, the evolution
of security threats to peace in conflict areas has made
the role of the Council in the maintenance of peace and
security more complex.
In order to better advance peace and security
in the world, we share the view that United Nations
peacekeeping operations must be given clear mandates,
adequate planning, management and financial support,
and sufficient time and resources to engage in
multifunctional peacebuilding tasks. As a former host
country for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Timor-Leste understands the importance of the
genuine commitment of all parties involved and better
performance in executing key goals, such as prevention,
stabilization, management and partnerships. In order to
better perform in conflict prevention and stabilization,
United Nations peacekeeping operations need to address
the issues that present long-term risks of conflict; engage
with parties that are on the verge of violence; negotiate
for peace; assist countries in achieving reconciliation;
support inclusive political processes and democratic
political culture to resolve ongoing conflicts; promote
social cohesion; build resilient and inclusive societies;
promote good governance and the rule of law; assist in
security sector reform; and promote electoral assistance
and gender equality.
At the same time, given that peacebuilding and
sustaining peace represent a long-term process that
requires flexible and timely resources, United Nations
peacekeeping operations must make use of the adequate
facilities given to them in order to achieve more effective
outcomes through improved prioritization, integration
and focus on efficiency. In addition, strong partnerships
with the United Nations, the host country and countries
with specialized experience are important for creating
the conditions necessary for long-term regional stability
and laying the foundation for economic growth and
sustainable development, which will facilitate smooth
exit and transition processes.
The improved performance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations will also be determined by an
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

adequate understanding of the local context, including
the history, culture, customary laws, national priorities
and needs of the host country and its people. Such
crucial knowledge can be acquired through active
engagement with the local community and civil society
and with the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women and the inclusion of young people and people
with disabilities. Through such a comprehensive
approach, we believe that the United Nations can do
better in its peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts
to help countries in conflict to fully transition to peace.

had negative impacts on our ability to reach a new
consensus at the United Nations over the best way to
promote our international multilateral work in order to
address the consecutive strategic challenges and risks
in a context of universal international solidarity at the
United Nations. An initial and thorough assessment
of those discussions and preparations to launch the
New Agenda for Peace and convene the Summit of the
Future will yield a number of conclusions that must be
taken into account, the most important of which are the
following.

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.

First, the vision set forth in the 1992 report of former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali entitled “An
Agenda for Peace” (S/24111), and in his subsequent
reports in 1994 on an agenda for development
(A/48/935) and in 1996 on an agenda for democratization
(A/51/761), all received the support of the international
community, which sought to implement them amid
an environment of international consensus. Those
agendas were and still are deep-rooted foundations
for promoting the relationship between the three main
pillars of the current work of the United Nations in the
fields of maintaining international peace and security,
enhancing economic and social development, and
respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Those foundations were also the bedrock of the report
of the next African Secretary-General, Kofi Annan,
entitled “In larger freedom: towards development,
security and human rights for all” (A/59/2005), based
on the pillars of freedom from fear, freedom from
want and freedom to live in dignity. Together, they
made up the basis of the fundamental reforms that we
adopted at the 2005 World Summit in celebration of
the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations. Their
implementation at the time provided a strong impetus
to the international multilateral system.

Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased to
begin my statement by expressing my deep appreciation
to the Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
holding this meeting and for the politically and legally
sound choice of topics for discussion by the Council in
open debate, which enhances the ability of the Council
and the General Assembly to address the increasing
challenges that the international multilateral system is
currently witnessing.
I am also pleased, on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, and the entire Arab world, to
express to the Japanese presidency of the Council our
deep appreciation for the well deserved recognition,
in the concept note for this open debate (S/2023/19,
annex), of the pioneering role and clear vision of the
late Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the only Arab-African
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who laid the
foundations of post-conflict peacebuilding in a personal
initiative that he introduced to the Council, upon the
request of the Security Council Summit (see S/PV.3046)
to present an Agenda for Peace in 1992 to specifically
and exclusively cover three topics — preventive
diplomacy, peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Former
Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali added to them an
important pillar that has become, after 40 years, one of
the main pillars that underpin the concept of sustaining
peace, which is the main focal point for the preventive
diplomacy of our Organization.
Our debate today coincides with the discussions
of the General Assembly on the implementation of
the Secretary-General’s report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) and his ongoing consultations to propose a
New Agenda for Peace, amid increased global tensions
and consecutive geopolitical developments that have

The most important of those reforms was the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Peacebuilding Fund, the Human Rights Council,
UN-Women and the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, in addition to the adoption of
several new concepts that specifically focused on
the protection of and investment in people, including
human security, in which Japan plays an essential
implementation role, and the responsibility to protect.
All those concepts were intended to strengthen the
principles of security and of the economic and social
protection of peoples, as well as to guarantee respect
for human rights and a commitment to the foundations

23-0258531/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of democracy, without one party imposing its views
on others. Those concepts also ensured the unimpeded
flow of humanitarian aid in times of crisis and conflict.
They are solid foundations that we, the United Nations,
must continue to develop and promote consensus about
for the sake of our peoples.
The recent variables and geopolitical disputes lead
to divergence instead of convergence and, day after
day, create shifting alliances that we never imagined
and expose us to unthinkable dangers, including the
danger of the use of nuclear weapons, in a manner that
is contrary to all international commitments included in
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Secondly, the challenges that the international
community currently faces have become more global
in nature and no longer affect only leaderships and
Governments. Instead, they now deeply affect ordinary
people, their standard of living and their ability to
enjoy freedom and dignity. That may be the result of
the Security Council’s failure to resolve protracted
conflicts, including those in our Arab region and on
the African continent, which have led to the spread of
terrorism, conflicts and revolutions.
That may also be the result of climate change and
the negative effects of natural disasters, or because
some have succeeded, under everyone’s nose, in evading
punishment and accountability at the international
level, despite perpetrating blatant international
violations. That may be because of the use of double
standards on pivotal issues, foremost of which is the
foreign occupation of the land of others, such as in
Palestine and Ukraine.
That may also be the result of other complex
challenges that threaten human security, food security
and water security, leading to the loss of all or some of
the gains achieved by countries in the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals. The outcome is an
unprecedented international concern, especially among
middle-income countries, low-income countries, small
countries, island countries and African countries, in
particular countries that are not part of large strategic
alliances or those that do not enjoy the protection of
nuclear umbrellas or military alliances. All of that
destroys the concept of sustaining peace and strikes at
the heart of it.
The Security Council is therefore required
to take the initiative to rise to the level of those
challenges, in particular the five permanent members
32/43

26/01/2023

of the Council, until the Security Council has been
reformed and expanded. Those five members are
collectively responsible for leading that international
effort based on joint respect of all the principles that
underpin the Charter of the United Nations, and on a
collective commitment to respect international law and
international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, the Security Council must confront
those dangers and seek to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. That requires establishing strong
international, regional and national institutions
that are able to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for
Peace must be based on the successes achieved by the
original An Agenda for Peace (S/24111).
Fifthly, we must enhance institutional cooperation
among the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, and the various regional organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Bakradze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the Japanese presidency
of the Security Council for convening today’s
important debate.
After nearly 80 years since the establishment of the
United Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, we still struggle to achieve peace in
many parts of the world, including in my own region,
in which Russia’s continued occupation of two integral
regions of Georgia, as well as the ongoing full-scale
military aggression against Ukraine, causes enormous
human suffering, with wider implications on global
security and sustainable development. Grave threats
stemming from pandemic diseases, technology-enabled
threats and the rapid spread of disinformation, coupled
with unmitigated climate change, exacerbate the grim
reality and once again demonstrate that multilateral
cooperation and the rules-based international order
have no alternatives.
While we agree that the Security Council has
contributed to resolving certain armed conflicts,
or at least to preventing their escalation over many
years, raging wars and protracted conflicts require
decisive action from the Council to fulfil its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations.
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

As stated before, Georgia views the suggested New
Agenda for Peace, in line with commitment 3 of the
declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, as a much-needed
opportunity to promote peace, prevent conflicts and
strengthen the framework for a peaceful world. Georgia
strongly believes that an ambitious New Agenda for
Peace must rest upon a reinforced commitment to
the fundamental principles of international law and
the United Nations Charter and better protection and
realization of human rights.
Sustaining peace can be achieved only through
Member States’ strong adherence to the principles of
the United Nations Charter and the presence of strong
accountability. We believe that, along with prevention,
the New Agenda should envisage bold action on peaceful
conflict resolution, as it is of paramount importance for
ensuring peace and stability globally. It should also
reinforce the women and peace and security agenda,
while ensuring the equal and meaningful participation
of women in all stages of peace processes.
A comprehensive and integrated approach to peace
and security is key. Given the strong nexus between
peace and development, addressing people’s need for
socioeconomic development and protecting their human
rights are of the utmost importance for the prevention
of conflicts. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, underpinned by States’ obligations under
international human rights instruments, is one of the
most important plans of action for people, the planet,
prosperity and peace.
Let me stress the key role of Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 16 in guiding our efforts towards peaceful
societies, which forms an important, complementary
basis to our conflict resolution efforts at all stages of
the conflict cycle and serves as a key enabler for the
success of the overall sustainable development agenda,
as hardly any of the SDGs can be achieved without the
commitment of integrated societies and guidance from
strong State institutions to that end.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that a holistic
approach to peace and development will help us
to connect the dots and better implement efforts
that will bring us closer to peaceful and inclusive
societies. In that regard, it is important to strengthen
the Security Council’s primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, which

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

paves the way for the protection of human rights and
sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mrs. Eat (Cambodia): As a newcomer, allow
me to express my warmest greetings to all members.
I presented my credentials to the SecretaryGeneral yesterday, and today’s meeting is my first
official engagement as Cambodia’s new Permanent
Representative to the United Nations. I hope to have the
full support and cooperation of members in fulfilling
my duties.
Let me begin by joining others in expressing high
appreciation to you, Madam President, and Japan for
initiating today’s dialogue on investment in people to
enhance resilience against complex challenges, as part
of the peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda.
We are indeed in an increasingly turbulent world,
with numerous interconnected and complicated
challenges that transcend national boundaries, including
the impacts of geopolitical rivalries, wars and conflict,
climate change, the coronavirus disease pandemic and
so on. Those challenges hinder the momentum towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
To be effective in building people’s resilience
in the face of those challenges, first and foremost,
we need to prioritize the maintenance of peace and
political stability. To that end, preventive diplomacy
and sensitivity to the concerns, including security
concerns, of all stakeholders should be embraced. In that
respect, Cambodia supports the Secretary-General’s
call for enhanced investment in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding in his New Agenda for Peace.
Synergies and partnerships between international
and home-grown peace and peacebuilding processes
are crucial to achieving lasting peace and stability.
Cambodia stands as a good example in that regard. My
nation suffered untold misery and destruction from
three decades of war and genocide. While the country
has greatly benefited from international peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts, enduring peace and stability
have been achieved thanks to our own win-win policy,
launched in 1998. Our leadership and ownership of
national development strategies have enabled us to
progressively enhance our people’s economic, political
and social freedom, with no one left behind: women and
young people are equally empowered to contribute to

23-0258533/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the consolidation of peace and sustainable development.
In fact, investing in people is our Government’s top
priority.
At present, Cambodia is in a position, and is ready,
to enhance its contribution and its role in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding under the United Nations umbrella.
Currently, we have almost 1,000 peacekeepers, some
15 per cent of whom are women, in five countries. To
share our success story in solidifying peace and national
reconciliation and unity, we would like to do more.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that more
open debates like this one would allow the Security
Council to hear the diverse voices and constructive
ideas of non-Council members.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
Japan for organizing today’s open debate. I also wish
to thank the briefers — Deputy Secretary-General
Ms. Amina Mohammed; Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh Ambassador Muhammad Abdul Muhith,
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC); and the
civil society briefer — for their insights on the topic.
In recent years, the international community has
come to better grasp the complex and interlinked
facets of peacebuilding. Our perspective on addressing
conflicts has undergone a paradigm shift from
resolution, reconciliation and recovery to prevention and
reconstruction. A comprehensive approach, focusing on
sustainable development, inclusive economic growth
and political processes, forms an integral part of our
responses to conflict situations today.
As a leading troop- and police-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations and
a founding member of the PBC, India has the following
observations to make with regard to the topic of today’s
open debate.
First, we need to recognize the primacy of national
Governments and authorities in identifying and driving
priorities, strategies and activities for sustaining peace.
What is needed is to work closely with Member States,
in line with their national requirements and needs,
rather than advocate prescriptions and solutions from
outside. Inclusivity in advancing national peacebuilding
objectives is imperative.
34/43

26/01/2023

Secondly, forging social cohesion and trust in
governance institutions in divided societies is easier
said than done, but it is indispensable to ensuring that
conflict-ravaged societies do not relapse into chaos.
Efforts to that end need to factor in complex layers of
post-conflict scenarios and the local context.
Thirdly, as the world’s largest democracy, we are
convinced that representative, inclusive and resilient
governance structures will help stability in securing
peace, safeguarding fundamental rights and protecting
the rule of law. Those elements, in turn, make
governance transparent, responsive and people-centric.
We need to encourage such governance structures in
countries in conflict settings. That also requires giving
them both the time and the space that they need to
deliver efficiently.
Fourthly, gender sensitivity and inclusivity
in the governance and security sector strengthen
nation-building. Similarly, creating an environment
that provides opportunities for young people to grow
out of conflict is equally critical.
Fifthly, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
mutually exclusive. Attempts to extend the role of
peacekeeping missions to peacebuilding tasks would
strengthen neither, but instead would end up weakening
both. The military component of peacekeeping can
play only an enabling role; it cannot bring about
peacebuilding on its own.
Sixthly, there is an urgent need for predictable and
sustainable financing for peacebuilding efforts to be
more effective. However, any decision to that effect
must be consensus-based.
India has been playing a constructive and
significant role in the context of peacebuilding through
extensive development partnerships, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, with countries in the global South.
The India-United Nations Development Partnership
Fund, which was established in 2017, has grown in the
short span of the past five years to a portfolio of 66
development projects in partnership with 51 developing
countries, including 17 Member States from Africa. In
the case of Africa, India has committed concessional
loans of more than $12 billion to various development
projects since 2015.
India will continue to be a force multiplier for all
peacebuilding efforts, particularly building resilient
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

institutions for an effective and enduring response to
conflict situations.
The representative of Pakistan made an
unwarranted reference to the union territory of Jammu
and Kashmir in his statement. The union territory of
Jammu and Kashmir is, and will always be, an integral
and inalienable part of India, irrespective of what
the representative of Pakistan believes or comments.
Pakistan’s desperate and deliberate attempts to peddle
falsehoods and the habit of abusing the sanctity of
multilateral forums deserve our collective contempt,
and perhaps sympathy, as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mr. Papakostas (Greece): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
The peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue and diplomacy is among the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
form the bedrock of the Organization. As a candidate
for non-permanent membership in the Security Council
for the period 2025–2026 and a staunch supporter of the
primacy of international law, Greece is ready to support
a wide array of tools for the prevention and resolution
of international disputes, including by addressing the
root causes and drivers of conflicts.
Greece would also like to stress the central role of
the Security Council, in cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations, in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. Greece supports the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) by introducing global governance
reforms in order to improve the effectiveness of the
United Nations-centred multilateral system in crisis
and conflict responses.
Furthermore, Greece believes that the Security
Council should better take into consideration the
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in order to make full use of the PBC’s unique
capabilities in promoting common analysis among the
integrated United Nations missions.
The New Agenda for Peace is yet another opportunity
to reinforce the long-standing commitment of the United
Nations to timely, coordinated and sustained conflict
prevention. Greece is willing to cooperate with all
Members of the United Nations to uphold the collective

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

security system established by the Charter, emphasizing
the prohibition of the use or the threat of use of force.
As a country of which the foreign policy is defined by
the need for respect for international law, including
international humanitarian law, Greece is determined
to advocate for a Charter-compliant approach to all
matters relating to international peace and security.
Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
the rules-based international order founded on the
Charter of the United Nations and multilateralism are
undoubtedly at the core of the New Agenda for Peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open debate.
As the concept note (S/2023/19, annex) aptly
recalls, the notion of peacebuilding was first introduced
in the report An Agenda for Peace (S/24111), which
was submitted by the then Secretary-General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali in response to a request from the
Security Council. Many provisions of that report are
highly relevant today, including for finding answers
to the questions of how the Security Council can
better address emerging threats and what elements
should be included in the New Agenda for Peace.
Most importantly, the cornerstone of any efforts in the
context of peacebuilding and sustaining peace is and
must remain the State. Respect for its fundamental
sovereignty and integrity is crucial to any progress
in preventing conflicts, restoring and maintaining
peace, building bonds of peaceful mutual benefit
among nations, enhancing respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms, protecting human security
and promoting sustainable economic and social
development. Although each war, conflict and dispute
is unique, the principles guiding inter-State relations
and cooperation are universal. An Agenda for Peace
was very clear in rejecting fragmentation and stating
that the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
must be applied consistently, not selectively.
By the time An Agenda for Peace had been adopted
and the concept of peacebuilding launched, Azerbaijan
was already facing armed aggression by neighbouring
Armenia. Neither the landmark messages delivered
through that report nor the subsequent resolutions of
the Security Council — namely, resolutions 822 (1993),
853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) — prevented

23-0258535/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the aggressor from undertaking further attacks, mass
atrocities and territorial seizures. In 1994, Boutros
Boutros-Ghali declared the position of the United
Nations based on four principles: the territorial
integrity of Azerbaijan; the inviolability of international
boundaries; the inadmissibility of the use of force for
the acquisition of territory; and the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of all Armenian troops from
the occupied territories of Azerbaijan. Armenia ignored
that position and kept the territories of my country
under occupation until they were liberated by military
and political means at the end of 2020.
Evidently, while committing aggression, torturing
and killing thousands of Azerbaijani people, subjecting
the occupied territories to total ethnic cleansing, cultural
erasure, looting and destruction, Armenia cared little
about the principles of inter-State relations, human
rights and the decisions and reports of international
organizations. The question now is whether Armenia
has changed its policy 30 years later — definitely not.
Following the end of the conflict, instead of engaging
genuinely and in good faith in the process of normalizing
inter-State relations based on mutual recognition and
respect for mutual sovereignty and territorial integrity,
as proposed and consistently advanced by Azerbaijan
and supported by the international community,
Armenia gave preference to its usual evasions and
destabilizing actions.
Territorial claims, motivated by fabricated
historical narratives and an ethnonationalist ideology,
are still the dominating imperatives for the authorities
in Yerevan. Armenia’s refusal to completely withdraw
its armed forces and illegal armed formations from the
territory of my country and return eight occupied border
villages to Azerbaijan, its continued mine terrorism and
other illegal activities, its references to the localities in
Azerbaijan with outdated or fake names, its widespread
smear and misinformation campaigns, and its failure to
prevent the incitement and promotion of racial hatred
by ethnonationalist groups operating within its territory
are in no way consistent with the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, human rights and the peace
agenda. Moreover, during almost 30 years of war and
occupation, Armenia refused to account for thousands
of missing Azerbaijanis and conduct investigations into
the numerous atrocity crimes committed by its armed
forces during the conflict. Only last year, in 2022,
Armenia handed over to Azerbaijan 67 bags containing
mixed remains belonging to 106 persons. It can only
36/43

26/01/2023

cause deep indignation that a country that claims to be
nothing less than a centre of civilization and an ardent
advocate of human rights has kept those remains for
three decades, contrary to all moral canons and in
violation of international humanitarian law.
Azerbaijan’s experience is an illustration and a
reminder of the need to do much more to prevent and
resolve conflicts, ensure respect for the sovereignty and
integrity of States, confront hatred and disinformation,
and build and sustain peace. Providing support for States
that are affected by conflict and engaged in post-conflict
peacebuilding, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
reintegration is and must remain a critical commitment
of the entire United Nations system. Such support is also
indispensable in the context of investment in people to
enhance resilience against contemporary threats and
challenges. Azerbaijan is firm in its determination to
defend its security, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
protect its people and ensure peace and stability in the
region by all available means, in full conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Most
of the violent conflicts since the Cold War were not
the result of power relations between States. Instead,
they were triggered by and rooted mainly in countries
with poor governance, ethnic or religious tensions and
structural inequalities — all of which are problems
related to development. That is why a wide range of
concerns, including socioeconomic development, human
rights and humanitarian issues, must be consistently
addressed in order to maintain international peace and
security. In that context, peacebuilding is more important
than ever. Many ceasefire and peace agreements are
initially unsuccessful. Many peace processes drag on
interminably, with long and circular negotiations. And
even if fragile agreements are reached, they may break
down during the implementation phase. If sufficient
attention is not paid to the needs of societies emerging
from conflict, the consequences are serious for all
parties. The societies themselves are exposed to the
risks of poverty, population displacement, the reversal
of development gains and renewed violence, sometimes
at levels even worse than they were before the conflict.
Peacebuilding seeks to not only resolve conflicts,
but also to build societies, institutions, policies and
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

relationships that are better able to sustain peace and
justice over time.
Argentina has supported the development of the
concept of sustainable peace, as defined in General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016), understood as a continuous
process that involves the peacebuilding system — not
only in the post-conflict phase, but also before and
during conflicts. That is based on a comprehensive
approach that must take into account the need to combat
the root causes of conflict by, among other things,
strengthening the rule of law, promoting sustained and
sustainable economic growth, eradicating poverty and
promoting social development, democracy and respect
for human rights.
In the face of new global challenges, we must ask
ourselves what the right United Nations structures and
mandates are for conflict resolution. The transition
from war to peace is not a technical exercise, but a
highly political process that must combine various
principles, priorities and approaches. We stress the
need for coordination between the main United Nations
entities, avoiding action in separate silos and striving
for systemic coherence in peacebuilding strategies.
That is why the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
is central to the architecture of conflict resolution.
Argentina understands that the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission has gained momentum
from the debate on the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. At the heart
of the Sustainable Development Goals is a drive for
transformative change, with more peaceful, just and
inclusive societies that help to shape stronger and more
inclusive institutions.
Argentina understands that financing for
peacebuilding and for development are interlinked,
complementary and mutually reinforcing. It is not
correct to assume that more spending on peacebuilding
means less funding for development. In that context,
South-South and triangular cooperation are important
examples of how various developing economies can
benefit from one another, and similar approaches should
be considered when financing peacebuilding activities.

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

convening this open debate of the Security Council on
peacebuilding and sustainable peace. We also thank all
of the briefers for their important presentations.
The emerging risks and threats to international
peace and security make it urgent for the Organization
and Member States to intensify their efforts to
consolidate and sustain peace. Allow me to take this
opportunity to point out four areas that El Salvador
considers key in the Security Council’s approach to
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
First, my country believes that the search for and
implementation of sustainable political solutions to
conflicts must always be aimed at combating their root
causes and triggers. It is therefore necessary to redouble
efforts to achieve more effective security responses and
to adopt measures to ensure the inclusion and effective
participation of all actors of society in all stages of
peace processes in order to establish effective and
resilient institutions and to invest in people throughout
their life cycle.
Moreover, we believe that investing in people
includes addressing their socioeconomic development
needs, protecting their human rights and empowering
them to be agents of change. My country is therefore
a promoter of the women and peace and security and
the youth, peace and security agendas, considering
the importance that both population groups play in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts and the
construction, consolidation and sustainability of peace.
Secondly, understanding peace as a holistic
and continuous process, El Salvador believes that
strengthening the advisory, liaison and convening role
of the Peacebuilding Commission is highly relevant
to applying a coherent collective approach in the
Organization’s efforts to build and sustain peace.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.

Thirdly, funding gaps for peacebuilding must be
addressed decisively. By adopting the first resolution
on financing for peacebuilding (resolution 76/305), the
General Assembly established a series of mandates,
the implementation of which is urgent and necessary
to prevent and end conflicts, meet the demands of
Member States for support and promote recovery,
reconstruction and development in various parts of the
world — all with adequate, predictable and, above all,
sustainable financing.

Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me first thank you, Mr. President, for

Finally, El Salvador believes that it is necessary
to continue bolstering integration, coordination and

23-0258537/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

coherence in the field of peacebuilding and sustainable
peace at all levels. Taking into account the multiplicity
of actors working to prevent conflict and consolidate
peace, my country believes that strengthening dialogue
and the establishment of strategic alliances will make
it possible to broaden the impact of interventions and
initiatives to consolidate and sustain peace.
Ms. Seid (Palau): I am delivering this statement in
my capacity as Chair of the 12 members of the Pacific
small island developing States (SIDS) represented in
New York.
On behalf of the Pacific SIDS, I convey our
congratulations to Japan on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January and thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
We would like to highlight two threats to peace
that are important to us as Pacific SIDS. The first is
based on our history with nuclear testing in the Pacific
and the second is the present and escalating threat of
climate change in our islands.
The Pacific experienced over 300 nuclear-test
explosions, conducted over the course of five decades.
It is through our unique historical experience that we
advocate that the New Agenda for Peace establish
stronger commitments on the non-use and total
elimination of nuclear weapons, as outlined by the
Secretary-General in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
We believe that this is inextricably linked to sustaining
peace and that it is of the utmost importance that the
Agenda address ways for the international community
to limit strategic risks.
The challenges we face to sustaining peace have
also evolved. For SIDS in particular, climate change
poses an ever-increasing threat as a multiplier for
instability and conflict. In the Pacific, rising sea
levels have flooded our coastal towns and villages,
causing displacement and forced migration. Sea level
rise has also created saltwater intrusion of our water
tables, creating water insecurity, and has flooded our
taro patches, threatening our food security. Prolonged
droughts, frequent floods and severe and intense
cyclones and typhoons are now a regular occurrence in
our islands, leaving catastrophic damage in their wake.
Warming waters are bleaching our coral reefs, which
we rely on for subsistence fishing, but also to drive
marine-based economic activities, such as fisheries
and blue tourism. Forced migration, displacement, food
38/43

26/01/2023

and water insecurity and infrastructure damage are all
terms we associate with war zones, but for SIDS, it is
climate change that is the root cause of those threats to
peace.
Additionally, when much of a developing country’s
fiscal space is choked by ever-increasing climate
disaster relief, there is less to spend on development.
That means less investment in education, health,
nutrition, infrastructure, social services and training.
Effectively, climate change is also eroding the
institutions and safety nets that we rely on for peace
and stability. In that respect, we reiterate our call for
a special representative of the Secretary-General on
climate change and security, who would inform the
future work of the Council and the Assembly.
We commend the efforts of the Council in engaging
with us in this open debate, and we look forward to
continuing to engage on these crucial issues.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Federated States of Micronesia.
Mr. Lippwe (Federated States of Micronesia): I
wish to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and the
Government of Japan for convening today’s open debate.
I align myself with the statement just delivered by
the Ambassador of Palau on behalf of Pacific small
island developing States.
In October 1945, when the United Nations
was founded, the Security Council focused on the
narrow concept of security. With the ever-changing
circumstances our world faces, however, and with
the security landscape becoming so complicated, the
Council and the traditional concepts of peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding have had to evolve. In
rebuilding a country torn apart by war and other grave
security threats and harms, we need to take a holistic
approach. National institutions and processes need to
be developed to prevent future hostilities, which we
think is important.
In our Blue Pacific continent, the primary threat
facing Pacific small island developing States is not
the encroachment of foreign armies, but the grave and
mounting threats posed by the impacts of sea-level
rise and climate change on our wellbeing, security and
existence as island States. And those threats on our
existence and security are no less harmful than the
threats of wars and their weapons of destruction on
populations elsewhere. In our islands, we are in a fight
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

for our survival. Our existence is under assault from
climate change, whose impacts do not discriminate.
We are familiar with the adverse impacts of climate
change, which we already see and feel in our island
communities — unprecedented occurrences of king
tides, the intensification of typhoons, droughts,
floods, the increased salinity of our ground water,
the disappearance of our beaches, heightened ocean
acidification and shifts in the migratory patterns of key
marine species. And the list goes on.
Peacebuilding obviously needs to be designed to be
future-proof and take into account climate change. The
onset of draughts, severe weather events and sea-level
rise must be factored in to build sustainable peace. There
is no one-size-fits-all solution. Each country emerging
from conflict will need a tailor-made solution, as do
those threatened and impacted by climate change.
For an island State such as Micronesia, there is
one element that can inform members of the Council
and the international community. A good start,
which Micronesia, along with the Pacific small island
developing States, has raised several times in this
Chamber and in the General Assembly, would be
the appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on climate change and security,
who would oversee how the adverse effects of climate
change impact or are otherwise related to current
and future conflicts. We believe that information
provided by the Special Representative on the security
implications of climate change on regions and countries
would be invaluable for the work of the Council and
the United Nations in carrying out their respective
mandates. I implore the Council to pay more attention
to climate-related security risks, which the most
vulnerable among us face on a daily basis.
Finally, I want to emphasize that we are all
responsible for the future of the planet we live on. The
attention paid by the Council to the security implications
that climate change pose to the survival of the most
vulnerable is one step in the right direction. Placing the
burden on them for what they least contribute to is not a
practical solution, and neither is it a fair one.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I commend the
presidency of Japan for its dynamic and successful
stewardship of the work of the Security Council this
month. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the
other briefers for their comprehensive briefings today.
As a country with experience of bloodshed during
its war of independence, Bangladesh has always
been committed to United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities. We have been a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission since its inception
and served as Chair twice, including last year. We are
also playing a critical role as the coordinator of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries caucus in the
Peacebuilding Commission. Moreover, as a leading
peacekeeper-contributing country, our peacekeepers
help countries in transition build their national
institutions, protect vulnerable civilians and support
communities, including women and youth, to pursue
sustainable peace and development.
I thank you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on
the theme “Investing in people to enhance resilience
against complex challenges”, at a time when we face
multiple challenges, starting from the pandemic to the
ongoing financial, energy and food crises. We have been
witnessing a growing demand for support for national
efforts to build and sustain peace. Furthermore, in the
recent years, the ongoing crises have again reminded us
of the need to ensure resilient, inclusive, effective and
sustainable institutions to keep intact our hard-earned
gains in maintaining stability and peace in society.
It is high time to enhance our collective efforts and
streamline the work of all organs of the United Nations
in addressing emerging threats and risk multipliers in
order to realize peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
With the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council has the major role to play in strengthening
United Nations efforts towards peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. In that regard, please allow me to
highlight few points.
First, as peacekeeping has proven to be one of the
most effective tools available to the United Nations to
assist host countries in navigating the difficult path
from conflict to peace, we emphasize reinforcing the
peacebuilding mandates of peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, as we highlight the synergies among
United Nations agencies, peacekeeping operations
and financial institutions on the ground to support
national peacebuilding efforts, coordination among
United Nations organs at Headquarters is also critical.
In that regard, we welcome the initiatives undertaken

23-0258539/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to strengthen the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and underscore the importance of having
an informal interactive dialogue between the members
of the Security Council and the PBC.
Thirdly, the preventative approach should be
strengthened in the peacebuilding work of the United
Nations. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary
General’s report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), which
emphasizes investing in prevention and peacebuilding,
supporting regional prevention and putting women
and girls at the centre of security policy. We look
forward to the New Agenda for Peace to supplement
the peacebuilding activities of the United Nations.
Fourthly, we reiterate the urgency of ensuring
adequate, predictable and sustained financing for
peacebuilding and emphasize considering all options
for peacebuilding financing to address the perennial
funding gap.
Finally, we underscore the importance of SouthSouth and triangular cooperation for supporting
countries as they implement their peacebuilding
initiatives, in particular by facilitating the exchange of
good practices among State-led organizations, as well as
non-State actors and non-governmental organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Mrs. McGill (Liberia): We thank the Council for
convening this open debate on the theme “Investment
in people to enhance resilience against complex
challenges” in connection with the item entitled
“Peacebuilding and sustaining peace”.
Instability and conflicts continue to generate and
exacerbate poverty and institutional fragility across the
world. Undoubtedly, the key elements that are necessary
conditions for sustaining peace and promoting
peacebuilding priorities across post-conflict societies
include effective institutions and an empowered
population. My delegation therefore believes the
theme of today’s open debate to be appropriate, as
it further elevates the need to strengthen efforts to
advance towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace
through investment in people and building resilient and
effective institutions. To that end, my delegation wishes
to highlight the following points.
There is a need for targeted investments in the most
vulnerable groups, including women and young people.
My delegation also believes that investing in people,
40/43

26/01/2023

in particular women and young people, in various
forms — including by advancing their socioeconomic
development, protecting their human rights and human
security, and empowering them to be agents of positive
change in their respective societies — not only enhances
countries’ abilities with respect to the prevention
and mitigation of conflicts, as well as recovery and
peacebuilding processes, but also ensures inclusivity.
We must ensure the provision of technical and other
support to facilitate resilience-building among
institutions in conflict-affected and post-conflict
societies. That includes strengthening economic,
democratic, social and governance institutions in order
to ensure transparency, accountability and efficiency.
At the national level, our national development
plan — the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and
Development — prioritizes, inter alia, the empowerment
of women and girls, including by taking actions to
reform our legal system to address inequalities, provide
decent jobs and livelihoods, and reduce poverty by
economically empowering young people so that they,
too, can become self-employed and contribute to the
growth and development of the country. For example, in
our quest to leave no one behind and build an inclusive
society, the Liberian Government, with the support of
the United Nations, launched a national fund drive on
30 June 2022 for the rehabilitation and empowerment
of at-risk young people. That initiative is geared
towards rehabilitating, empowering and reintegrating
at-risk young people into their communities as healthy,
productive and engaged citizens.
To that end, I also wish to highlight the
Peacebuilding Commission’s engagements in Liberia
in support of our peacebuilding initiatives, including in
relation to our national programmes to empower women
and young people. The Commission also engages with
key Government institutions to strengthen resilience,
coordination and service delivery; promote social
cohesion, integration and national reconciliation; and
support efforts to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peacebuilding and political
processes. In the same vein, the Peacebuilding Fund
also supports the Government’s initiatives with a
view to contributing to a more peaceful electoral
environment before, during and after the forthcoming
2023 elections. Its efforts are aimed at strengthening
the prevention of electoral violence and enhancing
the policy and institutional environment for a more
inclusive and effective early warning and response
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

mechanism, including by mainstreaming human rights,
gender-sensitive and youth-based approaches.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
appreciation for the convening of this open debate
and underscores that investment in people to enhance
resilience against complex challenges, as well as
building resilient and effective institutions, can be
better achieved through concerted engagement and by
pursuing a multi-stakeholder approach that includes
Government officials, United Nations country teams,
multilateral financial institutions and non-State actors,
including the private sector.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Bratchyk (Ukraine): Ukraine highly
appreciates the initiative of the Japanese presidency to
convene this important debate, and we take note of the
briefers’ presentations.
We share the concerns over the serious armed
conflicts, violence and instability in many countries
of the world reflected in the concept paper (S/2023/19,
annex). We also support the need to focus in particular
on complex risk multipliers, such as food insecurity,
while addressing the issue of maintaining international
peace and security. Those factors could not only hinder
us from eliminating the root causes of conflicts but
also increase the likelihood of their recurrence, as
rightly pointed out in the concept paper. The instigators
of conflict also consider those challenges to be an
important element of their aggressive tools aimed at
aggravating and broadening the impact of hostilities.
For instance, the strategy of the Russian Federation
in its invasion of Ukraine included, as an immediate
component, the full blockade of Ukrainian seaports and
Ukrainian food exports. Millions of people worldwide
were brought to the brink of famine, which in turn
aggravated regional security situations and affected
peacebuilding efforts in various countries and regions.
It should be a priority for the United Nations system
to support national efforts to create effective and
inclusive mechanisms and institutions that can address
the political, social and economic drivers of conflicts
across the globe. It is also important to consider issues
related to promoting and protecting human rights
and ensuring a prominent role for women and young
people in all stages of peacebuilding and post-conflict
recovery. Situations of concern also demand a tailored
approach that takes into due consideration the root

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

causes of the particular conflict. We commend the
efforts undertaken by the Peacebuilding Commission
in that regard and support the goals outlined in the
Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda (A/75/982)
initiative to extend the role of the Commission in
order to address cross-cutting security issues from a
prevention perspective. As a country withstanding a
full-fledged armed aggression, Ukraine has persistently
advocated that there is a need to develop the prevention
toolbox. The United Nations failed to prevent the
invasion of a sovereign, independent country, which
has already resulted in human suffering, the disruption
of critical infrastructure, enormous death tolls and an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. The task at hand is
to stop the aggression and ensure a comprehensive, just
and long-lasting peace.
That brings me to the assumption that our efforts to
strengthen the prevention toolbox should address two
important issues: how to prevent new conflicts from
occurring and how to prevent the recurrence of existing
conflicts. The only visible recipe for sustaining peace
is to ensure that solutions to conflict are based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States within their internationally
recognized borders. In that regard, if an instigator of
a conflict attempts to immobilize the Security Council
in its respective activities, in particular by misusing its
permanent seat, the United Nations shall be ready for
an adequate and resolute response to halt such attempts
in order to restore respect for the Charter the United
Nations and enable the Council to do its job with regard
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): Today’s debate takes
place at a time with the most conflicts worldwide
since 1945. Peacebuilding and sustaining peace, which
we are discussing today, undoubtedly must be at the
centre of our common efforts. Conflict prevention and
resolution can be successful and sustainable only when
they are fully inclusive. There is clear evidence that
the inclusion of women in peace talks increases the
probability of lasting peace agreements. And women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation across all
peacekeeping operations improves mandate delivery.
While there is no doubt that gender equality offers a
path to sustainable peace and conflict prevention, we
are moving in the opposite direction, with the reversal

23-0258541/43

S/PV.S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of generational gains in women’s rights in many parts
of the world. We applaud the brave women human rights
defenders who have taken to the streets to peacefully
protest such reversals to fight for their rights and the
rule of law from Myanmar to Belarus to Iran.
The Security Council, with its responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations, has the obligation to
ensure that peace processes are inclusive and gender
sensitive in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000) and
its follow-up resolutions. The women and peace and
security agenda must feature across all agendas and
country situations, and the empowerment of women as
agents of change must be a priority.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), together
with the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), plays an
indispensable role in implementing many of the
thematic agendas outlined by the Security Council. Its
advisory, bridging and convening roles have benefited
many country situations. We recognize the PBC’s
inclusive approach for sustainable peace by integrating
gender and youth perspectives in its work. And we
encourage efforts to include relevant stakeholders that
can further support peace processes and governance.
A crucial aspect of sustainable peace, as also reflected
in Sustainable Development Goal 16, is reconciliation
and accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. The PBC and the PBF have addressed
issues of transitional justice, notably in the Gambia, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Colombia and the Sudan.
Given the breadth and importance of the
work — for example, the funding for Colombia’s
Truth Commission — we would like to see further
engagement by the PBC in transitional justice, as
a standalone topic, along the lines of other similar
discussions that have already taken place. In doing
so, the PBC would reinforce the vital part it plays in
implementing and complementing many of the thematic
agendas of the Security Council — an important
synergy that Liechtenstein hopes will continue. In
that regard, we also would like to highlight the added
value created by General Assembly resolution 76/262,
also known as the veto initiative, which mandates the
Assembly to step in when the Council is blocked by the
use of the veto, including on conflict prevention and
peacebuilding efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
42/43

26/01/2023

Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): We would like to
thank Japan for convening this open debate on the
topic of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We
express our appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Mr. Muhammad Abdul Muhith, and
the representative of civil society for their important
contributions to today’s debate.
The rise of intolerance, hate, racism on ethnic and
religious grounds, systematic violations of fundamental
human rights, including the right to life, food and health
and violence against women and children in various
parts of the world are reminders of the crucial need for
the international community and the United Nations to
scale-up their efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts
and sustain peace. The comprehensive and sustainable
resolution of conflicts and sustaining peace require
tackling the root causes of conflicts, in particular
gross violations of human rights, and pursuing
accountability and justice for past crimes. A human
rights-based, people-centred and inclusive approach is
key to effective international cooperation to address the
humanitarian and development needs of people affected
by conflicts. In that regard, the resilience of the United
Nations system to efforts of manipulation aimed at
legitimizing the consequences of the use of force and
atrocity crimes is crucial to countering misinformation
and false narratives and attempts to impose unilateral
solutions in utter disregard of the norms of international
law, including international human rights law.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s New Agenda
for Peace, with a strong emphasis on prevention,
addressing violence and upholding human rights and
the equal and meaningful participation of women in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. As a consistent
supporter of strengthening the United Nations
prevention toolbox, the delegation of Armenia would
like to stress the need for addressing the risks of
genocide and other atrocity crimes, particularly in our
part of the world.
In our region, we continue to face attempts to pursue
a forceful resolution of the conflict, the instigation of
violence and hate, the denial of fundamental human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law.
For 46 days, the safe and unimpeded passage of people
and goods from and to Nagorno-Karabakh through the
Lachin corridor has continued to be denied. Children
remain separated from their families, and electricity
and gas supplies are deliberately cut off. Schools and
23-02585

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. S/PV.9250 (Resumption 1)

kindergartens have closed, owing to the lack of food,
and food stamps have been introduced to address the
immediate needs of a besieged population of 120,000
people. The aggressive actions on the ground, warmongering and hateful statements made by those at
the highest levels of the leadership of Azerbaijan,
encouraging ethnic cleansing and hate crimes, leave no
doubt of the imminent threat to the physical security of
the Armenian population.

the Charter of the United Nations concerns the right to
self-determination. The right of the Kashmiri people to
self-determination has been recognized and promised
to them by the Security Council through its resolutions.
For more than seven decades, through force and
fraud, India has prevented Kashmiris from exercising
that right and holding a United Nations-supervised
plebiscite to enable to Kashmiris to determine their
political destiny.

The Security Council needs to uphold its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and undertake timely and efficient
measures to prevent Azerbaijan’s attempts to ethnically
cleanse Nagorno-Karabakh of its indigenous population
and address the risks of atrocity crimes posed by the
Azerbaijani Government.

India has imprisoned the entire Kashmiri leadership,
illegally detained thousands of Kashmiri youths,
including women and children, executed young boys,
violently put down protests and burned down entire
villages and neighbourhoods. India currently occupies
Jammu and Kashmir, as the most militarized zone in the
world, where close to 900,000 security forces personnel
have been deployed by India to curb the legitimate
struggle of the Kashmiris. But such measures serve
only to strengthen the resolve and resilience of the
Kashmiri people to continue their struggle against the
illegal Indian occupation and intensify their struggle
for the right to self-determination. Even in the face of
the worst atrocities, as evidenced by the thousands of
unmarked mass graves in Jammu and Kashmir, illegally
occupied by India, the innocent people of Jammu
Kashmir remain firm in their claim to the right to selfdetermination. Pakistan will continue to expose Indian
brutality and inform the international community of
the Kashmiris’ plight.

The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give her the floor.
Mrs. Ijaz (Pakistan): I am constrained to take the
floor on account of the remarks delivered earlier by the
representative of India against my country.
India continues to perpetuate a factually incorrect
position year after year. Jammu and Kashmir is an
internationally recognized disputed territory, not an
integral or inalienable part of India. Repeating the wrong
position will not make it acceptable at any point, in any
forum. The focus of today’s debate is on people and the
inalienable rights of people. The very first Article of

The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m.

23-0258543/43
