S/PV.9165

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9165th meeting

Wednesday, 26 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Ravindran
Mr. Kenneally
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Jiménez Alegría
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2022/735)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-65453 (E)
*2265453*

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, the Résistance
pour un État de droit au Burundi and the M-23 fuel
insecurity in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as rekindling mistrust and tensions
among the countries of the region, in particular between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. That
militancy jeopardizes the progress made in recent years
in terms of bilateral and regional cooperation, as called
for under the Addis Ababa Framework Agreement.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2022/735)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and South
Africa to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Huang Xia,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/735, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Huang Xia.
Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): I am grateful
for the opportunity to brief the members of the Security
Council following the publication of the latest report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
During my previous briefing (see S/PV.9023), I
expressed concern about the deteriorating security
situation and increasing tensions in the region as a
result of the resurgence of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23). Seven months later, that observation remains
relevant, with the resumption of fighting just a few days
ago again leading to victims and thousands of displaced
persons in Rutshuru territory.
The Great Lakes region continues to experience
instability due to the militancy of armed groups,
which is one of its greatest challenges. The continuing
activities of the Allied Democratic Forces, the Forces
2/21

26/10/2022

The illicit exploitation of and trade in natural
resources continue to fuel the vicious cycle of
intercommunal clashes, the activities of armed groups
and the use of such resources by cross-border criminal
networks. The rigorous prosecution of the perpetrators
of those crimes, as well as human rights violations,
including those committed by armed groups, is required
to end the recurring violence in the region.
The humanitarian situation continues to be of
concern, with more than 4.9 million refugees and
asylum-seekers having fled owing to the violence and
climate-related issues, according to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. In
addition, approximately 12 million internally displaced
persons are registered in Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan and Uganda. I would like to pay tribute to the
memory of all the victims of the various crises in the
region, and I express my complete solidarity with the
refugee and displaced populations.
In response to those challenges, and despite the
continuing obstacles, the Governments and the peoples
of the region have remained engaged. I commend
Kenya’s role in the peace process of the East African
Community (EAC) on the situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which focuses on
a dual approach, involving military and non-military
efforts. I welcome the announced resumption of the third
regional Heads of State conclave on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in Nairobi in the coming weeks,
and I reiterate here, as I did with the authorities of the
countries of the region, my Office’s full readiness to
provide technical support to that process, alongside the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the relevant departments at Headquarters. Like my
colleague Ms. Bintou Keita, who briefed the Council
about a month ago (see S/PV.9142), I also wish to recall
the vital importance of effective coordination between
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

all the troops to be deployed on the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO.
Such coordination at the operational level is also
essential to the mediation efforts. I am pleased to note
that that is also the view of President Lourenço of Angola,
the current Chairperson of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), mandated by the
African Union, President Ndayishimiye of Burundi,
the current Chairperson of the EAC, and the Kenyan
authorities, who all assured me of their willingness to
continue their efforts in a coordinated manner. I would
like to thank Angola, whose mediation between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda made
it possible to establish a road map towards a peaceful
settlement of the dispute between the two countries.
During my visits to Kinshasa and Kigali, the authorities
also assured me of their willingness to achieve that
objective. While there is no doubt about the will for
dialogue, as shown by the many meetings between the
two Presidents, concrete actions are needed to give
substance to the efforts made in recent months. The
appointment of a coordinator for the ad hoc verification
mechanism is an encouraging step, and I sincerely hope
that the other mechanisms and confidence-building
measures provided for in the Luanda road map will also
be promptly implemented.
Because a lasting peace can be achieved only
through a political solution to the root causes of the
conflict, I also welcome the commitment of States
to the implementation of non-military initiatives.
At the fifth meeting of the chiefs of intelligence and
security services of the countries members of the
Contact and Coordination Group, they called for the
rapid deployment of the Group’s operational cell to
complement the efforts of the EAC regional force. They
also called for consultations to determine the modalities
for cooperation between the Contact and Coordination
Group and the regional force.
In that regard, I am pleased to inform the Council
that my Office facilitated the operational cell’s first
reconnaissance-and-contact mission to South Kivu
province. The mission’s goal was to engage with local
actors to identify opportunities for contact with armed
groups under the States’ mandate to directly engage
with such groups and facilitate their disarmament and
voluntary repatriation without political preconditions.
Another example of the strength of cooperation is
the increasing number of bilateral initiatives aimed at
enhancing cooperation among the States of the region

S/PV.9165

in the areas of security, trade, energy and transport.
In addition to the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
membership in the EAC, we should also mention the
strengthening of security cooperation between Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
the efforts to bring Uganda and Rwanda closer together.
Finally, I welcome the decisions taken at the
ICGLR ministerial meeting on enhancing judicial
cooperation in Kinshasa last June, in particular the
adoption of clear guidelines for requesting mutual
legal assistance in the Great Lakes region. I call on the
signatory countries to expedite the implementation of
the Kinshasa declaration.
The commitment by regional actors to finding
political solutions to maintain stability and peaceful
coexistence among States is in line with the principles of
the Addis Ababa Framework Agreement. It demonstrates
the relevance of that document, together with the
ICGLR Pact on Security, Stability and Development
in the Great Lakes Region of 2006, as the basis for
consultation and cooperation among the States of the
region in order to meet common challenges. I would
therefore like to reiterate my appeal to all the signatory
countries to step up their efforts to fully implement the
Framework Agreement and other regional agreements.
Stabilizing the region also depends on its ability
to transform its mineral resource endowment, which
is strategic for the energy transition, into a vector for
sustainable and inclusive development. With this in
mind, I conducted a joint advocacy mission with the
Executive Secretary of the ICGLR, Mr. João Samuel
Caholo, in Paris and Brussels in order to increase support
for better natural resource governance. However,
we are aware that national and regional ownership
of the Regional Initiative on Natural Resources is a
prerequisite for its effectiveness. To that end, we plan
to carry out joint high-level political advocacy missions
in the member States of the Conference, as well as in
some of the destination countries for those minerals.
Another crucial vector for peace is the ongoing
mobilization of women and youth in political processes.
Following a study on women’s involvement in electoral
management bodies, conducted jointly with the ICGLR
Levy Mwanawasa Regional Centre for Democracy,
Good Governance, Human Rights and Civic Education,
my Office continues to support efforts to promote
greater participation by women in electoral processes
and bodies. In addition, my Office, in collaboration
with the United Nations Population Fund and the

22-654533/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

ICGLR, organized a workshop to build the capacity of
youth networks in the region in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding from 17 to 20 October in Nairobi, in which
many very enthusiastic young people participated.
All of those efforts, undertaken by my Office
in close collaboration with the significant United
Nations system presence in the region, including the
resident coordinator’s office, are part of the 2022–2023
United Nations action plan for the Great Lakes region,
whose flagship initiatives in the areas of peace and
security, development and humanitarian action will be
presented in detail to the Peacebuilding Commission on
31 October.
During my many missions to the region, high
expectations were expressed to the United Nations with
regard to political, technical and financial support for
peace efforts. I would again like to reiterate my deep
appreciation to all the partners and friends of the Great
Lakes region who have continued to make financial
or technical contributions to peacebuilding efforts in
the region. I would also like to solicit the support of
the members of the Security Council and to further
appeal to the entire international community to lend
more substantial multifaceted support to the regional
initiatives and to the United Nations action plan for the
Great Lakes region.
The stabilization of the region and the restoration of
confidence, which together represent a lengthy twofold
process, require sustained and significant mobilization
by the international community in support of the efforts
of the Governments and the peoples of the region. Only
through coordinated, cohesive and harmonious action
can we support the Great Lakes on the path to peace
and sustainable development.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Huang
Xia for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Envoy for his presentation.
I would like to make three points.
First, it is imperative that the regional peace
initiatives yield concrete results. Late last week, as was
noted today, fighting between the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo and the Movement
du 23 mars (M-23) resumed, resulting in civilian
deaths and massive civilian displacements. Several
4/21

26/10/2022

other armed groups, including the Allied Democratic
Forces and the Coopérative pour le développement
du Congo, are increasing their attacks. France calls
on all armed groups of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to participate unconditionally in the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme. Foreign armed groups
must immediately lay down their arms and return to
their country of origin.
As a continuation of regional initiatives to try to
restore peace, dialogue must be maintained between
the States of the region. The commitments made,
whether in the framework of the Luanda road map or
at the meeting held in September in New York under
the auspices of the President of the French Republic,
must produce concrete results. I am thinking here of
the withdrawal of the M-23 from all occupied areas,
as well as enhanced cooperation in order to put an end
to the action of armed groups, including the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda.
Intra-Congolese consultations must continue. When
the East African Community regional force is deployed,
the protection of civilians must be at the heart of its
mandate. Respect for international humanitarian law
and coordination with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will also be necessary for it to be effective.
For all those processes, the support of the Special
Envoy is essential and must continue. His support for
the participation of civil society, women and youth in
these political initiatives is invaluable.
Secondly, a lasting peace will require disarming
former combatants, protecting the most vulnerable and
ensuring justice. Military measures alone will not bring
peace. Robust regional mechanisms must be created for
the surrender and repatriation of former members of
armed groups. It is therefore urgent that the Contact and
Coordination Group be operational. The sustainable
return of refugees and people displaced by conflict
must also be ensured.
The strengthening of judicial cooperation must
continue with the implementation of the Kinshasa
declaration, adopted in June. The launch of national
consultations on transitional justice in four Congolese
provinces is a further step towards justice and peace.
That same spirit of cooperation must prevail among
the States of the region to prevent and fight terrorism.
France will therefore provide financial support this
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

year to the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
in order to strengthen the capacities of the States of
the region.
Finally, combating the trafficking of natural
resources, an issue mentioned today by the Special
Envoy, must go hand in hand with sustainable
development for the benefit of the people. The illegal
exploitation of natural resources continues to finance
the activities of armed groups. That natural wealth must
instead be used for development. For that to happen,
the trade in resources must be regulated and controlled.
The States of the region must adopt and apply the
recommendations of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region regarding the use of minerals.
As the Special Envoy’s action plan indicates, local
initiatives are also needed. I am thinking here of
the work to be done with small-scale artisanal gold
mining operations.
Development initiatives for the benefit of the
population must also increase. This month, the European
Union allocated €25 million to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in order to tackle the food crisis. By
developing new agricultural sectors, food systems will
be more diversified and, above all, more sustainable.
Drivers of economic growth must also be exploited.
In Rwanda, the French Development Agency is
allocating nearly €200 million for the current period
for investment in human capital, digital technology and
green finance.
On the eve of the tenth anniversary of the Addis
Ababa Framework Agreement, the States of the region
must redouble their efforts, with our support, to
preserve the gains of this decade. They can count on
France’s support, as can the Special Envoy.
Mr. Ravindran (India): I thank the Special Envoy
for his briefing and his updates on the developments in
the Great Lakes region.
Over the past few months, there have been positive
political developments in the Great Lakes region.
Regular engagement among countries of the region have
continued, in both bilateral and multilateral formats,
including through efforts to strengthen economic
cooperation and trade.
We take note of the progress on the East African
Community-led Nairobi process and welcome the
establishment of the consultation mechanism between
the International Conference on the Great Lakes

S/PV.9165

Region-led Luanda process and the Nairobi process.
We also welcome the consultation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with representatives of various
armed groups and hope for the political track to yield
early results.
The volatile security situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to cast
a shadow on the ongoing efforts to achieve peace. We
condemn the violence perpetrated by armed groups,
particularly the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo, the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, the Résistance pour un État
de droit au Burundi and others. The resurgence of M-23
and its ability to hold its ground has further complicated
the security dynamics, including by having an adverse
impact on relations among countries in the region. We
emphasize the need for restraint, dialogue and political
will in order to collectively overcome those challenges.
In that context, we reiterate that fulfilling the
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remains crucial for establishing a
lasting peace in the Great Lakes region. We welcome
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s focus on
strengthening the financial, logistical, equipment and
operational capabilities of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo. We also take note
of further progress in operationalizing the Contact and
Coordination Group to focus on non-military measures,
including through an engagement strategy for facing
negative forces in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The success of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
will be a critical factor for ensuring that those parallel
processes converge and bear results, particularly in
cementing the community reintegration of armed
group combatants so that they are not compelled to
return to their former way of life. We welcome the
adoption of the Kinshasa declaration on enhancing
judicial cooperation by the Ministers of Justice of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), as well as the efforts made towards
standardizing guidelines for mutual legal assistance in
criminal matters.
The illegal exploitation of, and trafficking and
trade in, natural resources has contributed to armed
conflict in many parts of the resource-rich Great Lakes

22-654535/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

region. Existing systems and efforts at the regional
level must be strengthened further, with the sustained
support of international partners and the United
Nations. Institution-building and regulatory compliance
must be emphasized and pursued at both the local and
regional levels. We reiterate the call for the effective
implementation of the ICGLR Regional Initiative on
Natural Resources, as well as the recommendations of
the high-level regional workshop on natural resources
held in Khartoum.
We reiterate our concern about the expanding
footprint of terrorism on the African continent and
the growing linkages between terrorist outfits and
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Those concerns are shared by the African
Union Peace and Security Council. Armed groups such
as the ADF benefit from an increasingly lethal terrorist
network by way of training, finances and resources. The
rise in the use of improvised explosive devices in the
region is also worrisome. We support strengthening the
capacities of the ICGLR Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism and the Joint Intelligence Fusion Centre for
the monitoring of those terrorist networks.
India continues to be a reliable partner of the
countries of the Great Lakes region. Those relationships
are driven by close people-to-people ties over many
decades, partnerships forged in the development sector
and a long-standing contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the region. India will
continue to support the member States of the Great
Lakes region as they pursue collective peace, security
and development.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the pleasure to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya. We thank Mr. Huang Xia, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
for his briefing.
The A3 remains deeply concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in the eastern provinces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
effect on the stability of the Great Lakes region. Our
statement will focus on three areas that require urgent
action to address the root causes of conflict in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region: first, the continuing threat of armed groups;
secondly, reinforcing confidence-building among the
leaders of the region; and thirdly, addressing the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
6/21

26/10/2022

On the threat posed by armed groups, the A3 is
alarmed by the worsening situation resulting from
the recent capture of the town of Bunagana in North
Kivu by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). The A3
denounces the escalation of violence in Rutshuru since
20 October between the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and the rebels of the
M-23, which left at least 10 people dead and dozens of
people injured. We express our sincere condolences to
the families of the victims and express our solidarity
with the civilians affected by that violence.
We condemn the illegal and inhumane activities
of the M-23, the ADF, the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo, the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda-Forces combattantes Abacunguzi
and the Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi.
Those groups are perpetrating mass atrocities and
grave human rights violations. We note with concern
that some of them, particularly the ADF, have links
to terrorist networks, including the Islamic State. The
threat they pose to regional peace and security calls for
a robust regional response.
We call for the swift implementation of the action
plan of the 2021–2023 United Nations Strategy for
Peace, Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region, as well as the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
We welcome the inter-Congolese peace dialogue
initiated by the East African Community (EAC) and the
fact that many armed groups are already participating
in it. We further welcome the convening of the third
inter-Congolese peace dialogue in Nairobi from 4 to
13 November. The A3 commends Angola, Senegal and
Kenya for their contribution to the EAC peace fund
based in Arusha to support the political process. We
invite other countries to partner with the EAC by
contributing to the fund.
The success of the Nairobi processes depends on
the effectiveness of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme.
We urge the United Nations and the international
community to make available the necessary resources
for that exercise. We urge the Secretary-General to
strengthen the coordination gap between the Contact
and Coordination Group and the Nairobi process to best
support the peace dialogue.
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

We further urge the provision of enhanced support
to strengthen the capacity of the FARDC to consolidate
State authority in conflict areas. We encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to initiate a strategy for the ambitious reform of the
FARDC and its security sector so that it may assume
responsibility for the protection of civilians and
ensure the rights and needs of all Congolese people
after the withdrawal of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).
On confidence-building among leaders of the Great
Lakes region, the A3 underscores that political will is
the key ingredient for resolving the conflicts in the
region. We note with concern the heightened levels of
mistrust between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda, which serve only to fuel unsustainable
regional tensions. Both countries need each other for
peace, security and prosperity. It is therefore crucial that
they employ all efforts to prevent misunderstandings,
build confidence and strengthen cooperation.
We also strongly condemn the use of hate speech,
disinformation and misinformation by some leaders,
which contributes to mistrust, tension and animosity
and even incites violence. We urge the Special Envoy
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
proactively engage the major social media companies
to encourage them to take swift and comprehensive
action on hate speech. Regional and national authorities
should also ensure that those engaging in hate speech
and incitement are held accountable, especially if they
are political leaders.
We welcome the Luanda road map aimed at
normalizing the political relations between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
We commend the increasing coordination between
the Nairobi and Luanda processes and call for that
coordination to be strengthened in support of the
priorities of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We encourage further regional
confidence-building measures, particularly through
economic cooperation.
We urge States in the region to strengthen governance
frameworks, such as the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region Pact on Security, Stability and
Development, in order to promote a regional vision for
addressing the root causes of conflict. There is a need
to reinvigorate the Joint Intelligence Fusion Centre and

S/PV.9165

the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism in order to
ensure the collection of intelligence on armed group
activities and the dissemination of that intelligence to
national law enforcement agencies.
On addressing the illegal exploitation of and
trade in natural resources, the region must address
with urgency the alarming competition for natural
resources among illegal transnational actors and
armed groups. The A3 encourages States in the region
to implement regulatory frameworks and strengthen
accountability measures in order to manage the
sustainable use of natural resources. We also urge
States to effect necessary legislation and rules against
conflicts of interest. We urge all entities all over the
world importing and exporting natural resources to put
in place conflict-mineral awareness and monitoring
systems. We further urge States, particularly those
that receive minerals from the Great Lakes region, to
ensure compliance oversight, transparency in mineral
flows and fair play to enable responsible mineral
supply chains during the extraction, transport and sale
of natural resources. Meanwhile, the United Nations
and regional organizations should forge collaborative
efforts to support States emerging from conflict in
the region, with due respect for their sovereignty over
their natural resources. That can be achieved through
capacity-building to strengthen national regulatory and
law-enforcement capacities based on national priorities
to lay the foundation for the lawful, transparent and
sustainable use of natural resources.
The A3 recognizes the valuable role of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
in supporting cross-border cooperation in the region.
We therefore welcome the written advisory from the
Peacebuilding Commission and urge for the Council’s
support in the identified areas of work, including the
implementation of the United Nations Strategy for the
Great Lakes region.
In conclusion, we note with appreciation the
Security Council’s support to the Nairobi and Luanda
processes and encourage the continued partnership
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations,
including funding support. We commend and support
the efforts of the Special Envoy and his able team in
promoting peace and security in the region through
good offices and advocacy and capacity-building
programmes, which are beneficial to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. The A3 and
France have submitted a draft press statement for the

22-654537/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Council’s consideration, and we hope to see a strong
endorsement of that initiative by the Security Council.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for
his briefing and welcome the representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Africa,
Rwanda and Burundi to this meeting.
There is no question that the dire situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is having
a major impact on the situation in the Great Lakes
region. Unfortunately, as some of our colleagues have
already noted, hostilities between the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) and Government forces recently began
again. That is having a considerable impact on the
deteriorating security situation and is exacerbating the
situation in the region. Numerous illegal armed groups
that are active in the eastern part of the country are
taking advantage of it to promote their own interests.
The worsening of the already serious problems in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the diversion
of the attention of the Forces Armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo towards combating the wellarmed M-23 makes it possible for other illegal armed
groups to expand their illicit activities and continue
attacking civilians and exploiting natural resources
with impunity.
In those conditions, it is clear that close coordination
between the Government forces and the contingents of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
is more crucial than ever. However, it is also clear
that long-term normalization of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be achieved
through military measures alone. It requires dialogue,
effective confidence-building measures, consolidation
of understanding among regional States and their
recognition of their shared interest in stabilizing the
situation in the Great Lakes region. Ultimately, peaceful
and sustainable development, mutually beneficial
cooperation and a determination to resolve longstanding issues collectively is in everyone’s interests. In
that regard, we urge for stepping up the work to ensure
the full implementation of the 2013 Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. These joint efforts
demand transparency, a strong focus on results and a
full commitment to obligations undertaken.
We welcome the important decisions reached at
the Nairobi process consultations, including the one
8/21

26/10/2022

establishing the regional forces. It will be vital to
ensure that they are implemented with the support of
the international community, in direct coordination
with MONUSCO and with Kinshasa playing a leading
role. We also welcome the peacemaking efforts of the
President João Manuel Goncalves Lourenço of Angola
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. We believe that pooling these various efforts
and initiatives can help to achieve quality results with
regards to regional cooperation. In essence, they are
mutually reinforcing and serve the goal of ensuring
peace, socioeconomic development and an opportunity
for all Africans in the Great Lakes region to realize
their potential.
For our part, we affirm our readiness to promote
stabilization in the Great Lakes region by encouraging
dialogue and constructive cooperation among the
countries of the region. We are committed to meaningful
cooperation with the relevant institutions of the United
Nations system and its representatives. We support the
efforts of the United Nations to promote the United
Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict
Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes
Region and the work of United Nations officials aimed
at implementing its action plan. And we fully support
the work being done by Special Envoy Huang Xia to
promote inter-State cooperation and facilitate regional
efforts to ease tensions in the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Xia for his informative briefing. I would
also like to welcome to this meeting the representatives
from South Africa, Burundi, Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The United Nations Strategy for Peace
Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region is an important
means of bringing peace to the region, and we appreciate
the Special Envoy’s use of his good offices to generate
international support for the Nairobi process. Despite
those efforts, the humanitarian and security situation
in the Great Lakes region remains deeply troubling.
Attacks by armed groups, including the Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria- Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Coopérative pour le développement du Congo and the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), have killed more than
2,000 civilians this year. That violence is unacceptable,
and the United States calls on armed groups to cease
their assaults on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s most vulnerable populations. We also call on
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

State actors to stop supporting those groups, and that
includes the Rwandan Defence Force’s assistance to the
M-23.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) remains critical to bringing peace to
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the broader region, and it deserves our complete
and unequivocal support. It too has suffered losses
as the security situation worsens, including the
death of a Pakistani peacekeeper just last month in a
heinous attack. I want to extend my condolences to
the Mission, Pakistan and the peacekeeper’s family.
Anti-MONUSCO rhetoric increases the already
significant risk to peacekeepers. We are therefore
concerned about the calls being made for MONUSCO’s
immediate withdrawal, and we urge the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to work with MONUSCO towards
a gradual, responsible, conditions-based withdrawal
guided by benchmarks in the joint transition plan. No
one would argue that MONUSCO should remain in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo forever, but it serves
an important purpose that aligns with the interests of
the entire Great Lakes region — protecting civilians,
disrupting illicit networks and helping stabilize
governance and security institutions.
The States of the region, both bilaterally and
through the East African Community, have also
deployed troops to address the growing insecurity in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. As
those efforts advance, it is imperative that they not
aggravate an already tense situation. In that regard,
we call on regional leaders to ensure that both bilateral
and multilateral forces respect human rights, prioritize
the safety of civilians and refrain from illicit activities
such as the extraction of natural resources. It is equally
critical that they coordinate with and complement the
important work of the Forces Armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo, MONUSCO, United
Nations humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations. States must also formally notify the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) of that assistance, in line with existing Security
Council resolutions. Such assistance includes the
Burundian forces deployed bilaterally and under the
East African Community regional force.
As is often the case, we have spent significant time
today speaking about military solutions to a political
problem. Of course, achieving peace in the Great Lakes

S/PV.9165

region will not come by force. Peace is contingent on a
political process, political will and political solutions.
To that end, in September the United States announced
an additional $13 million in funding to support a
transparent electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That funding is in addition to
the $10.75 million we have already allocated for that
effort. We look forward to an inclusive electoral process,
ultimately concluding in free and fair elections.
Strengthening democratic institutions, bringing
justice to victims, holding bad actors to account,
respecting States’ territorial sovereignty and integrity,
and prioritizing civilians will help bring peace to
the Great Lakes. The people of the region deserve
nothing less.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Special Envoy Huang Xia
for his thorough briefing and appreciate his endeavours
to support peace efforts in the region. We also welcome
the participation of the representatives of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and South
Africa in today’s meeting.
The Great Lakes region has recently witnessed
alarming security developments due to the situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
continued activities of armed groups in the region,
their illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
continued attacks against civilians and humanitarian
workers. There are also growing concerns at the
spread in the region of hate speech, misleading
information, inaccurate information and incitement to
discrimination. Efforts must be promoted to address all
those challenges.
We note the hopeful signs represented by the
recent positive efforts made by the States of the region,
including the continuation of confidence-building
measures and improvements in their coordination and
cooperation with each other. For example, the meetings
held by Burundi, Uganda, Angola, Zambia, Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo resulted in
agreements in the areas of political consultation, natural
resources, investment and energy, among others. My
country encourages such endeavours.
The United Arab Emirates believes that achieving
stability in the Great Lakes region in the long term
requires a continued commitment to implementing the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and

22-654539/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

to addressing the root causes of conflicts by taking the
following actions.
First, it is necessary to continue to strengthen
regional
efforts,
dialogue
and
support
for
confidence-building measures among the countries and
leaders of the region. That will help to ensure that the
challenges they face are addressed in a comprehensive
manner. We stress here the need to continue following
the political track in order to facilitate consultations
among leaders and parties to the conflict, including
through the Nairobi peace process and the Luanda
road map.
It is important to assess the progress made and
determine the best practices for supporting those
processes. The role of regional and subregional
organizations remains vital in supporting efforts to
secure peace and stability for all the countries of the
region. Regional cooperation must also be intensified
in order to address the cross-border threats to the
security of the region posed by the activities of armed
and terrorist groups, in particular the recruitment of
foreign fighters in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Secondly, we must build the capacities of the
States of the region to sustainably manage their natural
resources and protect them from illegal exploitation,
while taking into consideration the willingness of
the countries concerned to receive such support
and assistance. We also encourage joint efforts to
prevent armed and terrorist groups from using the
proceeds of natural resources. We must ensure that
such proceeds are instead used to serve, advance and
develop communities and support their security and
stability, whether in the Great Lakes region or across
the continent.
Thirdly, the United Arab Emirates stresses the
importance of women and their active role in building
peaceful and prosperous communities that can
withstand the various challenges they face. That calls
for following up the joint work of the United Nations,
the African Union and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, as well as strengthening
their close cooperation with the region’s women
leaders in order to empower women to participate in
political processes and ensure their full, equal and
meaningful participation at all levels, including the
social and economic levels, while providing them with
the necessary protection and ensuring that their basic
needs are met.
10/21

26/10/2022

We underscore the urgent need to continue providing
humanitarian aid to the countries of the region, given
the worsening humanitarian crisis and the high levels
of displacement and food insecurity that have resulted
from the violence prevalent in the region and the high
prices of basic commodities around the world.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates affirms
its commitment to supporting the efforts of the
United Nations and all regional partners, as well as
other efforts to consolidate peace in the region, while
allowing its peoples to take the lead in their quest to
achieve prosperity and stability.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special Envoy
Huang Xia for his briefing.
The deteriorating situation on both the security and
humanitarian fronts in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo is deeply concerning and has serious
regional implications. Violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights continue to be reported that involve brutal attacks
against the civilian population, including children.
It is imperative that those violations and abuses be
investigated and those responsible held accountable.
We also note with concern the rising tensions
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda. We call on both countries to exercise restraint
and pursue a diplomatic solution. We welcome the
political and diplomatic efforts of the region to address
security challenges and promote dialogue, including
the holding of several summits of Heads of State of the
East African Community (EAC); the initiative taken
by President Lourenço of Angola; and the leadership
of the Nairobi process by former President Kenyatta
of Kenya. We stress the importance of coordination
among the Nairobi process, the Luanda process and the
efforts of the United Nations.
The deployment of the EAC regional force must
be closely coordinated with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Roles and responsibilities must
be clearly defined, and we reiterate that all countries
must respect the sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Norway urges all armed groups, including the
Mouvement du 23 mars and the Allied Democratic
Forces, to lay down their weapons. We welcome
the roll-out of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

and the appointment of provincial coordinators in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We stress
the importance of a common understanding of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
at the national and provincial levels in order to avoid
repeating mistakes committed in previous rounds
of DDR.
The involvement of women is essential to promote
sustainable peace in the region. We welcome the
efforts to strengthen cooperation with women’s
networks in peacebuilding, as well as the engagement
of women and young people in ongoing dialogue and
confidence-building activities.
To reduce the level of violence and protect civilians,
we must address the root causes of conflict in the region.
The illicit trafficking of natural resources constitutes a
significant revenue source for armed groups, fuelling
violence and other conflict drivers locally and in the
region. The rivalry related to natural resources and
their illicit exploitation and trafficking must come to
an end.
We encourage Special Envoy Huang Xia to
continue his valuable support for regional initiatives
aimed at addressing security challenges, as well as
his commitment to the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. Norway will
continue to support his efforts, including through
ongoing cooperation with his Office.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): The Brazilian
delegation is grateful to today’s briefer for his
informative statement and his valuable efforts. We
welcome the delegations of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and South Africa to
today’s meeting.
We have been closely following the most recent
developments in the Great Lakes region and would
like to make a few remarks on the security situation.
Security remains a matter of great concern to us. The
threat posed by armed groups to the countries of the
Great Lakes region is still tangible, as was demonstrated
in July by the tragic events in North Kivu, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, I first
want to reiterate our condemnation of such ominous
acts and of any attacks and provocations against the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Secondly, I also
want to reiterate our call for equipping peacekeeping
operations with the proper strategic communications

S/PV.9165

tools to counter hate speech and disinformation and
ensure the protection of both military and civilian
United Nations personnel. The increased activity by
armed groups in recent months not only represents a
threat to the lives of peacekeepers, but it also has a
destabilizing effect on local communities and millions
of refugees and internally displaced persons from
various perspectives, ranging from human rights
to economic development, such as through cases of
sexual violence, the recruitment of children into armed
conflict and the illicit exploitation of natural resources.
The efforts for peace deserve our encouragement
and full support. In that regard, we commend the
leading and constructive role played by the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as the mediation efforts carried
out by Angola. Moreover, we commend the leadership
provided by Kenya in the Heads of State Conclaves on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while hoping
that its role as facilitator in the dialogue between the
armed groups and the Government in Kinshasa will
soon bear fruit.
Both the Luanda and Nairobi processes are
examples of the kind of contribution that regional
actors can make and for which they should hope. The
admission of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
the East African Community and its engagement in it
provide yet another avenue for strengthening regional
cooperation and therefore the long-term perspectives of
the peace process. In order to protect the achievements
of the peace process that we have made so far, it
will be imperative to expedite the implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. At the same time, it is crucial to ensure
that former combatants, women and young people have
access to economic opportunities that can provide them
with the tools to improve their livelihoods in the postpandemic period.
In that vein, I would like to voice our support to
the Special Envoy and highlight the contribution of
the United Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation,
Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in
the Great Lakes Region in bringing coherence and
comprehensiveness to peacebuilding initiatives. We also
want to emphasize the importance of local ownership
in attaining lasting peace and prosperity in the region.
In that sense, we welcome and echo the Peacebuilding

22-6545311/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

26/10/2022

Commission’s advice encouraging the countries of the
Great Lakes

the protection of civilians first and foremost. We trust
that Special Envoy Xia will support that coordination.

“to create a political and social environment
conducive to the promotion of sustainable economic
development that will bring prosperity to the entire
region [and] is necessary for building peace”.

The United Kingdom remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes region.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is suffering
from the world’s largest food security emergency, with
26 million people at crisis levels of food insecurity.
The recent violence is adding to the 5.9 million
people already displaced in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and access to those who need relief is
severely limited. Coordination between military and
humanitarian operations is vital and we call on all the
parties to facilitate humanitarian access.

Finally, we call on all States in the region to persevere
on the path of an all-inclusive political dialogue. No
durable solution can be found without the meaningful
participation of all stakeholders, including women.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing today and welcome
the participation of the representatives of countries of
the region in this meeting.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the security situation in the Great Lakes region, in
particular the resurgence of violence by the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) in the past week. We call for the
immediate cessation of the violence and for the M-23’s
withdrawal from its current position. All parties must
respect national sovereignty and uphold the principle
of territorial integrity. We call on the countries in the
region, with the support of the Special Envoy, to continue
to work in close coordination with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
bring lasting peace to the country.
We have said many times that political and
diplomatic efforts should have primacy over a military
solution. Humanitarian considerations should have
equal priority. Military action alone will not bring
peace to the Great Lakes. We therefore encourage a
resumption of the Nairobi and Luanda processes. The
United Nations, including through the offices of the
Special Envoy, should actively support those efforts
and ensure coordination with existing efforts, such
as the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme process of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Any military action in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo requires careful planning, coordination
with MONUSCO, adherence to international law
and a clear exit plan. The East African Community
regional force and the Forces Armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo must engage substantively with
MONUSCO on the de-confliction of forces, to ensure
12/21

In conclusion, we call on the countries of the
region to intensify efforts to improve their regional
cooperation, address shared security challenges through
political and diplomatic means, improve humanitarian
access and bring an end to the violence.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing and welcome
the presence of the representatives of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and South
Africa in today’s meeting.
For some time now the countries of the Great Lakes
region have been strengthening their solidarity and
cooperation in a joint response to security challenges,
while promoting regional cooperation and sustainable
development, solving African problems with African
solutions and demonstrating resilience and wisdom.
China highly commends that approach. That said, it
must also be noted that there is still a long way to go to
achieve peace and development in the region.
The violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo is ongoing. The terrorism and ethnic tensions
there are difficult to resolve in the short run and issues
related to livelihoods and development have become
more acute. In order to deal with those challenges on
the ground, the countries of the region should intensify
their coordination efforts and deepen their cooperation
in the areas of security and development.
The Security Council and the international
community should invest more attention in the
subregion and increase their constructive support.
First, we must support the countries of the region
in standing together and staying the right course
towards shared security. The Great Lakes region is
an interdependent security community with a shared
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

future. Only by upholding the concept of common,
comprehensive cooperative and sustainable security,
and working together with collective determination can
the common security threats be effectively addressed.
The East African Community (EAC) and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
have been actively engaged in providing their
good offices with regard to the issue of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo through the launch
of the Nairobi peace process and the Luanda road map.
Kenya, Angola and others have also done a great deal of
work leading to positive outcomes.
The countries of the region must remain on the
right track towards maintaining their common security
and resolving their differences through dialogue and
consultations on the basis of respect for their mutual
interests and concerns. The international community
should fully support the lead role played by the
countries of the region and the coordinated progress of
the Nairobi and Luanda processes. In February 2023,
Burundi will host the eleventh summit of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. China looks forward to its
successful outcome, which will add positive energy to
the pursuit of regional peace and stability.
Secondly, we must support a multipronged
approach by combining military and non-military
means to eliminate threats to regional security as soon
as possible. In their response to the unrest caused by the
rebel groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the countries of the region took prompt action.
The EAC and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
pushed for the deployment of joint forces. Burundi
provided bilateral military support to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the framework of the
Nairobi process, and Uganda conducted joint military
operations with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Such independent initiatives to maintain stability
deserve our full recognition, and the international
community should provide the necessary support in
terms of funding and equipment.
At the same time, non-military means must also
be encouraged in parallel to create synergy. In August,
Uganda convened a meeting of the heads of regional
intelligence and security services to facilitate the
work of the Contact and Coordination Group, thereby
contributing to regional cooperation in addressing
security challenges. The disarmament, demobilization

S/PV.9165

and reintegration of armed groups is the only way
to defuse regional security threats. The countries
of the region have developed appropriate plans and
have gradually implemented them. The international
community should provide the necessary political and
financial support to that end.
The unlawful exploitation of natural resources is
another important factor that affects regional stability.
The Security Council convened a thematic meeting on
the issue under Gabon’s presidency (see S/PV.9147)
earlier this month. Special Envoy Huang Xia has
also made tremendous efforts to reach a solution.
The international community must work together to
implement the recommendations of the high-level
Khartoum workshop on natural resources, held in
2021, in order to end the illicit financing of terrorist
organizations and armed groups and actively foster
lawful trade in order to make natural resources a
hallmark of regional cooperation.
Thirdly, we need to push forward towards peace
through development and tackle the root causes of
regional instability and conflicts. The countries of
the region have come to a profound understanding on
the dialectic relationship between development and
security and have initiated a number of results-based
cooperation initiatives.
In his report (S/2022/735), the Secretary-General
notes that the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi, South Sudan, Zambia, Uganda, the United
Republic of Tanzania and other countries have
cooperated extensively in the areas of production
capacity, infrastructure development, trade, investment
and agricultural development. Those efforts will help
to unlock the potential for economic growth, build
stronger indigenous drivers for development, tighten
bonds based on regional interests and increase the
resources and means for maintaining regional peace
and security.
China is an important partner in the sustainable
development of the region and has helped countries
there implement a wide variety of development projects
in the framework of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation. China recently announced the first list of
projects in the project pool of its global development
initiative for the benefit of the countries of the region.
We will continue to deepen our cooperation with the
countries of the region in the area of development and
promote the timely achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals.

22-6545313/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Special Envoy Huang Xia has travelled extensively
to the countries of the region, actively provided
his good offices at the political level and diligently
worked to promote regional cooperation and address
shared challenges. The Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
has actively promoted the implementation of the new
strategy and action plan for the region and has achieved
a series of significant results.
China commends that and looks forward to the
United Nations regional presence in fully mobilizing
resources in order to achieve greater progress in the
implementation of the new strategy and action plan and
achieve an increase in early outcomes. China stands
ready to work with the international community to
increase its contribution to the achievement of lasting
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to begin by
thanking the Special Envoy for his briefing and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for the written
recommendations provided to the Security Council.
I also welcome the presence of the representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Africa,
Rwanda and Burundi at this meeting. Albania supports
the United Nations regional strategy for the Great Lakes
and the Special Envoy in his efforts.
Allow me to stress three points.
First, Albania remains extremely concerned about
the fragile situation in the Great Lakes region, despite
the continued diplomatic outreach and dialogue. The
activities of armed groups, mainly in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have
a devastating impact on the civilian population and
undermine efforts to encourage the countries of the
region. Those activities should cease, and respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law
is vital.
Secondly, Albania commends the positive
trends to promote peace through the Nairobi and
Luanda processes, as well as the efforts to ensure
proper coordination between them. In that vein, we
acknowledge the initiatives for rapprochement between
Burundi and Rwanda, between Rwanda and Uganda,
and especially between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, in particular the meetings
convened by the Joint Permanent Commission of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, which
led to the signing of several agreements.
14/21

26/10/2022

In addition, the countries of the region should
not underestimate the need for regional integration,
especially to maximize profits from the increased
demand for critical minerals, while also pursuing
economic diversification. We are encouraged by the
continued efforts to counter the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, which is one of the root causes
of regional instability. But more needs to be done to
effectively implement the recommendations of the
high-level Khartoum workshop on natural resources,
held in 2021.
Thirdly, regional efforts to promote peace and
security require careful attention and support. The
military track of the Nairobi process cannot be the
only solution to tackle the root causes of the conflict. A
much more comprehensive political track is necessary.
Women and youth’s engagement in the ongoing dialogue
and confidence-building initiatives are an example
of the essential components on which the strategy
should rest.
Albania welcomes the progress made in making
operational the Contact and Coordination Group,
which has become an important tool for dismantling the
networks of foreign armed groups. In line with building
trust, we welcome the public statements of national
authorities condemning the dissemination of hate
speech, and we share the call of the Secretary-General
for authorities to ensure accountability for violations
and strengthen legal frameworks on hate speech.
An additional pillar to be advanced through regional
cooperation is transitional justice. We commend the
adoption of the Kinshasa declaration on enhancing
regional judicial cooperation, which set new standards
for mutual legal assistance at the regional level, and we
hope to see the timely implementation of its priorities
in order to fight impunity.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our appreciation
for the work of the Special Envoy. In cooperation
with the Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, he has been a strong advocate for peace and
for implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.
Mrs. Jiménez Alegría (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Huang Xia for his briefing. We welcome the
participation of the representatives of Burundi, the
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and South
Africa at this meeting.
It is clear that almost 10 years after its adoption,
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
continues to be an integral component in addressing the
shared challenges in the region. The continued activities
of armed groups, such as the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo, the Allied Democratic Forces,
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda,
and in particular the strengthening of the Mouvement
du 23 mars in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo are of great concern owing to both the impact
on the civilian population and the regional tensions that
they create.
In that regard, we acknowledge the regional efforts
to respond to the escalating violence, in particular the
Nairobi process, led by Kenya in the context of the East
African Community. We note the recent signing of the
status-of-forces agreement between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Secretary-General of the
East African Community, which provides the basis for
the deployment of the regional force. We reiterate our
call for that force to coordinate with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the national security forces.
We believe that, in order to end the cycle of violence
in the region, military cooperation must be accompanied
by strategies that promote economic development. The
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes is also essential to advancing
stability and preventing setbacks. We acknowledge
the good offices of the President of Angola, Mr. João
Lourenço, whose role was instrumental in getting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to
commit to improving their bilateral relations through
the Luanda road map.
Thanks to that initiative, the joint permanent
commission between Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was reactivated 10 years after its
last meeting. In that regard, we also acknowledge the
work that the Peacebuilding Commission has carried
out in the countries of the Great Lakes region. The
investment of the Peacebuilding Fund in projects in
the region has helped to strengthen the participation of
women and young people.
In addition to addressing the structural causes of
violence, the countries of the Great Lakes region must

S/PV.9165

strengthen their cooperation to combat illicit arms
trafficking and the networks funding armed groups.
In particular, it is key to share intelligence and pool
efforts to combat the exploitation and trafficking of
natural resources, which provide armed groups with the
means to carry out criminal activities and terrorize the
civilian population.
We believe that the adoption of the Kinshasa
declaration on enhancing regional judicial cooperation
is a step in the right direction towards combating those
criminal networks. We urge all signatories to work
towards its implementation in a coordinated manner.
Mr. Kenneally (Ireland): I would like to begin
by expressing our appreciation to Special Envoy
Huang Xia for his briefing today. I also welcome the
participation in this discussion of the representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Africa,
Rwanda and Burundi.
The Great Lakes region has long faced a range of
overlapping challenges, with the security, humanitarian
and human rights situations undermining progress
and peace. There are positive examples of regional
cooperation, including the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and
the United Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation,
Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the Great
Lakes Region. We commend the Member States of the
region, United Nations entities, regional organizations
and the Special Envoy for their efforts to foster peace
and security in the region. However, there is a danger
that progress on such initiatives could be hampered by
the kind of public rhetoric that we have seen in recent
days. It is important to refrain from increasing tensions
in the region. Today I will focus on four main points.
First, conflict and hunger exist in a vicious cycle,
and several countries in the region face high levels
of food insecurity. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, 27 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Large numbers of people have been forced
to flee the violence and are displaced across the region.
Urgent efforts are needed to address the suffering
that people are experiencing; yet there are persistent
barriers to the humanitarian response. All parties
must ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance. Ireland remains concerned about the
documented human rights violations and abuses that

22-6545315/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

continue to occur. We call on all countries in the
Great Lakes region to pursue accountability for the
perpetrators of such acts.
Secondly, the negative impacts of climate change
on security are being felt across the continent and the
region. They contribute to the increasing humanitarian
need, as we heard during the debate on climate and
security in Africa earlier this month (see S/PV.9150).
The Council must integrate climate-related security
risks into its work.
Thirdly, on the struggle for control of natural
resources, the region is home to a significant
number of armed groups that benefit from the illegal
exploitation of and trade in some of the world’s most
valuable resources. Those illegal activities fund their
operations and destabilize communities and regions.
Natural resources should be a driver for sustainable
development across the region; yet instead they fuel
conflict and instability.
It is important to continue to make progress on
transparency issues, including through the regional
certification mechanism of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region. The implementation of the
recommendations adopted at the 2021 Khartoum highlevel regional workshop on natural resources can also
have an important impact. We call on all States to hold
to account those that are complicit in that illicit trade.
Fourthly, we believe that dialogue, partnership
and cooperation can build lasting peace in the region.
Ireland welcomes the Nairobi process initiative of the
East African Community to promote political dialogue
through an inclusive coordinated regional approach, as
agreed at the June Heads of State conclave. We also
welcome the Luanda process, convened by the President
of Angola. Those processes are evidence of the regional
commitment to working together to defuse tensions and
promoting regional peace and security.
There can be no military solution to the region’s
challenges. We welcome the commitment of the East
African Community to closely coordinate its regional
force with MONUSCO, and encourage it to ensure that
it fully complies with obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
Ireland recognizes the importance of the inclusion
and participation of women and young people in
regional cooperation initiatives and electoral processes.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of women
16/21

26/10/2022

in all peacebuilding and political efforts is essential. In
that regard, we welcome the positive role played by the
Advisory Board for Women, Peace and Security in the
Great Lakes region, and encourage continued efforts in
that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank the
briefers for their insightful briefings this morning. We
wish to highlight the following points.
First, we commend the countries of the region
for their efforts to advance the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/735). We encourage the region to strengthen its
efforts amid the challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, violence against marginalized
groups, forced displacement and non-State armed
groups, which continue to undermine peacebuilding,
stability and development. We support the enhanced
diplomatic engagements and outreach among the
countries of the region, and we stress the need for the
political commitments made to be honoured by all.
Secondly, we note the ongoing regional mediation
efforts, in particular those within the East African
Community-led Nairobi process, as well as the trustbuilding efforts led by Angola to strengthen political
and diplomatic cooperation. We hope that all such
efforts under way to advance the political processes in
the region will complement each other and be inclusive
of all stakeholders, such as civil society, including
women and youth peacebuilding organizations. In that
regard, we also note the recent operationalization of the
Great Lakes Women Entrepreneurs Network, the efforts
of which support the participation of all segments of
society in regional efforts, including domestic efforts
to increase the participation of women. We also believe
that community and traditional leaders can support
peace and foster social cohesion at all levels, including
through the reintegration of former combatants.
Thirdly, we continue to urge that the deployment
of the East African Community troops to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo be done in close
coordination with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to ensure coherence and complementarity.
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Fourthly and lastly, we appreciate the support
provided by the good offices of the United Nations,
most notably the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, who briefed us this
morning, for the implementation of the United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention
and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor to contribute
to this meeting. I join others in thanking the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region for his briefing. Rwanda commends the Special
Envoy’s dedication to peace, development and security
in our subregion.
Rwanda welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/735) and appreciates the recognition
that the security and humanitarian situation in the
subregion is not solely attributable to one armed group.
Similarly, we echo his call on all warring parties to cease
hostilities and take advantage of the several existing
agreements and the peace and security road map devised
for the peaceful resolution of the conflict. Rwanda
reiterates its readiness to execute the commitments
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
in good faith.
Rwanda knows first-hand what it takes to build a
nation from the ashes. We know that attention should be
given to national reforms, the reintegration of former
combatants, the neutralization of remaining groups and
the establishment of State authority. That is why we
are committed to carrying out all tasks required of us
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
in order to ensure that the region is moving towards
peace and stability throughout our borders.
Addressing the root causes of conflict remains
a crucial factor. That brings me to the dangerous
classification of specific communities in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo as foreigners who
should go back to where they came from. That stance
is a seed of unending conflict. It promotes hate,
marginalization and violence. Such dangerous rhetoric
undermines the United Nations and the subregional
efforts to find a lasting solution.
There is another area of extreme importance that,
unfortunately, has not seen progress — namely, the
neutralization of the 1994 genocidal force, the Forces

S/PV.9165

démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR).
The FDLR is one of the oldest armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It settled in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo after committing
the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda. Despite
several Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements calling for its disarmament and disbandment,
the FDLR continues to recruit and train combatants,
and it has committed grave human rights violations,
including promoting and committing ethnically based
and other killings in Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Supporting that genocidal force
therefore further complicates and prolongs a conflict
for which the region has already paid a heavy cost.
Even more disturbing is that supporting the FDLR
might set the stage for further conflicts in the region.
If the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo chooses to defeat armed groups militarily, we
have no problem with that. Our main concern remains
that the Government is choosing to side with the FDLR.
That kind of relationship will always draw Rwanda’s
close attention and alertness.
Rwanda firmly believes the international
community should engage with the signatories in
genuine collaborative terms. Together, they should build
on regional initiatives in order to achieve sustainable
peace by addressing the root causes of conflict in the
region. Chief among those causes is the active presence
of the FDLR in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for over two decades.
The harmonization and synchronization of
international and regional efforts are paramount to
avoid diluting or reversing the progress achieved under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. For
example, the implementation of concrete resolutions
agreed upon this year was, unfortunately, diverted by
unrelated agendas, some of which serve only to worsen
existing problems. The international community,
through its special envoys or other channels, should
make greater use of the good offices of the Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region in order to ensure
that the signatories to the Framework continue to
work in the spirit of confidence-building, ownership
and accountability.
I have several questions. After our collective
resolve, reflected by the often-abused phrase “never
again”, the Security Council is still struggling to
find a lasting solution to the FDLR, the leaders and
members of which are among the perpetrators of the

22-6545317/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda. Instead of
addressing the leading root cause of insecurity in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, we continue
to choose to manage that insecurity and focus on the
consequences of the presence of the FDLR in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Why does the
Security Council not follow up on the implementation
of the multiple resolutions it has adopted and hold
accountable whoever collaborates with the FDLR?
Why the long silence and tolerance of hate speech and
xenophobia? Those questions are legitimate not only
from a Rwandan or regional perspective, but also from
a broad perspective of maintaining international peace
and security.
In that regard, it would be unfortunate if the
Council were to spend another 28 years dealing with
the FDLR and its consequences for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. Indeed, beyond
the absolute need to restore peace and security in the
region, that collective inaction also further undermines
the implementation in our region of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.
Despite those challenges, let me conclude on an
optimistic note. Rwanda is convinced that the overall
momentum for peace, security and cooperation in the
Great Lakes region is so strong that it will eventually
enable us to address the root causes of conflict, under
the supervision of the Council, so that we can live up to
our collective expectations of a secure and stable Great
Lakes region that is free of armed groups, including the
remaining genocidal force on our continent.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French):
The delegation of Burundi would like to congratulate
the Gabonese presidency of the Security Council for
October and reaffirm its support for Gabon’s mandate.
The Burundi delegation welcomes the briefing
delivered by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region and thanks him for the work
and the results achieved, particularly with respect to
the implementation of the regional strategy. We take
note of the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2022/735) and commend the active engagement of his
Special Envoy in the interest of peace and development
in the Great Lakes region.
At a time when the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo continues to face a security and humanitarian
18/21

26/10/2022

crisis that affects the stability of the country and
the region, Burundi reaffirms the relevance of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
as a solution to the challenge of ensuring stability in
our subregion.
More than ever, the international community should
play an effective role as a guarantor in the search for
peace in the region. It is important that the members
of the Security Council go beyond the framework of
the presentation of reports made in New York and visit
the region in order to be able to draw the necessary
conclusions from the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo instead of following from afar the
developments in that hotbed of tensions, which could
have immense consequences and threaten international
peace and security.
While welcoming the efforts of the region and
stressing the need to ensure the synergy and alignment
of the Nairobi and Luanda processes, Burundi reaffirms
the importance of cooperation and coordination in
the military efforts between the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the deployed regional force
from the East African Community.
Burundi, which maintains excellent relations with
all its neighbours, believes that when your neighbour’s
house is on fire you should take proactive measures to
contain the fire before the flames coming from next
door reach you. In the context of the situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi
therefore supports and will always support the quest
for a lasting solution to the crisis there, as well as all
good-faith initiatives to restore peace and security in
the subregion.
In the light of the East African Community’s
decision to deploy a regional force to stabilize the
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi firmly supports the Nairobi process
and is deploying a military contingent of the National
Defence Forces of Burundi. We need technical and
financial as well as political support for the deployment
if we are to enable the force to effectively carry out its
mandate and address the concerns of those in need. We
believe that the international community should work
together to eradicate the negative forces that the region
is crawling with and that are obstructing peace and
economic development in the Great Lakes region.
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV.9165

Burundi will spare no effort to ensure peace and
development in the subregion. We are actively preparing
to take over the chairmanship in 2023 of the regional
follow-up mechanism for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, signed in Addis
Ababa on 24 February 2013 under the auspices of the
United Nations, the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community.

I would also like to acknowledge the presence
of Mr. Claude Ibalanky, High Representative of the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. He is also the coordinator of the
Framework Agreement’s local mechanism for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We benefited from
his notes in preparing for this statement. He is also
accompanied here today by his Director of the Cabinet.

The Framework Agreement is and will remain an
essential platform for bringing together the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region
to agree on sustainable solutions to the challenges of
our subregion. Its tenth summit, scheduled to take
place in Bujumbura in February 2023, will re-evaluate
the principles set out in the Framework Agreement,
which are based on the Pact on Security, Stability
and Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
commits the Governments of the region and the
international community to redoubling their efforts
to restore lasting peace in the region. The summit
will also involve analysing the progress made and the
challenges encountered so as to map out future actions
to be taken to ensure the Framework Agreement’s
effective implementation. We would like to take this
opportunity to ask the Heads of State and Government
whose countries are signatories to the Nairobi process,
as well as the guarantors, to play an active part in the
summit of the regional mechanism of the Framework
Agreement to be held in Bujumbura on 24 February of
next year.

I would be remiss if I continued without reminding
the Council that even as we are meeting here, the town
of Bunangana, a beloved part of my country, is still
being attacked and occupied by Rwanda, under the
guise of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), and that has
gone on for more than four months. Rwanda, we should
remind the Council, is one of the signatories to the
Addis Ababa Framework Agreement. This unacceptable
situation of aggression, which is undermining the
confidence-building efforts and positive momentum
that were beginning to take hold in the Great Lakes
region, must stop. We ask the Council to urge Rwanda
and its M-23 to leave that part of Congolese territory
without delay.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): Let me take this opportunity
to thank you, Sir, for your presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. I would also like to
thank all the members of the Council, especially the
three African members, Gabon, Ghana and Kenya, for
the interest they have unfailingly shown in my country’s
situation. My delegation greatly values the briefing just
made by Ambassador Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, and I
welcome his presence in the Chamber. We also want to
commend him for his commitment and sacrifice in his
efforts for the Great Lakes region.

I would like to make an important parenthetical
point. The representative of Rwanda spoke about
combatants from the Forces Démocratiques de
Libération du Rwanda (FDLR) being a main cause of
the conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That makes no sense. As a researcher who has
taught for nearly 50 years in universities, including in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I know very
well that Rwanda was in control of our entire country’s
national security from May 1997 until July 1998. James
Kabarebe, a Rwandan military officer, was appointed
the Chief of the General Staff of the Forces armées
congolaises or as it is known today, the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC).
First, why did Mr. Kabarebe and Rwanda do
nothing to eliminate the FDLR when they had power
and control over the security of the entire territory of
the Congo?
Secondly, between 1998 and 2003, Rwanda
occupied part of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including North Kivu. Why did they do nothing
in those five years to eliminate the FDLR?
Thirdly, when Joseph Kabila was President, he
authorized Rwanda to intervene in the Congo and to

22-6545319/21

S/PV.9165

The situation in the Great Lakes region

pursue the FDLR. The Rwandan army were in our
territory. They did not eliminate the FDLR. Why is that?
The reason is very simple. Rwanda is keeping the FDLR
as an excuse to plunder my country’s natural resources.
They are not really entering the Congo to pursue the
FDLR, because their main interest is in plundering our
resources. That is well known — it is in reports from
the United States Treasury and other studies, as well
the mapping reports of the United Nations Commission
on Human Rights. All of that is well known.
Regarding the armed groups, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is continuing its efforts both
individually and in conjunction with all its partners to
reduce the scale of the threat they pose. In that regard,
the Nairobi process will be fully relaunched with the
aim of tackling and eliminating all armed groups.
President Felix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo’s
message is very clear on that subject. He spoke about
it recently here in the General Assembly (see A/77/
PV.5) and has repeated it in London and elsewhere.
Our most important priority is to live in peace with
all our neighbours. Since he came to power, President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo has done his utmost to ensure
peace between us and our neighbours. In that regard,
I would like to thank my colleague from Burundi for
mentioning that the relations between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi are excellent. We
have allowed Burundi to enter the Democratic Republic
of the Congo because we know that its interests are not
that different from our own. I therefore believe that
we should take things as they are and recognize that
the aggression to which we are being subjected is real
and that the Security Council must take the necessary
action in that regard.
The humanitarian situation in our region remains
very worrisome, as Ms. Keita noted in this Chamber at
the end of September (see S/PV.9142). Advocacy efforts
to contain the situation must continue because at least
70 per cent of the funding needs have not yet been met.
With regard to the implementation of the Addis
Ababa Framework Agreement, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/735), has honoured the
six national commitments which it had undertaken.
The appointment on 26 May of nine provincial
coordinators of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme;
the reforms of the FARDC that are under way; and
the signature by the President of the ordinance-law on
20/21

26/10/2022

the military programming bill, which is focused on
capacity-building, are all directed at strengthening the
Addis Ababa Framework Agreement mechanism.
Moreover, it is worth recalling that, under the
leadership of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has been Chair of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region since 24 February, several important
meetings have been held.
For example, in August, the thirty-first meeting
of the Technical Support Committee was held in
Nairobi. At the end of that meeting, the senior
representatives of the Heads of State of signatories to
the Framework Agreement recommended accelerating
the implementation of the Agreement through existing
mechanisms to put an end to the insecurity in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region.
From 22 to 24 September, the fifth meeting of
the Heads of Intelligence and Security Services of the
Great Lakes region was held in Kampala. That meeting
decided on the deployment, beginning on 5 November
in Goma, of the members of the operational cell of
the Contact and Coordination Group, which will be
in charge of establishing and monitoring non-military
measures to complement the ongoing military
operations. The Contact and Coordination Group, in
addition to contacts with the armed groups, will also be
part of a community-based approach through contacts
with opinion leaders, communities and civil society,
not to mention women and young people. The stated
objective is to raise awareness and obtain the support
and effective involvement of all those stakeholders in
the non-military efforts to bring about the surrender
of the armed groups. The operational cell will also
accompany efforts targeting foreign armed groups
and their repatriation to their countries of origin, an
objective clearly stated by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is important to stress that the success of that
non-military component underscores the critical
importance of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme,
which was established by the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We take this
opportunity to ask the Special Envoy and the Security
Council to participate even more proactively alongside
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in efforts to
22-65453

26/10/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

deploy substantial funding of the programme, which
will contribute to changing the situation in the Great
Lakes region.
Furthermore, in accordance with resolution 2556
(2020), the stabilization of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo also depends on the implementation of the
Addis Ababa Framework Agreement. In that regard, my
Government would like to reassure the Council that it
will continue its cooperation efforts at the subregional,
regional and international levels for the effective
implementation of the Framework Agreement.
Finally, I would like to mention that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is upholding its commitments
under the Framework Agreement.
Rwanda is providing substantial support to the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and, in doing so, is
contributing to the deterioration of the climate of
trust and continued insecurity in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For years,
that insecurity has enabled a predatory and illicit
exploitation of the natural resources that abound in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
we deplore.
The Addis Ababa Framework Agreement prohibits
the destabilization of a member country of the region
by another State. Rwanda’s position is in defiance of
the conclusions of the Nairobi process and the talks in
Luanda and New York. With regard to the talks in New
York, I am referring to the meeting that the President of
France, Mr. Macron, held with President Kagame and
President Tshisekedi Tshilombo during the high-level
week of the General Assembly.

S/PV.9165

Second, I request that the Council demand an
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Rwandan
and M-23 troops from the town of Bunangana and other
parts of Rutshuru territory in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in North Kivu province.
Third, I call for the Security Council to strongly
condemn, via a resolution, the Republic of Rwanda
for its support to the M-23 armed group. I have heard
almost everyone at today’s meeting say that they deplore
Rwanda’s occupation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, but deploring it alone will not change anything.
Measures must be taken so that Rwanda knows that the
international community takes that seriously.
Fourth, I call for the Security Council to impose
appropriate and more severe sanctions on the M-23
and Rwandan actors who are threatening the peace,
security and stability in the Great Lakes region through
their activism.
Fifth, I call for support for the Nairobi process.
Sixth, I call for all armed groups without exception
to be required to lay down their arms and join the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme and for the Programme to
be provided with greater support.
Seventh, I call on the Council to strengthen
sanctions against domestic and foreign mafia
networks — including their entire networks, from
production and transit points to destinations — which
illegally exploit the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Council members should know that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, its President and its people will
defend the integrity of their territory and will not cede
a single centimetre of their land.

My eighth and last request is for the Council
to be involved in ensuring that each country in the
Great Lakes region resolve its disputes with its own
combatants and/or rebels.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
convey a few requests to the Council on behalf of
my delegation.

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

First, I call for respect for the integrity and
intangibility of the borders of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject..
The meeting rose at noon.

22-6545321/21
