54

General A1111embly-Thirteenth Session

2. Invites Member States to submit their comments
on the draft articles concerning diplomatic intercourse
and immunities not later than 1 June 1959;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate such
comments so as to facilitate the discussion of the subject at the fourteenth session of the General Assembly;
4. Decides to include the item entitled "Diplomatic
intercourse and immunities" in the provisional agenda
of its fourteenth session with a view to the early conclusion of a convention on diplomatic intercourse and
immunities ;
5. Decides to consider at its fourteenth session the
question to what body the formulation of the convention
should be entrusted.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.

1289 (XIII). Relations between States and intergovernmental organizations
The General Assembly,
Taking note of paragraph 51 of the report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its
tenth session, 1 which refers to ad hoe diplomacy and,
in particular, to diplomatic conferences, and of paragraph 52 of the same report, which refers to relations
between States and international organizations,
Considering the importance and development of international organizations,
Considering the observations made by Governments
at the twelfth and thirteenth sessions of the General
Assembly, particularly on the question referred to in
paragraph 52 of the report,
Invites the International Law Commission to give
further consideration to the question of relations between States and inter-governmental international organizations at the appropriate time, after study of diplomatic intercourse and immunities, consular intercourse
and immunities and ad hoe diplomacy has been completed by the United Nations and in the light of the
results of that study and of the discussion in the General
Assembly.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1290 (XIII). Report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its tenth
session ( chapter V)

The General Assembly,
Having considered the questions dealt with in chapter
V of the report of the International Law Commission
covering the work of its tenth session,1
Takes note of chapter V of the said report.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1291 (XIII). Question of the publication of a
United Nations juridical yearbook
The General Assembly,
Considering that it is a function of the General Assembly to take appropriate measures to encourage the
development of international law,
Considering that the publication of a United Nations
juridical yearbook may constitute a useful measure for
that purpose,

Recalling its resolution 176 (II) of 21 November
1947,
Having considered the discussion in the Sixth Committee on the question of the publication of a juridical
yearl)ook,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the question of the publication of a United Nations juridical yearbook, covering in addition the technical and financial implications of such a publication,
taking into account the suggestions made during the
discussion in the Sixth Committee, and to circulate the
report to Member States before the fourteenth session
of the General Assembly ;
2. Decides to place this question on the provisional
agenda of its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1306 (XIII). Question of initiating a study of the
juridical regime of historic waters, including historic bays

The General Assembly,
Having received the resolution adopted on 27 April
1958 by the United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea3 requesting the General Assembly to arrange for
the study of the juridical regime of historic waters, including historic bays, and for the communication of the
results of such study to all States Members of the United
Nations,
Decides to place the question of initiating a study of
the juridical regime of historic waters, including historic
bays, on the provisional agenda of its fourteenth session.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.
1307 (XIII). Convening of a second United Nations conference on the law of the sea

The General Assembly,
Having received the resolution adopted on 27 April
1958 by the United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea,4 requesting the General Assembly to study at
its thirteenth session the advisability of convening a
second international conference of plenipotentiaries for
further consideration of questions left unsettled by the
Conference,
Recalling that the Conference made an historic contribution to the codification arid progressive development of international law by preparing and opening for
signature conventions on nearly all of the subjects covered by the draft articles on the law of the sea drawn up
by the International Law Commission,5
Noting that no proposal concerning the breadth of the
territorial sea or fishery limits received the two-thirds
majority required for adoption by the Conference,
Believing that the desire for agreement on these two
vital issues continues, and that agreement thereon would
contribute substantially to the lessening of international
• United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, Official
Records, Volume II: Plenary Meetings (United Nations publication, Sales No.: 58.V.4, Vol. II), annexes, document
A/CONF.13/L.56, resolution VII.
• Ibid., resolution VIII.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Sessfrm,
Supplement No. 9 (A/3159), para. 33.
