United Nations

2233rd

GENERAL

PlENARY ME£I1NG

ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, 17 September 1974,
at 3 p.m.

TWENTY-NINTH SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pag~

Agenda item I:
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation
of Ecuado~
.
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditl'tion

.

Address by Mr. Leopoldo Benites. Temporary President,
.
Chairman of the delegation of Ecuador
Agenda item 3:
Cred~ntials of represematives to the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee

2

Agenda item 4:
Elec~ion of the President

2

Address by Mr. Abd~laziz Bouteflika. President of the
twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly

2

Agenda item 22:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations. . . . . .

7

Temporary President: Mr. Leopoldo Benites
(Ecuador).

AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairmsn
of tine delegation of Ecuador
1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretatIOn
from Spanish): I declare open the twenty-ninth

regular session of the General Assembly.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

2. The TEMPOP 4-RY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): I n•• ite representatives to stand and
observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The representatives stood in silence..
Address by Mr. Leopoldo Benites, Temporary President,
Chairman of the delegation of Ecuador

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): It is an unshakable custom, constantly followed at previous sessions of the General
A&sembly, that the Temporary President express
his expectations regarding the new session; and,
basing myself on that custom, I crave representatives' indulgence to make a few remarks.
4. I shall begin by expressing my conviction that
the new President·-who will be elected in a few

moments--will successfully carry out his complex
and difficult task. He will be able to do that thanks
to hi.s high qualifications.
5. In almost all fields of United Nations activities,
new problems have emerged that will challenge our
imagination, our prudence and our tact if we are
to find adequate solutions to them.
6. In the political field we have seen that the use
or the threat of the use of force, prohibited by the
Charter and repudiated by mankind which this Organization r'epresents, has still not ceased to harvest
death and to sow in the minds of men scepticism
regarding the true effectiveness of the Organization. I am deeply convinced that the Assembly that
is today beginning its work will find just solutions
and return to horrified mankind its faith in the final
abolition of force as a means of creating, destroying
or modifying rights. We must carry to th~ minds
and souls of people the conviction that their right
to self-determination will always be respected with
regard both to the achievement of full independence
and to the full exercise of their sovereignty in setting
up their own social and political regimes, and even
that the rights of those peoples who for long years
have awaited their moment ofjustice will be restored.
7. In the economic field the Assembly that is beginning its session today will have to' deal with urgent
problems, particularly those arising out of the sixth
special session of the General Assembly, of which
. I had the honour of being President. The creation
of the Special Fund to complement the emergency
operation already undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral to help the developing countries, particularly those most affected by circumstances that have
injured their economies, will be one of the topics
of greatest interest once the report of the Economic
and Social Council based on the recommendations
of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Special Programme,
in accordance with resolution 3202 (S-VI), is taken
up for consideration. Perhaps an assessment of the
result~ of those conferences closely linked to development whicl1 were held in the course of the present
year will help us to find more precise solutions concerning, for example, population growth and the
ways and means to be developed, particularly.in
the assurance of a food supply, in order to avoid
potential dangers.
8. One of the I'roblems that may cause the greatest
concern and dismay regarding'the work of the United
Nations is its present inability to act in the face of
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms, respect for which and safeguard of which
constituted the very basis of the creation of the United
Nations and which are set forth in the Preamble to
the .Charter and in the definition of the purposes
and principles of that document.
A/PV.2233

2

I

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Seaion-Plenary Meetlngs

9. Another item that will be the focus of attention
in the session of the Assembly which is beginning
today will doubt!ess be the consideration of the report
of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression [A/96/9]. I trust and hope that no divisive
or confusing elements will be allowed to enter into
that definition and that it will in concrete terms express
what the international community has been awaiting
for so many long years.
10. I shall not make a list of the problems, far less
try to predict solutions that can only be arrived at
by the General Assembly. I shall limit myself to
expressing the hope that under the skilful guidance
of the new President who is to be elected in a few
moments. an outstanding son of Africa, the General
Assembly will carry out serious and orderly work in
its search for such solutions.
11. In closing the twenty-eighth regular session of
the General Assembly yesterday [2232nd meeting],
I said, and I now repeat, that we live at a moment
when the course of history is being transformed;
some systems are dying away, others are being born,
particularly in the field of economic relations and in
the establishment and strengthening of greater social
justice.
12. In declaring open the present session of the
General Assembly, I am imbued with the assurance
that this body will do its historic duty.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-ninth
.session of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee
13. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (intdpretation from Spanish): Rule 28 of the rules of procedure
provides that the General Assembly at the beginning
of each session shall appoint, on the proposal of
the President, a Credentials Committee consisting
of nine members. Accordingly, I propose that, for
the twenty-ninth session. the Credentials Committee
should consist of the following Member States:
Belgium, China, Costa Rica, the Philippines, Senegal,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the United States of America
and Venezuela. If I hear no objection, I shall take
it that the countries I have mentioned are hereby
appointed members of the Credtlntials Committee.
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President
14.. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I now invite the Members of
the General Assembly to proceed to the election of
the President of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly. In accordance with rule 92 of the
rules of procedure, the election will be held by secret
ballot.
At the invitation of the Temporary President,
Mr. Caicedo (Colombia) and Mr. Kaufmann (Netherlands) acted as tellers.

A vote was laken by secret ballot.
133
Number of ballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
0
Number o/valid ballots:
133
Abstentions:
0
Number of members voting:
133
Required majority:
67
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Bouteflika (Algeria)
" 133
Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Abdelaziz Boutej1ika (Algeria) was elected President 0/
Ihe twenty-ni",h session'of the General Assembly.
IS. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): I extend my most sincere and cordial
congratulations to Mr. Bouteflika on his unanimous
election to the presidency of the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly, and I ask him to accept the
congratulations of everyone of the representatives
who voted for him. I address particular congratulations to the Assembly on its wisdom in electing its
new President. I am sure th~t in his expert hands
and thanks to his strong personality, his brilliance
and his ability as a statesman, the General Assembly
will be able to carry out the great tasks before it.
Mr. Boutej1ika took the Chair.
Address by Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, President
of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assemblv

16. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Although it may appear to be false modesty to consider oneself unworthy of something which one has
wished for in silence, the extent of the confidence
which the Assembly has un.animously placed in me
gives me an opportunity to estimate the importance
of the merits which I do not possess myself and, at
the same time, to try to become more aware, with
both sincere and profound humility, of my own personallimitations. Yet, at one time or another in one's
existence, who has not, quite legitimately aspired
to being professionally recognized?
17. My friendly gratitude to all of you is enhanced
by the fact that, over and above the contingencies
and whims offate, I should like to regard your verdict
as a tribute paid to all the peoples of the continent
which, by its unanimous choice, has so decisively
burdened me with this new debt.
18. .I should also like to regard your ruling as a recognition of Africa, which is in its full efflorescence.
Moreover, certain as I am of your full agreement,
I should like to regard it, above all, as a manifestation of your deference to all those generations of
freedom fighters, who, like those in my country,
have themselves shouldered the historic responsibility for making a decisive contribution to the
advent of a better world, if necessary, with weapons
in their hands.
i9. If great empires have arisen from oppressive
violence, what greater empire could there be than
th,' ~~ah'1 of justice, which itself makes revolutionary
violence legitimate-revolutionary violence, which
is the only way for peoples to liberate themselves?
20. As the victim of an almost unjust fate which
has lavished always unexpected favours on me,

.~

11

:i,;[

I
iI

I should like to
reasons why I ti
the normal than
have been my
which have nev
form of express
too eroded by u
21. It has bee
among you, a
country, harbou
and sustained b
changed. Havin
privilege of sp
behalf of Alge
stantly renewe
have imagined
I would, with y
the honour of p
of the Organizat
today, how ma
great fortune of
22. In an Org
where else, we
tion, you have t
honoured tale
knowledge, rev
simply to refer t
of politics, skil
able jurists-all
immediately exc
of its path.
23. I am succ
decessors with
replace them. I
who, from this
circumstances,
while at the sa
authority and t
men. In none of
my own inade
great that they c
24. In the case
ular, Mr. Leop
that probably e
able to be so c
by chance circ
succeed. How
stant solicitude
of a humanist w
when I know fo
constantly redis
on all the probl
2S. In this A
I am; as it wer
the United Nati
to praise it in th
form, devoted s
I did so with a
defend, since it
motives. Need
that time was a
ization and an
ideal which pr
has made it a c
all nations of th
tice, freedom a

2233rd meetlng-17 September 1974

I should like to explain to you, in simple terms, the
reasons why I feel a special gratitude, in addition to
the normal thanks I owe you. In so doing, it would
have been my profound wish to redi~cover words
which have never been used, or at least to find some
form of expression whose connotation has not been
too eroded by usage and by time.
21. It has been nearly 12 years since I first arrived
among you, a young plenipotentiary from my own
country, harbouring as many illusions as I did hopes,
and sustained by faith and an ideal which have never
changed. Having had subsequently the rare, constant
privilege of speaking in this prestigious forum on
behalf of Algeria, a country which has been constantly renewed by revolution, how could I ever
have imagined that one day, sitting in this chair,
I would, with your consent, be called upon to assume
the honour of presiding for a time over the destinies
of the Organization? On the path which I am treading
today, how many exceptional figures have I had the
great fortune of meeting?
22. In an Organization in which, more than anywhere else, we like to respect the dictates of tradition, you have throughout the years valued wisdom,
honoured talent, respected seniority, venerated
knowledge, revered experience and devotion; and
simply to refer to the imposing constellation of princes
of politics, skilful economists, subtle diplomats and
able jurists-all this forces us to be bumble, and
immediately excuses all the gaps and all the stumblings
of its path.
23. I am succeeding, therefore, my illustrious predecessors without, naturally, having any claim to
replace them. I am thinking in particular of all those
who, from this seat, have been able, in very trying
circumstances, to maintain dialogue at all costs,
while at the same time revealing both their moral
authority and their remarkable aptitudes as statesmen. In none of them, unfortunately, can I recognize
my own inad,~quacies; indeed, their merits are so
great that they cannot but be alien to me.

!
"
. i

':1

, '1

i
~

~
!~

J

;~

24. In the case of my eminent predecessor in particular, Mr. Leopoldo Benites, I was going to confess
that probably each of us would have felt uncomfortable to be so closely associated with a man whom,
by chance circumstances, I am now called upon to
succeed. How could I, in effect, without your constant solicitude, feel at ease occupying the place
of a humanist whom you will surely continue to miss,
when I know for certain how gratified we all feel in
constantly rediscovering the originality of ,his views
on all the problems of the present and the future?
25. In this Assembly everything has been said;
I am; as it were, a late comer. But, after all, this is
the United Nations; I would already have had a chance
to praise it in the past, had I not, from this very platform, devoted some time to criticizing it. Frequently
I did so with a severity which I would still strongly
defend, since it was based on sincere and still justified
motives. Need I recall here that any challenge at
that time was an act of renewed faith in the Organization and an act of noble adherence to the very
ideal which presided over its creation and which
has made it a centrt: of concord and alliance among
~ll oa/ions of the world? The three principles of jus-

3

rely )on in seeking that universality which was so
difficult to bring about have made the existence of
the Organization even more indispensable by that
very token. The fact that it had to exist could not
obviously confer perfection upon it; but it is quite
obvious that it can &till be improved. Furthermore,
it is already in the process of progressively reforming
itself, without crisis and without disruption.
26. Furthermore, throughout the dangerous storms
of contemporay history could we for one instant
even dare to imagine that the international community could survive its own contradictions without
the timely and indeed salutary intervention of the
great institutions which watched over its own destiny? But in the world as it is, no one would be so
bold as to claim that these institutions, however
indispensable they may be, can be placed above
and act equally towards all the Powers, great and
small. It has even occurred that they have become
so used to the problems of some that finally they
overlook the vital concerns of the majority. Undoubtedly, in the solemn atmosphere of this forum all
States are equal. But it would seem that outside it
some are more equal than others. A fine tradition
perhaps, but not one that speaks very eloquently in
favour of the Charter.
27. Undoubtedly it would not be an exaggeration
to state that today the ovet·~~btle games of politics
have become obsolete and that our responsibility
is less to turn our b~,;:ks on reality than, rather, to
face up to it rigorously aod vigilantly. In a world
from which mystery is fading more and more and
which is being penetrated through and through by
science, is not the prime virtue precisely that of
objectivity, scrupulous respect for the real and the
patient search for truth? It is this self-discipline that
will probably give the necessary moral impetus for
the survival of a world that is becoming more unified
day by day as it shrinks day by day. Underlying any
politics, as it underlies any morality, we have the
same principle which should prevail: that is, making
the idea fit the thing, the WG ~d fit the thought, and
the act fit the word. And what forum could welcome
such a maxim better than ours? In adjusting its conduct faithfully to this ideal, the Organization would
be simply keeping its promise of peace and universality.
28. The concept of universality is also a moral
necessity. It means that in the face of the unity of
human kind, racial barriers are crumbling away in
the same way as differences in economic and social
status are gradually fading.
29. Our era is in fact characterized by a constant
move towards universality, which, in the initial phase,
took the form of the gradual recognition of the equality of races, of nations, of States, and in the second
phase, that of an ever-growing trend towards translatirig this equality into facts by striving to reduce
the disparities created by the wealth of some and
the poverty of the majority.
30. In the case of the first phase, who can deny
that the United Nations has played its part? Of course,
the application of the right of self-determination to
colonized peoples has not been easy, and the example
of my country bears witness to this. Of course, the

L:~' r~::d=:l:i::=~::~::e~g:::

Poople', Republic

4

Genenl Assembly-Twenty-nlnth session-Plenary Meetings

of China in the United Nations was something which
we regard as having been held up for too long. Of
course, other countries which are unfairly split up
remain outside our deliberations. Of course, it is
true that the Organization has not always been able
to defuse conflicts and to resolve crises. However,
it does remain a privileged place where nothing which
affects the freedom of peoples and their dignity can
be regarded as alien.
31. However decisive the distribution of power
may be, moral considerations also have their weight,
and this weight can be decisive. In recent years there
has been a certain weakening in decolonization, but
there has just been a giant step forward in the recognition of the right to independence of the remaining
territories under foreign domination.
32. With the admission of new States during the
present session, socn all peoples will be able to make
their voices heard in this concert of nations.
33. But it is not enough to win a place in this Organi:zation to be proof against hunger and insecurity.
We do not wish to be deluded by the fragile appearance of freshly acquired sovereignty. We are people
who have made a religion of struggle. The nations
which seek to establish themselves always go through
this painful tension which they impose on themselves
and which they regard as being the inevitable price
of progress and of freedom.
34. This gives us greater freedom to underscore
international responsibilities regarding development
problems. Here we have another task which has to
be done, not one which affects the existence of States
but one which affects the progress and well-being
of peoples. At the present time the problems of development are spreading beyond national and continental limits. These are world-wide problems~ in the
same way as imperialist hegemony is a world-wide
problem. It is not by chance that I have mentioned
these two phenomena' in the same breath, because
it is modem capitalist exploitation which has brought
about the divorce between the wealthy and the poor.
35. The awareness which has now crystallized
around these problems is not simply the expression
of a philanthropic impute--=;; it proceeds from the
growing belief that in an organically cohesive world,
no one's destiny is isolated. In this connexion, it
is obvious that development cannot be simply viewed
through the cold calculations of utilitarianism; rather
it must be viewed as the function of fundamental
.
needs for justice and equity.
36. For the first time this year these crucial matters
have been set down as the subjects of specific debate.
Acting at a particularly delicate moment in the international economic situation, Algeria considered this
forum to be the most appropriate one to establish
a genuine dialogue and to look for constructive solutions. The debate is still open. It will continue during
the present Assembly, and then during the next special session of the Assembly.
37. By dint of their scope and complexity, the
problems which have been raised by the Group of 77
developing countries form the very warp and woof
of the historic evolution of our times. The fact that
this year they have taken on an unprecedented breadth
and political acuteness in the Organization, where

they continue to enjoy special treatment, can in itself
be regarded as considerable progress, because it is
less a question of looking for ad hoc recipes than
of leading the international community progressively
to see problems as they actually are, quite apart
from any selfish cliches and short-sighted strategies.
38. The United Nations, after almost 30 years of
existence, has now entered a decisi'.'~ phase in its
life. The action of the United Nations in today's
world, in order to safeguard international peace
and security, to defe~d the right of peoples to selfdetermination and the "sovereignty of States, to act
in favour of the development of multilateral cooperation at the level of humanity, all this is o~e of
the leitmotivs of the profound needs of our civilization, in which it has become an irreplaceable factor.
But its solidity, its ability to become rooted in the
awareness of this era, undoubtedly increase its responsibilities and militate in favour of even greater effectiveness in the way it carries out its mission. This
means that a greater democratization of its structures
and their rigorous adaptation to the realities in which
we live today not only would be consonant with an
imperative need but would open to the Organization new and undoubtedly heartening prospects.
39. We know, Mr. Secretary-General, everything
that you have already done to ensure that the Organization shows its face wherever there is any danger
to world peace. Your personal action has helped
to make the Organization a tool which is being resorted to more and more by countries in search of
a settlement of their disputes. The confidence which,
once again, world public opinion has placed in the
United Nations gives us new opportunities both to
develop the activities ofour institutions and to promote
a climate, a method and a system which will make
it possible to ensure that the existence among States
of more harmonious relations and thus to guarantee
our generation and coming generations a future which
will be marked by peace and understanding.
40. This is not the first time that this wish has been
uttered from this platform. This wish formed the
very thinking of those who drafted the Charter and
it continues to prevail in the policies and the activities of the Organization. Need I say that today,
perhaps even more than in recent years, when peace
is being so threatened in various ways and when
new storm clouds are gathering over certain parts
of the world, the vocation of the United Nations
to guarantee peace and s~curity remains more urgent
than ever and is a yardstick of the continuing responsibilities of the Organization?
41. The international context in which the present
session is opening is, unfortunately, not free of
sources of concern which, from year to year, form,
as it were, the backdrop ·of our work. But before
I actually turn to those problems, I should like to
welcome an event which is of the greatest interest
in the international community and a source of legitimate satisfaction to the Organization, and that is
the accession to independence of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau as well as the progress which is being
made in the liberation of other Portuguese colonies.
We are very pleased to see that Portugal, which had
so long been outlawed by the international community
because of the stubborn way in which it pursued a

universally c
become recon
thus regained
had not desp
are following,
which are bei
clude success
to triumph 0
tude of whic
respect.
42. This fin
required so
verance, is a
the African
years in orde
ment to libe
striking achie
its real claim
tion of the va
its creation.
of peace thr
has been able
and a practica
43. But ove
eyes of all wil
moral authori
no lack of rea
national situ
world there a
into being, t
been imprope
riorating, sim
at the right ti
sary courage

44. If in So
have uncertai
ouflages of t
are certain tha
as is also the
The fact that
cned its atten
the question
light-and qu
destiny of the
And the fate
sions. Less t
be regarded a
East has bec
repercussions
nerve-centre
adjacent conti
being paid by
opment of the
of developme
ure the full i
problems iov
which may w
are most stro
45. No one
as the conque
and since the
up in the circ
expect the in
its solidarity
accordance w
the pertinent

•. ._.a__----__

~

-=E'~

-------------'

2233rd meeting-I? September 1974

universally condemned colonial policy, has now
become reconciled with the cause of liberty and has
thus regained its place among us, a place which we
had not despaired of seeing it occupy one day. We
are following, alertly and with sympathy, the efforts
which are being made by its leaders in order to conclude successfully this policy of decolonization and
to triumph over last-minute difficulties, the magnitude of which our own experience has taught us to
respect.
42. This final phase of decolonization, which has
required so much sacrifice and so much perseverance, is a fitting culmination to the struggle which
the African peoples have maintained for so many
years in order to affirm their rights and their attachment to liberty. It also represents one of the most
striking achievements of the Organization and one of
its real claims to glory, since it marks the completion of the vast undertaking which it began just after
its creation. Thus, while serving directly the cause
of peace throughout the world, the Organization
has been able to give a new dimension to its prestige
and a practically unlimited field for its activities.
43. But over and above this success, which in the
eyes of all will once again confirm the unquestionable
moral authority of the Organization, there will be
no lack of reasons for anxiety about the present international situation. Practically everywhere in the
world there are still trouble-spots existing or coming
into being, the aftermath of problems which have
been improperly settled or situations which are deteriorating, simply because they were not confronted
at the right time and were not tackled with the necessary courage and far-s.1htedness.
44. If in South-East Asia imperialist aggressions
have uncertainly crept back beneath the legal camouflages of the Paris agreements on Viet Nam, we
are certain that the defeat of the aggressors is assured,
as is also the victory of the peoples of Indo-China.
The fact that international public opinion has slackened its attention as a result of this has meant that
the question of the MiddUe East has gained the limelight-and quite rightly. And this is because the
destiny ot" the Middle East affects that of all of Europe.
And the fate of Europe has world-wide repercussions. Less than ever can the Mediterranean now
be regarded as a lake of peace; because the Middle
East has become the stake for major rivalries. The
repercussions of events in that region which is a
nerve-centre will undoubtedly be felt even beyond
adjacent continents. Already, the attention which is
being paid by Africa, Asia and Europe to the development of the struggle of Arab peoples is a harbinger
of developments of which it is difficult today to measure the full impact. It is my earnest belief that the
problems involved here require from us solutions
which may well run counter to the traditions which
are most strongly anchored in our institutions.
45. No one could ask us to be optimistic, as long
as the conquered territories have not been restored,
and since the Palestinian homeland has been given
up in the circumstances we are aware of, no one can
~xpect the international community to bargain with
lis solidarity with the Palestinian people, until, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter and
the pertinent resolutions of the United Nations, it has

5

had, like other peoples, the opportunity to exercise
freely its right to self-determination.
46. The events in Cyprus have added further anxiety as far as the situation in the Middle East is concerned. If some hidden hands manipulated this operation only to make it possible for Western Europe
to become reconciled to itself- -as part of some sort
of planetary strategy, I imagine-we can say that
the Cypriot people has once again paid a tragic price
to safeguard its independence, the integrity of its
national territory and its attachment to the policy
of non-alignment. The Greece of the colonels is no
longer the Greece of the colonels. The Iberian peninsula is undergoing changes which we are foHowing
very attentively. Countries which up to now have
been in isolation seem to be leaving their quarantine.
We have seen that the Atlantic Alliance has been
reforged. Since the newly created situation is likely
to favour what has been won as regards European
security and therefore to strengthen the chances
of detente and co-operation between East and West,
we cannot but express our gratification at the results
which have been obtained; but is the time not now
ripe for all foreign troops, including of course British
troops, to begin seriously to envisage their withdrawal from the island of Cyprus in order to make
it possible for the State that founded the non-aligned
movement to meet finally all the criteria which mark
out a country as being non-aligned? However complex
this situation is, it is quite obvious that making things
clearer can only favour both the -intra-European
initiatives and the possibilities for there being a more
fruitful and mor~ promising dialogue between Europe
and the Arab world on the one hand and between
Europe and Africa on the other.
47. Naturally, a crisis such as the Cyprus situation can be seen to be rooted first and foremost in
the imperfections of the international system born
of the Second World War, which during the coldwar period was based on dividing the world into
antagonistic blocs and into zones of influence which
were further consolidated by the setting up of military
bases, but since then profound changes have marked
international life, particularly in the relationships
between the major Powers, which have been greeted
as a harbinger of detente in international relations.
48. The slackening of East-West tensions has made
the chances of dialogue more promising. The saying
"to know is to understand" is something which many
appear to have taken as their motto, and the direct
communication estabHshed between those who
yesterday were the protagonists of the cold war now
reveals all the signs of clear understanding, sometimes even surrounded by the solemnity conferred
on it by a summit meeting, military negotiations
or an important event which frequently gives rise to
accord.
49. Thus we can see understanding gradually taking
shape, and it is in this framework that we should
see the military negotiations on the limitation of
strategic weapons, the mutual reduction of forces
in Europe and the Conference on European Security
and Co-operation.
50. We should not wish to minimize the importance
of such changes which, if they developed normally,
might effectively spell the creation of a new era, one

6

General Assembly-Twenty-nlnth SessIon-Plenary Meetings

where co-operation would replace confrontation,
one in which each member of the international community would bear his measure of responsibility
in international affairs. But what is happening in the
world today and the legitimate concern for it demonstrates the present fragile balance and the dangers
which may grow from upsetting it.
51. The crises that have occurred in different continents, whose development led to the very threshold
of a general conflagration, attest to the flaws f,"d the
dangers of an international order which rest oS exclusively on the will of a few powerful nations and is
the offshoot of the nature of their relations. That
order, however, is the one that has prevailed since
the end of the Second World War and for 25 years
has shown its virtues but also proved its limitations
and its inadequacies.
52. The movement of the non-aligned countries
was born of the gradual awareness of the flaws in
that international system, controlled as it was by
the great Powers. Its prima.ry obje,;:tive was precisely
to guarantee to small countries safety against the
abuses of such a regime.
53. The movement of the non-aligned countries is
constantly being strengthened in the crucible of its
difficult undertaking; it is as close to an ideal on which
it depends as to an international reality which it
cannot ignore. Whenever both a commitment and
a pressing need were faced, the movement has chosen.
It has chosen unequivocally for the sake of those
men whom a fleeting event condemned to suffer
history, regardless of the dangers that might flow
from all the centres of decision which make history
on the basis of the strategic estimates of the moment,
merchant interests or the will for power and domination. The service of truth and the service of freedom,
which make up the greatness of its vocation, cannot
be shirked. It must keep cool and at times confront
the upheavals of a decadent period because, however
seduced. the third world may be by spectacular acquisitions of brilliant technology, it has learned not to
divide itself from the hum~n and to be convinced
that mankind has a right to expect things that are
perhaps more elementary but more in keeping with
needs that are as pressing as they are vital.

54. Through the ideological clashes philosophies
multiply, vary, harden and become very tempting.
But who could contend that civilization has yielded
all its secrets? If ideas advance resolutely, we still
have not acquired the right to fall back into optimism.
Now that science has conquered such heights, prodigious treasures of knowledge are so carefully guarded
that the world which aspires to perfection and unity
has become complex. Such a situation means that
through the misleading paradoxes of international relations, we are always termed barbarians by someone. It
is true that right is not now the sole possession of the
pontiffs, and significant progress has been achieved
in many fields thanks to the proliferation of international meetings. and the enriching exchanges of
view that take place. there. Events have quickly
assumed a universal scope. Policies used to be decided without us, against us, despite us. But we have
conquered the right to make ourselves heard, to be
allowed to participate actively and helpfully. It is
true that we are merely at'the first stages of the inevi-

table movement of ideas. But the ideas are moving,
and they show us a foretaste of the architecture of
tomorrow's society. Having always by all means
encouraged detellte, and, later, understanding, we
were able to understand a synthesis of politics and
economics.
55. As history is forged, so the urgency of conflicts
decrease, and already unbelievable changes have
taken place, changes that have upset the traditional
combinations. Because the contradictions that
flowed from the adventures of the past are being
observed with a unive.rsal awareness, :\}t'lay man's
concerns have become planetary. In a world in constant sight of a future, invective has given way to
dialogue; dead space has come to life, and &uddenly
man has entered the flow of an ever increasing historic
process. Both in what is being done and what should
be done, the movement of non-aligned countries
plays a responsible role since it has become an undeniable fact. Confronted by the shield and buckler
in the international arena, it does not consider itself
the alpha and omega, far from it.
56. It would not be reasonable, at a time when we
are living at the end of one exhausted era, because
freedom has chosen a difficult road across the intersection of ideas, to try to suspend history at an arbitrari!y chosen moment. Such a venture could be
equalled only by the danger inherent in it. Yet there
is reason to believe that the times have changed since
material power alone could lead to the primitive
idea of "the world, that is I". Some changes are
barely perceptible; but reconciliation and tolerance
are now admitted. The notion of chauvinism is now
outmoded and has given way to a larger concept
of the community. It was high time that these changes
took place. Is it not true that for more than 25 years
man suffered the vicissitudes of a turbulent history,
inflamed by the cold war, the balance of terror, brinkmanship, localized wars that divided States and
shattered nations which were faced with distant
and particularly unjustifiable expeditions? For an
entire generation, that was the era of madness, filled
with uncertain promises and disquieting moves.
But the present changes fortunately are more reassuring. Yet, can a world without war ever become
a world without conflict? Alone, moral consent cannot completely redress and change fundamentally
contradictory situations. Though less opaque, the
world is not entirely transparent.
57. The development of the movement of nonaligned countries in the course of the last few years
must be considered as a phenomenon whose importance and ramifications yield in no way to those of
the detente that ha:-. taken place in the relations between the super-R)wers. The new dimensions it has
acquired and the dynamism which is constantly
shown by it make it a weighty participant in world
affairs.
58. The appearance of this new piece on the world
chessboard was not favourably welcomed by all,
particularly by those who were troubled by this intrusion of the small nations into a system that thus far
had been managed by the great. Others expressed
some doubt regarding the solidity and effectiveness
of the movement, because of the number and vulnerability of the countries it brought together.

59. But
does not p
it wish to
the solidar
thus are i
among nati
which the
some had
expression
own indep
dedication
in the wor
In all
part of th
world aff~
niable COl
doing, it a
not only
the superparticularl
relations ~
and defens
today it s
that it ha!
objectives
harmony i

60.

The
countries
not alway
simply be
world of
tional COlT
and we an
that were
some d~1
that migh
countries.
ment of a
had been
very ofteJ
frontiers.

61.

62. Ever
tory had c
aptitude c
determina
ance. Thi
re§triction
of initiati
internatiOl
and in th
rights will
the world,
the search
The
countries
principles
guarding ~

63.

The
and its al
the third
on the ac
tion and
minor me
Organizat
own missi

64.

7

Z233rd meetlng-17 September 1974

Ig,

of
ns
lie

Ild

:ts
ve
lal

at
Ilg

,'s
n·
to
Iy
'ic

Id
es

eer
:If

le
le
f-

li·
le
'e
:e
re

'e

:e

w
,t
:s

:s

I,

,-

d

It

n
d

I.
1-

e

1-

Y
e

I-

S

'-

s

V

i

i

r
i
s

59. But the movement of non-aligned countries
does not plan to rival the great Powers. still less does
it wish to quarrel with them. Its acts are based upon
the solidarity of the countries of the third world and
thus are intended above all to bring into relations
among nations this new factor of justice and humanity
which the prodigious development of the power of
some had obscured. What is non-alignment but the
expression of the attachment of our peoples to their
own independence, but also an expression of their
dedication and total devotion to the cause of peace
in the world?
60. In allowing the smaller nations to assume their
part of the responsibilities in the management of
world affairs, non-alignment appears as an undeniable component of international balance. In so
doing, it also plays the role of promoter of detente,
not only by breaking up a confrontation between
the super-Powers, often a dangerous one, but more
particularly by participating actively in improving
relations among States. In setting aside the static
and defensive attitude it adopted in the first few years,
today it shows a vitality through which it proves
that it has achieved maturity and the clarity of its
objectives which now allows it to introduce a better
harmony into the world.
61. The voice which the movement of non-aligned
countries raises may at times still be too feeble, and
not always persuasive. But it cannot purely and
simply be disregarded when we propose to free the
world of the dangers that threaten it. The international community is becoming gradually aware of us
and we are happy to note that among the suggestions
that were put forward to solve the Cypriot question,
some depended upon the effective contribution
that might be made by the group of non-aligned
countries. It is no longer that witness whose assessment of a detente was sometimes sought, one that
had been decided upon without consulting it and
very often a detente which bordered on its own
frontiers.
62. Everything is happening as though recent history had once and for all endorsed the vocation and
aptitude of the third world for partnership in the
determination of the elements of international balance. This is an undeniable qualitative change. The
re§trictions allowing for a sort, of monopolization
of initiatives bearing on the security of the entire
international community will gradually be removed,
and in the task of building peace, no seigneurial
rights will be allowed to one or another' region of
the world, or one or another political family, so that
the search for peace now becomes the search of all.
63. The United Nations offers the non-aligned
countries the right arena wherein to affirm their
principles and contribute best to the tasks of safeguarding and strengthenil'kg security in the world.
64. The emergence of the non..aligned movement
and its affirmation as the authentic spokesman for
the third world have had considerable influence
on the activity of the United Nations, on its orientation and its effectiveness. And it is not one of its
minor merits that it has contributed to giving the
Organization new life and renewed confidence in its
own mission.

65. To understand and realize this, suffice it to
glance at the provisional agenda [A/9700) for this
session which starts today. While we find on that
agenda many items that have been debated for many
years and for which solutions must still be sought
progressively and prudently in order to preserve
the cohesion and understanding of all countries,
new problems also appear on that list, problems
of a different nature and of differing urgencies, but
all of which require our attention and once again test
the good will of the international community, the
skill of the representatives and the efficiency of the
Organization's machinery. I do not, I think, need
to assert here that we are ready to face this task with
the firm determination that the twenty-ninth session
will make a positive contribution to the progress of
our world and that it will meet the hopes that our
peoples have always placed in the United Nations.
As President of this Assembly, I shall bend every
effort to that end, and particularly since I have the
privilege of being honoured by a unanimous election. But these efforts would be futile were I unable
to count on your trust and co-operation, your friendly
understanding and your own dedication to the cause
of mankind.
66. I know that it is not customary for a President
to address the General Assembly with the directness and frankness to which I have resorted today.
From the bottom of my heart I thank you for having
allowed me this exceptional privilege, which again
I consider to be proof of your friendship and admiration for the Algerian people. Naturally, it is to it,
through the person of President Boumediene, that
I will transmit your homage and the signal honour
which today you have conferred upon me. And since
I have allowed myself some personal comments on
the United Nations and the third world, it would
not be wrong to borrow my concluding words from
t~e Algerian head of State himself, who today assumes the responsibility of presiding over the movement of non-aligned countries:
"Because of the innumerable threats which
lurk around it, the world in which we live leaves
little room for optimism. But tbat is the major
reason why we must exorcise from our spirits
the doubt that weakens our will and banish from
our hearts the disquiet which leads to discouragement. The great problems which we must face
and in the search for whose solutions we may find
ourselves confronting even harsher tests than
those of the past will force us to have greater faith
in our future, must uphold us in our enthusiasm
and will nurture our belief in the solidity and the
greatness of the destiny both of each of our coun-.
tries and ofthe international community as a whole."
AGENDA ITEM 22
Admission of new Members to the United Nations

67. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
In accordance with the procedure followed in the
past, I should now like to invite the General Assembly
to consider, under item 22 of the provisional agenda
entitled •• Admission of new Members to the United
Nations" the positive recommendations by the

8

General Assembly-Twenty-nlnth Session- Plenary Meetings

76. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I think members will easily understand my natural
embarrassment at having inflicted such a long statement upon the Assembly at the beginning of the
twenty-ninth session, but I thought it might be helpfui if I threw off the cloak of anonymity, as it were,
and revealed myself as I am and as I think I should
be seen, through the personal reflections I made
regarding the United Nations, the non-aligned movement, the third world and the world as I see it in the
light of the international situation.
77. On this occasion ins my privilege to say, before
anyone else, how overjoyed I am-an d I speak on
behalf of members of the General Assembly because
I enjoy their trust- to see the People's Republic
of Bangladesh, Grenada and the Republic of GuineaBissau take their place among us in accordance with
recommendations of the Security Council, as fully
fledged Members of the United Nations.
78. All those who were absent when the Charter
of the United Nations was drawn up and the Organization was established and who arrived later in this
forum in order that both their national sovereignty
and their independence would be recognized in the
eyes of the world have understood that this moment
is precisely a very special kind of turning-point both
in the life of nations and in the life of the Organiza3203 (XXIX» .
tion to which we all belong.
71. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
79. Had I had sufficient time I would have had
I declare the People's Republic of Bangladesh ada great many things to say about the People's Repubmitted to membership in the United Nations.
lic of Bangladesh, with which my country is spiritually and culturally linked; I would have had a great
The delegation of the People's Republic of BangAsl
Genera
the
in
deal to say about Grenada also because distance
ladesh was escorted to its place
has never separated Algeria from the Caribbean
sembly Hall.
region and Algeria has always been very attentive
72. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
to the evolution of problems in that region. NatuWe turn now to draft resolution A/L.729 and ~ Add. 1
rally, as an official and a ·representative of Africa,
concerning the admission of Grenada to membership
I would have had a great deal to say about the Repubin the United Nations. May I take it that the General
lic of Guinea-Bissau. I shall content myself with
Assembly accepts the re-commendation of the Security
wishing them, on behalf of all of you, a very hearty
Council and adopts the draft resolution unanimously?
welcome and saying that at the very outset they
tion
(resolu
d
adopte
have our sympathy, our confidence and our friendwas
ion
The draft resolut
ship and that, faithful as we must always be to serv~ng
3204 (XXIX ».
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
):
French
from
retation
(interp
73. The PRESIDENT
and the Organization, they will find in each and
I declare Grenada admitted to membership in the
every one of us-bo th collectively and individ uallyUnited Nations.
someone to stan~ by their side.
its
80. I am also quite certain that their special contriThe delegation of Grenada was escorted to
Hall.
bution will mark an important turning-point in the
ly
place in the General Assemb
life of the Organization and will thus help speed up
74. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
the admission of other countries which are also
We turn now to the draft resolution A/L.730 and
waiting their turn to join us.
Add.1 on the admission of the Republic of Guinea81. Mr. KINEN E (Uganda): Mr. President, may
Bissau to membership in the United Nations. May
I first of all take this opportunity to congratulate
I take it that the General Assembly accepts the recomyou upon your unanimous election to the high office
the
adopts
mendation of the Security Council and
of President of the General Assembly during its
draft resolution unanimously?
twenty-ninth session. This is a great honour which
tion
(resolu
d
adopte
the United Nations accorded the Government and
The draft resolution was
the people of Algeria in particular, and all Africa
3205 (XXIX» .
in general. It is a clear recognition of and respect
75. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
for your personal, intellectual and diplomatic qualI declare the Republic of Guinea-Bissau admitted
ities. Speaking for the African group of States, I am
to membership in the United Nations.
particularly honoured and delighted to see that you
will be directing important deliberations, especially
The delegation of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
the burning economic issues which are going to
was escorted to its place in the General Assembly
occupy the minds of representatives for the next
Hall.

Security Council in documents A/9642 , A/9652 and
A/9712 for the admission to membership in the United
Nations of the People's Republic of Bangladesh,
Grenada and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau.
68. This special procedure has been applied previously in order to give States recommended by
the Security Council for membership in the Organization the opportunity, if the General Assembly
acts favourably on their requests, to participate
from the outset in the work of the session. If there
is no objection, we shall proceed in this manner.
It was.so decided.
69. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I would remind ,he Assembly that the Security Council has recommended the admission of the People's
Republic of Bangladesh [A/9642] , Grenada [A/9652]
and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau [A/97J2] to membership in the United Nations.
70. We shall consider first draft resolution A/L.728
and Add.l on the admission of the People's Republic
of Bangladesh to membership in the United Nations.
May I take it that the General Assembly accepts the
recommendation of the Security Council and unanimously adopts the draft resolution?
The draft reso.'ution was adopted (resolution

three
closely
the pr
to the
cussed
will be
period
82. T
eral A
namel
nada a
United
note t
indepe
in the
casion
to the
the la
founde
da Gu
gave
of all
and it
the Ca
83.
ofGui
calpro
in the
sons a
a dec
ment
attain
of a I
agains
Portug
Cape
centur
the so
Howe
ofGui
they h
84.
deter
Moza
Saha
free.
Portu
85.
an ag
the le
bique
which
25 Jul
ment
by th
promi
year i
have
mino
or tw
grou
demo
lost.
fulof
ours
of the

Z233rd meetlng-17 Septolmber 1974

ch):

.ural
tatethe
lelp/ere,
ould
nade
ove1 the
~fore

k on
:ause
ublic
ineawith
fully
larter
rgan1 this
:ignty
n the
,ment
both
miza~

had
epubspiri. great
;tance
bbean
entive
Natu-

~frica,

tepubf with
hearty
t they
friend,erving
lations
hand
lally-

contriin the
eed up
'e also

t, may
:atulate
1 office
ing its
, which
:ot and
Africa
respect
.c quals, I am
~at you
pecially
oing to
~e next

three months. As a group we look forward to working
closely with you, and we are quite confident that
the problems which are of particular importance
to the developing countries and which were discussed earlier this year during the sixth special session
will be re-emphasized by the Assembly during the
period when you are President.
82. Today is a great moment for Africa. The General Assembly has just admitted three new States,
namely, the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea-Bissau, to full membership in the
United Nations. In we:.\:oming them we particularly
note that Guinea-Bissau is the forerunner of the
independence struggle throughout Africa. In joining
in the rejoicing and celebrations on this solemn occasion, we the Africans should like to pay a tribute
to the memory of a great and dedicated son of Africa,
the late Amilcar Cabral, Secretary-General and
founder of the Partido Africano da Independencia
da Guine e Cabo Verde [PA/GC]. He fought and
gave his life for the sacred principle of the dignity
of all mankind. Today Guinea-Bissau is a free nation,
and it is our hope that it will not be too long before
the Cape Verde Island!': join this sovereign State.

83. We are fully aware of the fact that the birth
of Guinea-Bissau is not the result of a peaceful political process but rather the fruit of sweat and bloodshed
in the bitter struggle which its valiant and dedicated
sons and daughters had been waging for more than
a decade. To President Luis Cabral, his Government and the entire people of Guinea-Bissau, the
attainment of independence marks the beginning
of a long struggle, a struggle for survival, a war
against disease, illiteracy and hunger, for, although
Portugal had been ruling Guinea-Bissau and the
Cape Verde Islands since the middle of the fifteenth
century, nothing was done in the way of alleviating
the social and economic conditions of the masses.
However, we are confident of the ability of the people
of Guinea-Bissau to consolidate their struggle, which
they have rightfully won.
84. Yet this is not the end of the struggle for selfdetermination in the continent of Africa. Angola,
Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia, the Spanish
Sahara, Sao Tome, French Somaliland are not yet
free. We welcome the new approach of the new
Portuguese authorities with guard,ed optimism.
85. We are gratified at the signing in Zambia of
an agreement between the Lisbon Government and
the leaders of the Frente de Liberta~ao de Mo~am­
bique [FREL/MO] on 7 September. This agreement,
which specifies independence for Mozambique by
25 July 1975 and guarantees a transitional Government during the interim period, is a commitment
by the Portuguese Government to live up to the
promise it made when it came to power earlier this
year in April. However, we are all aware that there
have been recent demonstrations by a few misguided
minority whites and an abortive take-over of one
or two buildings by the so-called Dragons of Death
group-and that is really what they are, as has been
demonstrated by the number of lives that have been
lost. We hope that Portugal will not allow a handful of white extremists to embarrass it in its endeavours to transfer the political power into the hands
of the majority of Mozambicans. It is now imperative

9

that Portugal take precautionary measures to prevent any repetition of this irresponsible behaviour
from occurring in Angola. We are confident that
those two African I::ountries will get their independence irrespective of any artificial obstruction engineered either internally or externally.
86. The independence of Guinea-Bissau should
serve as a clear warning to the racist, white-minority regimes in southern Africa, which are under the
illusion that they will continue to oppress the majorities of the indigenous ~eoples in those areas and
deny them their' inalienable rights through the use
of the repugnant policies of apartheid, policies which
have already been denounced by world public opinion
as an affront to human dignity and a crime against
humanity.
87. The whole of Africa will be free. To achieve
that goal, the African peoples are committed to
continue the struggle to the end. The members of
the Organization of African Unity [OAU], through
its Liberation Committee, and other freedom-loving
countries and organizations will do everything possible to assist all recognized liberation movements
in Africa morally and materially until every inch of
African soil is liberated from foreign subjugation.
No African country will regard itself as free so long
as some parts of our continent still languish under
the yoke of colonialism and racial discrimination.
88. As I mentioned earlier, the admission of the
two other, friendly States of Banglaqesh and Grenada gives us great happiness. These two States
have a common purpose with that of Africa: to develop themselves' to a level of standards comparable
to those that are regarded as satisfactory for the
well-being of their entire populations; We look forward to a fruitful co-operation with them here at the
United Nations and on a bilateral basis.
89. Finally, we should like to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-General, Mr, Kurt Waldheim, for the
personal interest he has shown in the process of
decolonization, and to all organizations and agencies
which are in various ways involved in the fight against
imperialism, colonialism and racial discrimination
throughout the world in general and in Africa in
particular.
90. Mr. EHSASSI (Iran): On behalf of the Special
Committee on the Situation with Regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
I wish, in my capacity as its Acting Chairman, to
express my deep gratitude and appreciation for the
opportunity to address this august body in connexion
with the admission of Bangladesh, Grenada and'
Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United Nations.
91. Mr. President, since the head of the delegation of Iran will have an opportunity subsequently
to welcome you to the presidency of the twentyninth session of the General Assembly on behalf
of the Iranian delegation, I should like at this stage
to confine myself to expressing the Special Committee's satisfaction, and my own, at seeing you
elected to that important post. Your country's outstanding and consistent contributions to the cause
of decolonization are too well known to require
elaboration., Suffice it to state that the successful

16

General Assembly-Twenty.nlnth Session-Plenary Meetings

series of meetings held by the Special Committee
in Algiers in 1966 at the invitation of your Govern~
ment are still fresh in the memory of many of its
members. The Committee's achievements at those
meetings, in close collaboration with your Govern~
ment and under your personal and dynamic leader~
~hip, were indeed a corner-stone in the annals of
the Special Committee's endeavours to assist the
peoples of colonial territories in the ultimate attainment of their liberation and full independence.
92. The admission today of the Republic of GuineaBissau to membership in the Organization brings
particular joy and pleasure to those of us in the
Special Committee who have, since the inception
of the Committee's work, followed closely the courageous struggle of the people of Guinea-Bissau under
the heroic leadership of the PAIGC. Having proclaimed in September last their full national independence, the people of the newly born Rept' 'nc
demonstrated to the world in no unclear terfi1l~ the
unshakable determination of oppressed peoples
to regain their human· dignity and their fundamental
rights, whatever sacrifice might be required, in order
to live their lives free from colonial and alien domination.
93. The victory and progress achieved by the people of Guinea-Bissau serve as a source of great inspiration and encouragement to all those engaged in
the liberation struggle elsewhere, partkularly in the
southern part of Africa. Let us all hope that we shall
soon be welcoming among us not only independent Mozambique and Angola, but also free Zimbabwe and Namibia. Grenada has also engaged the
continued attention of the Special Committee since
the inception of its work.

94. We, the members of the Special Committee,
wish to express our confident hope that the process
of peaceful evolution towards self-determination
and independence taking place in the smaller colonial territories in the region will be further expedited
by intensified efforts on the part of the members
of the world community, particularly of those responsible for their administration. Let us take this
opportunity to redouble our efforts to comply fully
with the provisions of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and to extend all moral and material
assistance to the peoples concerned, for the achievement of the goals set forth both in the Charter and
in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peopies [resolution /5/4
(XV)].

I should like also to take this opportunity to
welcome, as representative of Iran, the admission
of Guinea-Bissau and Grenada, as well as of the
People's Rt:public of Bangladesh, with which my
country enjoys excellent relations, to membership
in the United Nations. We are sure that Bangladesh,
as a new State, will play an important role in international affairs with the maturity of the ancient nation
it is. We hope that, with membership in the world
Organization finally achieved by the People's Republic of Bangladesh, the memories of conflict in the
subcontinent will soon disappear. It is our sincere
hope that Bangladesh will grow in strength, in friendship with its neighbours and indeed with the world
community as a whole..
95.

On behalf of the Special Committee, I should
like to express our best wishes for peace, harmony
and prosperity to the peoples and the Governments
of the newly admitted Members. I am confident that
the Special Committee will receive their full cooperation in the important task of decolonization
entrusted to it by the General Assembly.
97. Mr. HUSSEIN (Somalia): First of all, I would
like, on behalf of the current Chairman of the OAU,
the President of the Supreme Revolutionary Council
of the Somali Democratic Republic, Jaalle Mohamed
Siad Barre, to join those who have spoken before
me in congratulating' ~y'ou, Mr. President, on your
unanimous election as President of the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly.
98. On this occasion I should like also to express
our appreciation and admiration of your predecessor, Mr. Benites, the representative of Ecuador,
for the excellent manner in which he conducted the
work of both the twnety-eighth session and the sixth
special session. His skill, experience and wisdom
were indeed a factor contributing to the accomplishments of those two sessions.
99. In my capacity as representative of the Chairman of the OAU, it is a cause of special pride for
me to see a son of the continent of Africa presiding
over the current, important session of the General
Assembly. Taking into account your vast experience
in international politics and diplomacy and also your
already proven ability and wisdom, I am confident
that this session, under your guidance and leadership, will be a success.
100. Allow me, on behalf of the current Chairman
of the OAU, to seize this opportunity of welcoming
to membership in the United Nations the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau, the People's Republic of Bangladesh and Grenada. We have no doubt that the
membership of those nations will bring a further
useful contribution to the work of the Organization.
The admission of those countries is a further st\ep
towards the implementation of the cherished principle of universality enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. We are looking forward to the day
when all peoples under the yoke of colonialism and
apartheid will take their rightful places in the community of nation;;;.
96.

10 I. Finally, Mr. President, I would like to pledge
our unqualified' co-operation and understanding,
as well as our assistance in lightening the heavy
responsibilities that we have jUs~ placed upon you.
102. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation from
French): Since I am speaking as representative of
Algeria, it would ill behoove me to follow the example
of previous speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President, on your election or in listing those qualities
which have earned you the new and important responsibilities that have been vested in you. However,
I take advantage of this privilege of speaking among
the first here to echo you in saying how honored
Algeria feels at the General Assembly's decision to
elect you its President, and in extending our sincere
gratitude to all Members.
103. Our twenty-ninth session is beginning with the
admission to membership in the United Nations
of Bangladesh, Grenada and the Republic of Guinea-

1

of
ni
hi
ac
th
h
th

11

th

e, I should
e, harmony
overnments
nfident that
~ir full co:olonization

22JJrd meeting-17 september 1974

19 with the

Bissau; and our work could not start under better
auspices. On behalf of the non-aligned countries,
I wish to tender our fraternal congratulations to
those three countries and express to them the hopes
we have for the prosperity and welfare oftheir peoples.
104. Even before taking its place in the Organization, Bangladesh had already been recognized as
one of us by the non-aligned countries and, as such,
hold participated as a full-fledged member in the
Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Algiers
from 5 to 9 September 1973. Its admission today to
the United Nations gives us even greater reason
for satisfaction, since we should like to see in that
act. the end of an era that was marked by the tragic
sufferings and painful confrontations of the peoples
of the region. We know well that the wounds left
by those events cannot suddenly be healed, and
that there must be great courage and goodwill on
the part of all concerned in order that, with the passage
of time, the scars may disappear.
105. The friendship that we feel equally for all the
countries of the Asian subcontinent leads us to a
cruel realization of their sufferings; it also prompts
us to pray, from the bottom of our hearts, for a rapid
return to an atmosphere of confidence and relations
of fraternity among them for the welfare of all.
106. In becoming a Member of the Organization,
Bangladesh is completing its entry on the international scene, joining us now in the exercise of our
responsibilities for the present and future of the
world community. That is a demonstration that for
Bangladesh, the page has been turned and that it
must now turn its sights and its efforts to the future.
It can be sure that it can count on having us at its
side and on always enjoying our active understanding
and effective solidarity.
107. The non-aligned countries are also happy
and proud to greet with great satisfaction the admission to membership in the Organization of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. The admission of that State
is the culmination of the lengthy struggle waged by
the people of Guinea-Bissau for liberation; it consecrates the merits of the PAIGC and its leaders,
who, through their wisdom, courage, dedication
and example, succeeded in leading that struggle
to the attainment of its ultimate g~al.
108. The non-aligned movement, of which the
PAlGC, as a liberation movement, formed part,
must regard this victory as one of its own. In it we
see additional encouraging reasons for continuing
unflaggingly in our work te achieve the liberation
of all peoples and the esta'utishment of an international society of equal and sovereign peoples united
in a freely accepted solidarity.
109. The Organization itself can rightfully be proud
of this latest progress on the road towards decolonization, which is one of the greatest victories in its
history. It is thanks to its determined and persevering
actions that, through worthy efforts and despite
the many difficulties of which we are all aware, it
has managed to enable colonized peoples to exercise
their right to self-determination.

d Nations
of Guinea-

110. The independence of Guinea-Bissau marks
the begirming of the evolution towards freedom and

111, I would
f the OAU,
uy Council
~ Mohamed
lken before
It, on your
.venty-ninth

to express
our predeIf Ecuador,
Iducted the
Id the sixth
nd wisdom
Iccomplish-

the ChairI1 pride for
a presiding
he General
experience
d also your
1 confident
md leader-

t Chairman

welcoming
e Republic
: of Bang)t that the
; a further
'ganization.
Ilrther st\ep
ished prinIrter of the
to the day
lialism and
1 the com-

: to pledge
erstanding,
the heavy
Ion you.

'tion from

mtative of
le example
,Mr. Piese qualities
lOt responHowever,
ing among
" honored
lecision to
mr sincere

11

self-determination of the territories under Portuguese
domination. We now expect that Portugal will continue to wind up the policies of decolonization which
it has now undertaken and that it will not let itself
be distracted by the magnitude of the efforts to be
made, by attempts at obstruction by those who
stubbornly wish to uphold a regime that is doomed
to disappear.
Ill. The moment when the flag of the independent Republic of Guinea-Bissau is raised among
those of the members of the international community
will be an historic moment for the people of GuineaBissau, as it will be for all those who have devoted
themselves to the cause of freedom. At this time
we wouid wish to pay a heartfelt tribute to the one
who dedicated his entRre life to bring that sacred
moment to pass, a tribute to the memory of Amilcar
Cabral, who was our comrade-in-arms and whOlle
name will be closely linked to that of his people and
to that of Africa. May his example continue to inspire the leaders of Guinea-Bissau and to guide them
in the task of creation which awaits them.
112. Mr. SIDDIQ (Afghanistan): Mr. President,
on behalf of the States members of the Asian group
of States in its capacity as Chairman of that group
for this month, the Afghan delegation would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate you, on
your unanimous election a::. President of the twentyninth session of the General Assembly. Your election is a well-deserved honour for your country,
the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria, and
for Africa, of which your country is a part.
113. I also wish to avail myself of this opportunity
to welcome the new Members, namely, the People's
Republic of Bangladesh, the Republic of GuineaSissau, and Grenada on their admission to the United
Nations. The admission of these three new States
is a continuation of the steps being taken by this
world body towards a fuller representation of the
peoples of the world. This auspicious moment in the
history of the United Nations, in my view, is not
due to a mere historical accident but is rather the
outcome of a long and difficult struggle by the people
of these new Member States against colonialism,
foreign occupation and alien domination.
114. As members of the Asian group of States,
we take special pleasure in seeing a State from our
region, the People's Republic of Bangladesh, taking
its rightful place among the sovereign States in this
world Organization. The heroism and. self-sacrifice
of the people of Bangladesh in the legitimate struggle
which they waged for their freedom has served as.
a clear indication of the fact that the struggle of people
everywhere for independence will ultimately triumph
and the world will respect the will of the people.

115. The Asian States are equally pleased to welcome the membership of the Republic of GuineaBissau. The long struggle of the people of GuineaBissau under the leadership of its national leaders
has culminated in the success which we witness
on this auspicious occasion.
116. The accession to independence of Grenada
and its joining the United Nations reflect the fruit
of the efforts of its people and are positive steps in

12

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session-Plenary Meetings

the process of decolonization, the certain reality
of our era.
117. The Asian States believe that the admission
of these three new States to membership will further
strengthen the United Nations as it continues its
endeavours towards the goals of world peace, security and human welfare. We look forward to cooperating with them in the Organization.
118. Mr. President, having had the pleasure of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Asian
group of States, I wish to conclude by stating that
the Chairman of the delegation of the Republic of
Afghanistan, in the course cr the general debate,
will convey to you the congratulations and felicitations of the Government and the people of Afghanistan on your assumption of office as President of
the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
Likewise, he will extend the congratulations and
welcome of Afghanistan to the new States on the
occasion of their admission to the United Nations.
119. Mr. GROZEV (Bulgaria) (interpretation from
Russian): Mr. President, despite the fact that the
leaders of our delegations will be greeting you from
this rostrum, I should like to avail myself of the opportunity which has been given me most sincerely
and warmly to congratulate you on your election
to this extremely responsible post and to express
our conviction that, under the skilful, competent
and wise guidance of such an eminent representative
of the Algerian people, who are our very close friends,
the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly
will be conducted successfully and will yield the
results expected of it by world public opinion.
120. A clear testimony of this is the very beginning
of the session itself, at which the admission to our
membership of the People's Republic of Bangladesh,
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, and Grenada· has
marked a new step forward towards the implementation of the principle' of universality of the Organization.
121. I have the honour and great pleasure on behalf
of the group of socialist countries of Eastern Europe
to welcome heartily and to congratulate delegations
and peoples of these countries on this occasion and
to wish them full success and prosperity in constructing their new independent States, which,
without any doubt whatsoever, will make their own
valuable contribution to achieving the aims of the
Organization.
]22. We welcome the admission of these three
new Members to the Organization as a victory for
the sacred right of peoples to self-determination
and independence and as a victory of the peoples
of Bangladesh, Guinea-Bissau and Grenada in their
struggle for national freedom and independence,
for democracy and social progress. These three
new Members, geographically speaking, belong to
three regions in which in recent years a number of
independent States have been created, States which
have emerged victorious after the lengthy struggle
with the colonizers and foreign enslavers.
123. The admission of these Members to the United
Nations is occurring in a 'particularly important period
in the development of the world political situation.
The process of detente in international relations.

which is becoming further affirmed as an irreversible
process, has created and continues to create genuine
conditions for tangible assistance to be .given to
peoples in their struggle for national independence
and the implementation of democratic and progressive social reforms.
124. Self-sacrificing indeed has been the struggle
which has been waged by the people of Bangladesh
to win their liberty and to start to shape their life
along the Hnes of social progress. This heroic people
has made enormous sacrifices and fought in bitter
battles in order to win' their right to create their independent State. Over three years have passed now
since the independence of the People' s Republic of
Bangladesh was proclaimed, a period which has
been filled with events and which has shown the
viability of the new young State. The efforts of the
people of Bangladesh to strengthen their independence and to rebuild a new life on the basis of peaceful co-existence, have confirmed the international
authority of the country. It has now been recognized
by more than 100 States and is a member of numerous
international organizations, both specialized agencies
and others.
125. We should remind members of the importance of the tripartite agreement which was signed
in Delhi on 9 April 1974 and which is a genuine contribution to the normalization of the situation in the
subcontinent. The steps which have been taken by
the leaders of India, Bangladesh and Pakistan in
order to overcome the radical causes underlying
disputes and conflicts and in order to establish goodneighbourly relations undoubtedly are of great significance. The entire world has now witnessed the re..olution, the resolve and the perseverance of the people
and Government of Bangladesh to follow a policy
of peaceful coexistence and to support actively the
universal struggle for the strengthening of peace.
126. Our socialist States have given full support
to the national liberation movements of the people
of Bangladesh. After the proclamation of the independence of the country, we established comprehensive and mutually beneficial relations and cooperation on tl'i~ basis of the principles of peaceful
co-existence. Those relations are yielding the expet:ted
excellent results redounding to the benefit of the
people of Bangladesh and to the peoples of our countries mutually. We have never had, nor could we ever
have, any doubt that the People's Republic of Bangladesh is fully entitled to occupy its legiaimate place
among us and we are firmly convinced that it will
play an important part in the United Nations in order
to consolidate peace and security or. the Indo-Pakistani
subcontinent and throughout the world.
127. Our countries and peoples have admired and
continue to admire the heroic and self-sacrificing
struggle waged for 11 years against colonial domina~ion by the brave people of Guinea-Bissau under
the leadership of its party, the PAIGC; for its struggle which culminated in full victory was an integral
part of the universal national liberation struggle of
the peoples of Africa against the colonial yoke and
cruel exploitation by colonialists and neo-colonialists
and for the development of their countries along
new progressive lines.

2233rd meeting-I? September 1974

128. In this great struggle for freedom and independence the people of Guinea-Bissau made tremendous sacrifices. So that its independence and freedom would triumph the faithful son of the pec,le of
Guinea-Bissau, Amilcar Cabral, gave his life-Amilcar
Cabral, a person whom we recall and whom we
cherish in our memories as being a great revolutionary and a tireless warrior for the freedom of his
and other African people.
129. From the very outset, as the Assembly knows,
our countries gave their unreserved support to the
armed struggle being waged by the people of GuineaBissau and their efforts on the diplomatic front in
order to win their independence and national recognition. After the proclamation of the independence
and the forming of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
the countries of the socialist commonwealth immediately recognized the new sovereign State and estabHshed diplomatic relations with it and insisted on
its being admitted to the United Nations. The new
young and vital State of Guinea-Bissau at the very
beginning received international recognition from
the overwhelming majority of States Members of the
United Nations. Its admission to the United Nations
last year was thwarted by the then Fascist and colonialist regime existing in Portugal with the support
of some of its p.llies in NATO.

an irreversible
~reate genuine
be given to
independence
: and progres-

1 the

struggle
of Bangladesh
hape their life
heroic people
lUght in bitter
late their indee passed now
's Republic of
:>d which has
las shown the
efforts of the
their indepenbasis of peacee international
een recognized
er of numerous
alized agencies

of the imporch was signed
a genuine coniituation in the
been taken by
Id Pakistan in
ses underlying
establish good·
of great signifessed the re30:e of the people
oUow a policy
ITt actively the
~ of peace.

130. However, the constructive changes which
have occurred in Portugal and the coming to power
of a new Government which has recognized the
right to independence "f peoples in colonial territories, first and foremost among them the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau, have paved the way for the swift
and final abolition of the colonial regime in the southern part of Mrica. A genuine expression of this was
the recently signed agreement on the granting of
independence to Mozambique. The statement made
by the new Government of Portugal to the effect
that it is prepared to co-operate with the United
Nations in order to implement all those provisions
enshrined in the historic Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
gives us every reason to believe that the granting
of independence to Angola will not be far behind.
Thereafter; without any doubt whatsoever, the
day of the abolition of the racist regimes in South
Africa and Rhodesia will come. Freedom and independence will be given to the people of Namibia
and all other peoples of the world who are still under
the colonial yoke and foreign dependence, a situation which is such a disgrace to the twentieth century.
131. The delegations of our countries warmly welcome also the admission of Grenada and wish its
delegation a successful and fruitful participation
in the activities of the United Nations. The proclamation of the independence of Grenada once again
bears out the irreversible nature of the ongoing process of the elimination of colonialism and the granting
to the remaining colonial peoples of the complete
opportunity to enjoy their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
the decisions of the Organization and as is demanded
by all the peoples of the world.

:n full support
of the people
to of the indelished compreltions and coles of peaceful
og the expe~ted
benefit of the
es of our counr could we ever
public of Banglegitimate place
~ed that it will
~ations in order
l Indo-Pakistani

;I.

re admired and
self-sacrificing
olonial dominaa-Bissau under
C; for its strugwas an integral
tion struggle of
[onial yoke and
neo-colonialists
countries along

i:.·
!' ' "~

i.:_'

(_>, t
)-

132. I should like to conclude my welcoming words
by quoting the Chairman of the Council_ of Stat~
of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, Todor Zhivkov,

13

who, in expressing the point of view not only of the
People's Republic of Bulgaria but also of the entire
socialist commonwealth at the solemn session held
in Sofia, celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of the
victory of the socialist revolution in our country,
on 8 September 1914, stated:
.. ~ should like to assure the peoples of Asia,
Africa and Latin Aroeric2 that in their struggle
against the colonial and neo-colonial policie~ of
imperialism, and also in the implementation of
democratic and progressive social reforms, they
can always count on our understanding, our solidarity and our support."
133. Mr. MARTINEZ ORDONEZ (Honduras)
(interpretation from Spanish): On this solemn occasion I am speaking as Chairman of the Latin American
group of States.
134. Mr. President, the General Assembly has
begun its work at its twenty-ninth session by entrusting
you with the responsibility of presiding over it. This
event is of fundamental importaace because it takes
place at a time when all mankind seeks new guidance to attain a better standard of living for man and
more stable structures for the various social and
political groupings in the world.
135. The Latin American group through me would
like to state to our President, Mr. Al1delaziz Bouteflika, that we feel confident that under his skilful
guidance we shall be able to overcome all the obstades on the path we must necessarily travel in order
to meet the universal aspirations io peace, harmony
and progress.

136. For the Latin American group, which has
always held the aspiration of universal representation in the United Nations, it is a source of special
satisfaction to know that henceforth we shall have
the co-operation of three new States which, in different circumstances and in different ways, today finally
have seen satisfied their just aspirations to occupy a
place in the General Assembly. We are very pleased
indeed to welcome cordially the legitimate representatives of Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea-Bissau.
Each of these nations, following a long path of effort
and sacrifice, has bravely won this place of honour.
137. The admission of Bangladesh to the Organization is a definitive step on the path which ensures
a better understanding and a stable peace in the
subcontinent of which it is a part. That peace and
that understanding are essential flIements.for success
in the efforts towards progress and human dignity
to which the peoples and Governments of that region
are committed. Latin America, which for reasons
arising from its own social problems and structures
knows how rocky the path to progress is' and knows
what devotion is required at every step, can indeed
be satisfied at this achievement, which it deems
essential.

138. The Latin American group, through me,
would especially like to express its satisfaction to
the delegation of Grenada on the occasion of its admission to the United Nations. We should like to state
that we feel sure that it will make 11 valuable contribution throughout its participation in the work of
the Organization.

14

General Assembly-Twenty.nlnth Session-Plenary Meetings

-

-

139. The unanimous acceptance by the General
Assembly of Guinea-Bissau as a Member is a landmark in the history of decolonizatioll. It is a triumph
of a people and its ideals. achieve- 1t the I.)st of so
much blood. It is a genuine achievement for all the
African peoples which have shared efforts. sacrifices and aims with it. It is a source of a feeling of
victory for all of us. men and nations. that have
shared its purpose of freedom. To complete the pietu!'~. there is reason tbr legitimate pride on the part
of the Government of Portugal. which. interpreting
th~ historic moment that mankind is living through.
has definitively taken the path of honourable amends.
140. The opportunity is propitious to express the
wish that in the very near future we shall welcome
the legitimate representatives of Mozambique and
Angola. thus completing. to the honour of Portugal
and those nations, the process of decolonization.
141. Mr. President, in congratulating you on the
distinction conferred upon you and the Government
of Algeria on the responsibility entrusted to it. I pledge
to you the co-operation of Latin America in the common enterprise to implement fully the high human
aims that inspire the ideological foundat!ons of the
United Nations.
142. Mr. CARAYANNIS (Greece): Speaking in
my capadty of Chairman of the group of Western
European and other States, I feel great joy and deep
emotion in conveying on behalf of this geographical
group sincere congratulations to the new Members
on their admission to membership in the United
N3tions and I wish to assure them of our complete
support in the pursuance of the common objectives
of the Organization. Three countries of three different continents will be among us from now on: the
People's Republic of Bangladesh, the aepublic of
Guinea-Bissau and Grenada. Their membership
is an iml-ortant example of the fact that whatever
the differences, ideological or otherwise, there is
al -ays a margin for finding peaceful solutions.
143. By the decisions taken this aft~rnoon the
United Nations has achieved an important step forward towards the universality of the Organization
and recognition of the right of all peoples to be represented in this supreme international forum. The
process towards the universality of the Organization is
an irreversible evolution of history. We all realize this
evolution and we are most glad to combine in our
minds today's historic dedsions with the irrefutable
fact that with new people one is entitled to expect
a freshness of ideas and trends..
[The speaker continued in French.~
144. Mr. President, permit me to offer you on this
occasion my personal congratulations on your unanimous election as President of the General Assembly.
If I say "personai congratulatioOf.;" it i.:: beca....e
I am certain that the foreign minister;;; of the European
countries who will speak in a few days ~n the general debate wm be particularly pleased to offer you the
official congratulations of their respective countries.

1-

145. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon) (interpretation
from Arabic): Mr. President, on behalf of Lebanon,
in its capacity as head of the Arab group of State~
at the United Nations for this month, and in the name
of the Arab group, allow me to present to you our

warmest congratulations on the occasion of your
election to the presidency of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly. The head of the Lebanese delegation and the heads of the Arab delegations
will express in due time not only their congratulations
but also their appreciation of your talents and your
merits. but I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to express our confidence that you will administer the work ofthis session with great vitality, wisdom
and ability.
146. It is indeed a source of pleasure that the election of an African~nd an Arab Foreign Minister
as President of the General Assembly should coincide with the acceptance of Arabic as an official
language at the United Nations. and I find myself
happy to be given this opportunity to become a
spokesman for the Arab group. and to speak in the
language of its member countries. The acceptance
by the United Nations of Arabic is a recognition of
the status of the Arabic language and its contribution
to the spread of science and knowledge and its contribution to human civilization throughout a long
history.
147. The Arab delegations deeply welcome the
admission of the three new Member States which
have joined the international family. These new
Members represent three continents, three ancient
civilizations, and they have a deep desire to cooperate within the framework of the Organization
for the achievement of principles embodied in the
Charter for the cor:,olidation of peace and security
in the world and the strengthening of international
co-operation in all domains.
148. The admission of these States gives the Organization a wider universal character which is in keeping
with one of the basic principles of the Charter. The
Arab countries have always worked for the implementation of this principle as widely as possible, and
therefore we hail Grenada, which belongs to the
vigorous Caribbean area and to the group of Caribbean
countries which have great aspirations for a better
future, for its admission consecrates not only the
principle of the right to independence and sovereignty but ~lso the principle of equality between
all Member States small and large.
149. We should also like to hail Bangladesh, a
country which is linked to the Arab countries by
friendly ties. Bangladesh appearod in the world in
an atmosphere of difficulties and it was able, thanks
to the wisdom of its leaders and the leaders of the
subcontinent of South Asia, to' overcome those difficulties. Because of its enormous human capacities
and its important geographical position, it is now
called upon today to make a great contribution to
the activities of the United Nlltions in its endeavour
t~ promote peace all over the world and to contribute to the processes of development and progress.
Bangladesh, which is suffering, along with another
group of countries, some economic and social problems, is worthy of meeting with every possible support from the Organization, support which would
enable it to overcome the problems facing it.
150. The Arab delegations warmly hail GuineaBissau because the achievement of its independence
is a crowning ot' the struggle of its people for freedom
and for self-determination which are sacred rilihts

il~~""!~~~.E.~~~':'~'._''''~~=3'!.,.~.~_~_e_m iR!l~~\J1!!'~'!!!_~_.!!'J,~.
__

enshrined in the
the Universal
also hail the her
and their sacri
national aspirati
tions of peoples
within and outs
tion in support
in order to put a
gation.
151. On this 0
greatest satisfac
in Portugal and
ment with reg
These moveme
-toties and are 0
tions. The age
has ended and
the right to liv
independence a
the course of
of liberation fr
of all its cons
to the liberation
tries which are
nialism and mil
occupy their p
so that the Uni
versal in accord
152. Finally, I
effective role p
its creation in re
towards Iiberati
Nations started
has 138 Memb
figure is likely
all peoples to
ized. Therefore.
undertaken by t
153. At this ti
sion of the thre
their delegation
ments the Ara
them and their
progress and pr
154. Mr. PET
congratulating
the twenty-nint
I wish to state
in his statemen
to say about it
guished repres
indeed the coment, assume §

155. Let me a
impressed we
in which the Pr
eral Assembly
Mr. Leopoldo
twenty-eighth s
the General As
156. Today,
Members to t
public of Bangl
and Grenada-

•••••- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -..--...... ~-OIIIM~

~Iil~

\'1

IS

~

~
~I

Jj

enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Hu...,1n Rights. We
also hail the heroism of the people of Guinea-Bissau
and their sacrifi~es for the achievement of their
national aspirations and the fulfilment of the aspirations of peoples and countries which have worked
within and outside the framework of the Organization in support of national liberation movements
in order to put an end to colonialism and racial segregation.
151. On this occasion I cannot but view with the
greatest satisfaction the change that has taken place
in Portugal and the new course taken by its Government with regard to African liberation movements.
These movements have recorded conspicuous vie'tories and are on the way to achieving all their aspirations. The age of colonialism as a force of history
has ended and the real force is the force of right,
the right to live. The will of peoples to liberation,
independence and sovereignty is unconquerable and
the course of contemporary history is the course
of liberation from colonialism and the eradication
of all its consequences. We are looking forward
to the liberation in the near future of all other countries which are still suffering under the yoke of colonialism and military occupation, so that they may
occupy their pruper place in the Organization and
so that the United Nations may truly become universal in accordance with the principles of the Charter.
152. Finally, I have to refer to the important and
effective role played by the United Nations since
its creation in responding to the aspirations of peoples
towards liberation and independence. The United
Nations started its life with 51 Members and now it
has 138 Members. All indications show that this
figure is likely to increase until the aspirations of
all peoples to freedom and independence are realized. Therefore, we have to recognize the great efforts
undertaken by the United Nations in this connexion.
153. At this time when we are hailing the admission of the three new Member States, we would ask
their delegations to convey to their respective Governments the Arab delegations' good wishes towards
them and their peoples and hopes for their constant
progress and prosperity.
154. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, in
congratulating you on your election as President of
the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
I wish to state-only briefly, because my Minister
in his statement iu the general debate will have more
to say about it-how proud we are to see a distinguished representative of a non-aligned country,
indeed the co-ordinator of the non-aligned movement, assume such 9. high office.

"

,

2233rd meellng-k: \'::;:teltlllm

..

;

155. Let me also use this opportunity to state how
impressed we were by the wise and dedicated way
in which the President of the last session of the General Assembly, the representative of Ecuador,
Mr. Leopoldo Benites, guided us through both the
twenty-eighth session and the sixth special session of
the General Assembly.
156. Today, when we are admitting three new
Members to the United Nations--the People's Republic of Bangladesh, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
and Grenada-is a solemn day. The entry of these

"new h.embers into our ranks constitutes the crowning
of ~.heir long struggle for an equal place in the world
community as fully independent, equal and active
subjects in international relations. We have to pay
unreserved and due credit to their peoples and leaders,
because their admission to the United Nations was
not an easy, routine operation, but the result of difficult struggles and great sacrifices.
157. My delegation greets the admission o~ the
People's Republic of Bangladesh with the greatest
satisfaction because of my country's close relations
of friendship and co-operation with it from the very
first day of its establishment. In the same way, m~'
country lent full support to, and exerted very active
efforts for, Bangladesh's early admission to the
United Nations.
158. The wisdom and realism of the leaders of
Bangladesh-and we have particularly in mind the
dil)tinguished leader, our friend Mujibur Rahmantogether with all others directly involved, have contributed to the growing normalization of relations
between Bangladesh, India and Pakistan.
159. Now, we are all well aware of the extraordinary difficulties with which the people and the
Government of Bangladesh have had to grapple
from the very outset under the arduous conditions of
war deVastation, natural catastrophes, and extremely
unfavourable world economic trends. Therefore, it is
not sufficient for us merely to admit Bangladesh to
our ranks; we should utilize this event to redouble all
our efforts-whether bilateral, through the United
Nations, or other-to provide the assistance indispensable to Bangladesh, both urgent aid and longterm assistance for its all-round dev~lopmeQt.
160. The entry of Bangladesh will give added
strength to the world Organization. Bang!adesh has
~ aiready made a great contribution by opting for socialism and non-alignment and by its support of the idea
of transforming the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace.
Bangladesh is already an important and active factor
of progress, peace and stability in the region and
generally, and we are sure that the role of Bangladesh in that respect will continue to grow.

161. The admission of Guinea-Bissau is undoubtediy one of the brightest moments in the life of the
world Organization during the present decade. Its
admission-after the long and successful fight of its
people for freedom, independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity-marks the definitive beginning of the end of the vestiges 'of colonialism.
From the very beginning Yugoslavia has done its
utmost to assist directly the liberation struggle of
PAIGC and it recognized the Republic of GuineaBissau on the very first day.
162. Many of the best sons of Gub~a-Bissau lost
their lives in the struggle led by the revolutionary
leadership of PAIGC, and I cannot but evoke on this
occasion the heroic figure of Amilcar Cabral-founder
of PA1GC and father ef the revolution in GuineaBissau-who fell victim to international reaction
and whose shining example provides an inspiration
for all those who are still oppressed. We are very
happy that this struggle has been bro..ght to a successful end by his brother, President Luis Cab!al.

16

General Assembly-Twe~·nlDtb Sesslon-Plenary Meetings

163. The struggle of the peoples of Guinea-Bissau
and Cape Verde, Mozambique and Angola undoubtedly had a positive effect on developments in Portugal and the events of April of this year. The new
Portuguese Government has taken signiticant and
substantive steps towards the liquidation of colonialism and towards granting to all the peoples under
its colonial rule the right to self-determination and
independence. We expect that it will in the very
near future grant full independence to Mozambique
and Angola as well. We also expect that the question
of the Cape Verde Islands will be settled on the same
basis as that of Guinea-Bissau.
164. At the same time it is to be regretted that there
is an absence of any signs of positive evolution on
the part of the reactionary regimes of Pretoria and
Salisbury. The African populations of Namibia and
Rhodesia continue to be deprived of their most elementary human rights, not to speak of th~ir right
to self-determination and independence. However,
the armed struggle of these peoples is gathering momentum and we are convinced that. with the assistance of the whole of progressive mankind. they will
soon achieve those rights.
165. Yugoslavia, having itself emerged from an
epic liberation struggle, will continue to help politically, morally and materially the struggle of all
oppressed peoples and their liberation movements
for freedom and independence.
166. Finally, let me express our satisfaction at
the admission of Grenada to the United Nations.
The proclamation of the independence of Grenada
and its entry into our ranks constitute one more step
leading to the final elimination of foreign domination and its most reactionary form-colonialismand further strengthen the role and contribution
of the great Caribbean region to the Orgautzation
and to international relations in general
167. The admission of Bangladesh, Guinea-Bissau
and Grenada constitutes a new, major and almost
fmal step of the Organization in the direction of full
universality. The fact that all countries, all new
States, wish to enter the United Nations proves the
vitality of the Organization as an irreplace~ble forum
and place where everyone can assert his identity,
make his contribution and become a part of this great
community of nations.
168. I wish to say also how gratified we are that
two of the new Members admitted today are distinguished and active non-aligned ·countries. This will
contribute even further to the strength ana prestige
of the non-aligned movement in the United Nations.
The non-aligned countries, as well as the United
Nations as a whole, are faced at this session of the
General Assembly and in general with extremely
responsible and difficult tasks, and the admission of
three new Members constitutes· a major contribution to our joint strength for exerting successful
efforts for the achievement of new and required
solutions.
169. Mr. RAE (Canada) (interpretation!rom French):
Mr. President, at this stage, and before Canada makes
its statement in the course of the general debate,
I wish to congratulate you, on behalf of the Canadian
delegation, upon· your accession to the post of Pres-

ident and to assure you of our delegation's entire
co-operation in the execution of the important tasks
that have been entrusted to you.
[The speaker continued in English.]
170. On behalf of the Government of Canada, it
is my privilege to welcome the People's Republic
of Bangladesh, Gnmada and the Republic of GuineaBissau to membership in the United Nations. We
were pleased to join with our fellow members of the
Commonwealth and with others in sponsoring the
draft resolutions relatiL ~ to the admission of Bangladesh and Grenada, apd also that concerning the
admission of Guinea-Bissau.
171. For many years the peoples of Bangladesh
and Canada have been involved in forms of cooperation in the economAc, social, cultural and humanitarian fields. The ties between our two countries
are varied and our relations are friendly. It is thus
with confidence that we look forward to the participation of this new State in the many activities of the
United Nations. Let me say in passing that the Government of Canada has followed with the closest attention and understanding the progress that has been
made 'towards the normalization of relations among
the States of the subcontinent, progress which has
had as one of its happy consequences the support
of all the parties concerned for the admission of
Bangladesh to membership.
172. Grenada, too, is a country with which Canada
has had many contacts over the years and with which
it is ca.rrying out a number of programmes of cooperation for development. Grenada is one of our
Caribbean neighbours and we will welcome its presence in this world body. It is perhaps timely for us
to mention our pleasure at the growing number of
Commonwealth countries that have reached independence and joined the ranks of the United Nations
in a steady flow since the admission of Ghana in 1957.
173. My delegation has also sponsored the draft
resolution proposing the admission of Guinea-Bissau.
The prospect of that country's membership in the
United Nations is one which we greet with enthusiasm. Guinea-Bissau is a country with which we
have had little contact in the past, but we look forward to close co-operation with its Government
and with its delegation here in the years ahead. GuineaBissau's independence and membership in the Organization have raised the curtain on a new scene for
southern Africa, one which holds great promise.
174. We have noted the progress being made by
the Government of Portugal, working in co-operation with the liberation movements <.'f the remaining
Portuguese African territories, and we look forward
to developments which will result in the further
growth of our membership..
175. The welcome extended to the three new Members carries with it a deep sense of gratification and
the conviction that the General Assembly's decision will serve to strengthen the world Organization. This act also marks very significant progress
towards that universality of membership to which
you, Mr. President, referred so eloquently today
and to which many of us have for so long attached
importance.

176. Mr. FR
the opening 0
Brazilian deleg
dent, the con
ment on your
of the General
on this occasi
pliments on yo
177. It is wit
of Brazil wel
new Member
ple's Republic
public of Guin
178. For tw
diplomatic rei
tions are beco
tain that the U
dom ami the i
179. The en
the Americas
fiable cause ti
the Governme
and look forw
with its delega
180. The ad
Bissau to the
ular satisfacti
people. Brazil
application for
ization as soo
of Guinea-Bis
181. The Mi
Mr. Antonio
on the signifi
address to a
on the very d
speaking siste
purpose is to
Brazilian dele
to the delegati
182. Mr. T
dressing the
Secretary of
United Work
that we attac
co-operation
stressed that
as Algeria, P
kinship and
statement by
of its foreign
political cont
you, Mr. Pre
to the. presid
the Genera! A
183. May I
felicitations fi
main speech
your unanimo
recognition 0
policies and
Republic of A
is bravely m
the colonial y
ments so far.

2233rd meedng-17 september 1974

176. Mr. FRAZAO (Brazil): In his statement at
the opening of the general debate, the head of the
Brazilian delegation will convey to you, Mr. President, the congratulatioUlI of the Brazilian Government on your unanimous election to the presidency
of the General Assembly. May I be allowed, though,
on this occasion to extend to you my personal compliments on your assumption of that high «?ffice.
177. It is with great pleasure that the Governm~nt
of Brazil welcomes today the admission of three
new Member States to the United Nations: the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Grenada and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau.
178. For two years now Brazil has maintained
diplomatic relations with Bangladesh. Those relations are becoming more and more active. I am certain that the United Nations will profit from the wisdom ami the initiative ~f its new Member.
179. The entrance of another sister country of
the Americas into the Organization is also a justifiable cause for rejoicing. We sincerely congratulate
the Government of Grenada on this significant event,
and look forward to working in close collaboration
with its delegation.
180. The admission of the Republic of GuineaBissau to the United Nations is a source of particular satisfaction to the Brazilian Government and
people. Brazil lent its whole-hearted support to the
application for membership of that State to the Organization as soon as it was requested by the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau.
181. The Minister for External Relations of Brazil,
Mr. Antonio Azeredo da Silveira, will ._~uiy elaborate
on the significance of this historic moment in his
address to a plenary meeting next week. Today,
on the very day of the admission of this Portuguesespeaking sister nation .to the Organization, my only
purpose is to join the heartfelt congratulations of the
Brazilian delegation to those that are being extended
to the delegation of Guinea-Bissau.
182. Mr. TREPCZYNSKI (Poland): While addressing the Polish Parliament last July, the First
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish
United Workers' Party, Mr. Edward Gierek, said
that we attached great significance to solidarity and
co-operation with the developing countries.. He
stressed that with many of these countries, such
as Algeria, Poland had long been tied b} bonds of
kinship and broad collaboration. In invoking that
statement by the leadership of Poland in the realm
of its foreign policy, I wish to point to the weighty
political context in which we view and congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your well-deserved election
to the presidency of the twenty-ninth session of
the Genera! Assembly.
183. May I assure you, Mr. President, before our
felicitations find their fuller expression in Poland's
main speech before the Assembly, that we see in
your unanimous election evidence of the well-founded
recognition of your personal merits, of the peaceful
policies and successes of the People's Democratic
~epublic of Algeria and of the whole of Africa, which
IS bravely marching towards its full liberation from
the colonial yoke. In the spirit of all its accomplishments so far, the Polish delegation wishes to offer

'."".

,~.

17
18

-

you, Mr. President, its loyal and constructive cooperation for the good of the Organization and the
purposes it serves.

19
the
fu
no
fo
ex
th
N
of
19
th
I
fa
di
ro
A
w
to

184. May we also join in the assurances of appreciation addressed from this rostrum to the outgoing
President, Mr. Leopoldo Benites of Ecuador, whose
work, perseverance and experience, demonstrated
both during the twenty-eighth session and at the sixth
special session of the General Assembly, represent
a valuable contribution to the cause of international
co-operation and understanding.
185. Greeting in our midst the three newly admitted
Member States, we trust that their active involvement in the work of the United Nations will strengthen
the Organization and the foundations upon which
it is based. Indeed, the unanimous admission of
the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Guinea-Bissau
and Grenada is yet another step in the implementation of the principle of universality, and one to which
Poland has consistently attached undiminished
political importance. It is at the same time evidence
of the successful materialization of the principle
of self-determination of peoples and nations, achieved
at the cost of frequent sacrifices in their relentless
. political and armed struggle.

aJ

w
st
W

s(
he
tl1
a
tll
w
1
h
c
a

186. We therefore rejoice today that the just aspi··
rations of the people of Bangladesh have finally
come to a successful fulfilment. We rest assured
that the admission of Bangladesh to the United Nations will serve well the cause of peace and friendly
co-operation of all States of the South Asian subcontinent.

\'\
\'\

187. We congratulate the people of Guinea-Bh;sau
on having achieved the goal of independence for
which its great son and outstanding leader of the
national liberation struggle, Amilcar Cabral-our
guest during the twenty-seventh session-gave his
young life.

a
1
v
a
1

188. We are happy that progress in the implementation of the right to self-determination of peoples
is an outcome of the concerted efforts of the world
community, and it confirms that, given goodwill
and political realism, it is possible to eliminate conflicts, tensions and prejudice. In this spirit, the delegation of Poland wishes Bangladesh, Guinea-Bissau
and Grenada ever fuller utilization of the advantages
of their newly won independence for the benefit
of their own peoples and that of international cooperation. In pursuing these goals our new Members
can always count on the friendiy and constructive
co-operation of the Polish People's Republic.

0

d
0

n

I
e
1
(

t

1

~

t

189. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, may I first of all
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly and express the particular pleasure I feel
personally in seeing you sitting at thns distinguished
rostrum, to which I have no doubt you will bring
additional lustre. My Minister, your colleague Mr. Sauvagnargues, in a fe\ ~ays will express his own feelings to you, as well as those my Government and
all your French friends feel in seeing you occupy
the high office which the Assembly has just unanimously conferred upon you.

t

"

18

General Assembly-Twenty·nlnth session-Plenary Meetings

190. It'is in my capacity as the representative of
the country which at the moment is exercising the
functions of the presidency of the European Economic Community, and on behalf of the nine States
forming part of it, that I have the privilege of now
extending a welcome to the three countries which
the AssemQly has decided to admit to the United
Nations by unanimously adopting three resolutions,
of which, incidentally, our nine States were sponsors.
191. To Bangladesh, which has today at last reached
the end of a process started some two years ago,
I would first of all wish to express the profound satisfaction of our delegation. In spite of the considerable
difficulties left by the dramatic circumstances surrounding the birth of this young State, of which the
Assembly had at other times heard the echo, today
we note that all the parties concerned have decided
to embark upon the course of peace, conciliation
and reconciliation. We have followed their efforts
with all the sympathy justified by the genuine friendship which binds our nine States to each one of them;
we encouraged them each time we were able to do
so. Thus, noting that our friends of the subcontinent
have resolutely turned towards a future for which
they have laid the foundations together with courage
and dignity, we are happy to see Ba:1gladesh now
take up its rightful place and join here the countries
with which it is called upon to forge its destiny.
192. To the solicitude which the United Nations
has displayed towards it since its creation, we are
convinced that it will now be able to respond with
a positive contribution to our work. For our part,
we may assure it that from our nine delegations it
will always meet with mutually advantageous assistance and warm sympathy.
193. In pursuing the realization of the goal of universality of the Organization, to which we are all
attached, we likewise today welcome Grenada.
This State attained independence at the beginning
of this year, at the conclusion of an evolution conducted with realism and clear-sightedness by one
of the members of the European Economic Community on behalf of which I am speaking today. Thus,
I shall limit myself to emphasizing how the other
eight States members are pleased, together with the
United Kingd9m, to see here the representatives
of this hospitable land whose destiny has now been
taken over by its own population.
194. At the meeting held on 12 August last, the
Security Council unanimously recommended that
the General Assembly admit the Republic of GuineaBissau to memberstiip [A/9712]. The European
Economic Community followed with particular attention and interest the course of events that culminated
at that historic meeting. On 9 June, the nine countries
of the Community had issued a communique in which
they had e~pressed their pleasure at the democratic
developments in Portugal and at the policy designed
to bring to an end the protracted armed conflict in
Africa. They had declared their confidence in the
results of the negotiations between the parties concerned aimed at the exercise of self-determination
with all its consequences, and had indicated that
they were prepared to support that action. As the
talks proceeded, a second joint communique announced, on 12 August, the 'positive results that

had been achieved, results leading to the recognition of the new State.
195. Since then events have occurred that justify
the confidence thus expressed by Europe. A new
stage has been overcome. The policy of decolonization that Portugal adopted has been brought to reality
by the signing of the act legally recognizing the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. Thus, as a result of negotiations in the course of which the two parties demonstrated the extent of their political wisdom, an end
has been put to a period, which lasted far too long,
of armed confrontation. That confrontation has
been ended, as we have always) wished it to be, by
a political solution in keeping with the principle of
the right of peoples to self-determination and an
independent life,
196. Today, the French delegation is happy to
welcome, on behalf of the European Economic
Community, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau in the
presence of the representatives of the entire international community. We rejoice to see among us
at the United Nations a new State from the African
continent, which is already so broadly and so positively represented here. We are convinced that its
leaders, loyal to the spirit of generosity that has
always been the hallmark of Africa, will contribute
usefully to the labours of the Organization. Finally,
we express the hope that the Republic of GuineaBissau will maintain with Europe, from which it
is not so distant geographically, the same relationships of friendship, trust and co-operation that exist
with other countries of Africa.
197. May I be permitted, in concluding, to say
that the entry into the United Nations of GuineaBissau, the first country of Africa to which the Portu'guese Government has returned control of its destiny, gives us grounds for viewing the future with
confidence. The agreements recently signed at Lusaka
and the decisions that have followed them have
demonstrated a political will to which we pay a tribute
and which convinces us that the process now undertaken will run its full course to the greater benefit
of Africa and of Europe, eager as they both are to
work together for peace.
198. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, my Foreign Secretary will, I know, wish to
congratulate you personally on your election as
President of this Assembly session when he speaks
in the course of the general debate next week. I should
like to anticipate him, however, by offering my own
personal congratulations to you on the assumption
of this important office. The prominent part that
was played by your country, and by you yourself,
Mr. President, in bringing us together in this spring's
historic special session gives us every hope that the
twenty-ninth session will indeed be a successful
one.
199. Once again we have met at the outset of a
new session of the General Assembly to admit new
Members, this time three in number, to the United
Natious, and it gives my country very great pleasure
indeed to be a sponsor of their admission. Britain
has had close historical ties with two of these nations, the People's Republic of Bangladesh and
Grenada. It gives me, therefore, special pleasure
to welcome Bangladesh and Grenada to me'mbership

I
11

':

in
ass
tha
as
tic
be
Un
2
of
far
tio
we
pat
ev
led
of
an
of
a
th
im
lad
no
Or
po
su
cu
co
201
to
he
an
I
in
do
an
ou
20
co
to
lea
pe
jus
Gu
its
pr
of
U
us
to
se
gr
iz
ce
an
G
G
W

20
fir
on
th
Th
co
bu
th

2233rd meetlng-17 September 1974

,I
'!

in the United Nations. Our countries are already
associated with each other through the medium of
that free, equal and multinational association known
as the Commonwealth of Nations, and we are particularly delighted today that those close links will
be further reinforced by our partnership here at the
United Nations.
200. My country's involvement with the peoples
of the Indian subcontinent goes back, of course,
far beyond February 1972, when diplomatic relations between the United Kingdom ~nd Bangladesh
were first established. It was with the deepest sympathy and concern that we followed the difficult
events of the autumn of the previous year which
led to the establishment of the People's Republic
of Bangladesh. The process of re-establishing peace
and good-neighbourly relations between countries
of the area has not been an easy one; and may I pay
a public tribute to the high degree of statesmanship
that has been manifested on all sides. But, most
important of all, we welcome the fact that Bangladesh, the eighth-largest country in the world, will
now be able to fulfil the role as a Member of the
Organization which its size, its importance and its
position in the Indian subcontinent require. We are
sure that it will play an importa,"t part in our discussions here and we look forward to the very closest
co-operation with the delegatjon of Bangladesh.
201. Grenada's admission adds one more voice
to the impr~ssive group of Caribbean nations already
here. It is a group, as we know, that is well known
and respected for its eloquence and itG ability, and
I am sure we will hear Grenada's ideas expressed
in a similar way. The links between the United Kingdom and Grenada date back well over 200 years,
and we hope that they will continue to prosper through
ourjoint association in the work ofthe United Nations.
202. Finally, may I say that my delegation welcomes unreservedly the admission of Guinea-Biss'au
to the United Nations, about which my French colleague has already spoken in the name of the European Economic Community. We were, of course,
just as anxious in the Security Council to welcome
Guinea-Bissau as we are here, and once again I give
its leaders our best wishes for the new State's future
prosperity. As the memory of war fades, the work
of redevelopment takes on crucial importance. The
United Kingdom will be glad to help in any way it
usefully can, and indeed we have already offered
to meet the new Government of Guinea-Bissau to
see how we can help with its development programme. Guinea-Bissau takes its place in the Organization as a result of negotiations which have succeeded thanks to the wisdom, the statesmanship
and the far-sightedness of those concerned, My
Government whole-heartedly congratulates both
Guinea-Bissau and Portugal on their joint success.
We believe that it augurs well for the future,
203. Mr. Swaran SINGH (India): Mr. President,
first of all let me offer you our warmest felicitations
on your election to the high office of President of
the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
This is not only a recognition of your outstanding
contributions in the field of international relations
but also a tribute to the great and dynamic country
that you represent. I have had the privilege of knowing

19

you for several years and I have always admired
your steadfast adherence to principles and your
ardent advocacy of the cause of national liberation,
progress and development. Your personal contribution to the cause of non-alignment is truly historic.
We have every confidence that under your distinguished lel,ldership and wise guidance, this Assembly
will prove to be forward-looking in its achievements,
204. May I also take this opportunity to pay our
tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Benites, who
guided the deliberations of the Assembly through
a particularly difficult period with characteristic
wisdom, courtesy and understanding.
205. ,The General Assembly has taken a historic
decision today in admitting the People's -Republic
of Bangladesh, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and
Grenada. We are happy to welcome them and we
offer them our warmest congratulations. Their admission wilt contribute further to the universality
of the Organization-an objective to which India
has always lent its support. Each of these three countries has passed through a different historical process
in attaining its independence and gaining recognition by the international community. It is only fitting
that the three Members should be admitted to the
Organization on the first day of this General Assembly session. This will enable them fo participate
in the proceedings of the current session, especially
in matters of great concern to them, and we look
forward to their contribution.
.
206. It is a source of particular satisfaction to my
Government that our close neighbour, the People's
Republic of Bangladesh, has joined our ranks. Bangladesh is now recognized by over 120 countries and
it has already taken its rightful place in a large number
of international forums, where its delegation has
been playing a most useful role.
207. Bangladesh was warmly welcomed at the
Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries held at Algiers last
year. At that Conference the membership of Bangladesh in the United Nation!: found widespread
support, Bangladesh is the eighth most populous
nation in the world and enjoys a democratic government, freely elected by its people on the basis of
universal suffrage. Bangladesh is fortunate in having
a great leader and Prime Minister in Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, who enjoys immense support and prestige
within his country and abroad. Under his inspiring
leadership the people of Bangladesh bravely faced
unprecedented trials and tribulations and suffered
untold hardship before finally liberating themselves.
The entry of Bangladesh into the United Nations
is an occasion of great pride for its people, and we
who are their friends salute them and remember
also those who fell in the struggle for national liberation.
208. Bangladesh is fully committed to the cause
of global peace and co-operation. The magnanimity
and statesmanship of Bangladesh were largely responsible for the conclusion of the Delhi agreement and
the tripartite agreement between India, Bangladesh
and Pakistan. Those agreements provide the. basis
for the normalization of conditions and the establishment of ~ durable peace in our subcontinent.

20

General Assembly-Twenty.nlnth Session-Plenary Meetings

we hope to wekom e as soon as possible in the United
209. The admission of Guinea-Bissau to the United
Nations the representatives of other peoples of Africa
Nations is also a matter of great satisfaction to us.
they accede to their national independence.
when
ize
recogn
to
es
India was among the first countri
216. The decision of the General Assembly at its
the new Government of Guinea-Bissau after it propresent session to admit the three sovereign States
claimed its independence last year. The agreement
at
arrived
have
-Bissau
to the United Nations clearly shows once more that
that the leaders of Guinea
withthe
ng
regardi
al
Portug
of
ment
Govern
the
with
detente promotes the struggle of peoples for their
drawal of the remaining Portuguese troops from
national independence and the development of interGovern
the
by
ed
welcom
been
has
Guinea-Bissau
State relations on the basis of respect for State sovereignty and non-interference. The decision on the
ment. We welcome the new policies and trends in
admission of these new Member States is a promising
Portugal and we believe that they are irreversible.
among
have
we
before
long
be
not
will
it
that
start in the work of the twenty-ninth session, which
We hope
we expect will make an important contribution to
us Mozambique and Angola as sovereign indepento
-Bissau
Guinea
of
ion
admiss
the further improvement of the international situation.
dent States. The
the United Nations is a significant step and it will
217. Mr. DENNIS (Liberia): Mr. President, at a
undoubtedly give encouragement and strength to
subsequent and more appropriate time, I shall convey
freedom fighters in southern Africa.
to you the congratulations of the Liberian delegas
Nation
tion and of myself on your election, as an outstanding
210. Grenada's admission to the United
Caribthe
of
islands
the
son of Africa, to the high office of President of the
is most welcome. Though
twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
bean are far away from India, their progressive decolfulfilthe
in
ance
import
onization is a matter of great
218. Liberia, as the first independent African Rement of the objectives of the Charter. We welcome
public, has always taken the position that all peoples
the independence of Grenada and we look forward to
should be represented in this world forum through
co-operating with its delegation here.
the admission to membership of their respective
nations and the active participation in its deliber211. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Repubnt,
Preside
Mr.
):
ations of their legitimate representatives. This is not
lic) (interpretation from French
very
you
tulate
congra
to
ed
an important principle but an essential compermitt
be
only
may I first
ponent of our unwavering belief in the democratic
warmly on your election to the highly responsible
process. Inasmuch as the grave issues which we
post of President of the General Assembly. The
debate here and resolve to take action upon do for
achievements of your esteemed country in the realizaenable
s
Nation
United
the most part affect the peace, security, well-being
tion of the purposes of the
guidyour
under
that,
tion
and, indeed, the continued existence of our world,
convic
our
us to express
Asl
it is entirely just that every nation, whether large
ance, the twenty-ninth session of the Genera
s.
succes
with
d
or small, rich or poor, developed or less developed,
sembly will be crowne
should play its part in arriving at these decisions
212. On behalf of the Government of the German
and that the voice of each people should thereby
Democratic Republic, I should like to voice our
be heard.
profound satisfaction at the admission to the United
219. There is another, connected principle which
Nations of the People's Republic of Bangladesh,
complements that of the universality of the Organizaofthe Republic of Guinea-Bissau and also of Grenada.
tion and is applicable here, and that is the right to
213. It is with particular pleasure that we welcome
self-determination, independence, self-rule, human
the delegations of Bangladesh and Guinea-Bissau,
dignity and the unimpeded determination of its own
with whose countries my own enjoys close friendly
national destiny which each people should enjoy.
ties. Like all the other States of the socialist comAll systems of colonialism, racism, apartheid and
munity, the German Democratic Republic has given
alien minority rule tend to undermine these basic prinits active support to the struggle of the peoples of
ciples. Rather, such systems are based on inequalBangladesh and Guinea-Bissau for their national
ity, oppression, suspic.ion, fear, hatred and, most
independence; it recognized these two States immedeplorable of all, on the unconscionable exploitadiately after their founding and has worked for their
tion of others in our world.
entry into international life on a footing of equality.
220. What we seek instead, what our world must
214. The People's Republic of Bangladesh is making
have if the noble enterprise of building a sane and
a precious contribution to the stabilization of the
prosperous, peaceful and secure life for all mankind
political situation in southern Asia and to the continis ever to be achieved, is co-operation, trust, equality,
uation ofthe prvcess of detente on the Asian continent.
an attitude of give and take, and the ability to see
with ever greater clarity that we are all a part of the
215. The admission of Guinea-Bissau to the \"ited
against
e
struggl
long
a
of
family of man, irreversibly interlocked by our comNations is the culmination
under
waged
ation
exploit
and
sion
oppres
l
mon existence on this planet, and linked by our depencolonia
dence on its resources.
the direction of the PAIGC at the cost of enormous
sacrifice, and is yet another step forward on the
221. It is therefore in this spirit and with genuine
path towards the implementation of General Asconviction and profound joy that, on behalf of the
sembly resolution 1514 (XV) on the granting of indeGovernment and the delegation of Liberia, I extend
pendence to colonial countries and peoples. All
a hearty welcome to the three new Member States
progressive and peace-loving forces in the world
which have now been admitted to membership in
are encouraged thereby to continue with even greater
United Nations. To the people of Bangladesh,
the
of
tion
determination their struggle .for the elimina
who have faced with courage and determination the
all forms of imperialist oppression. In this regard,

i#
2233rd meeting-17 September 1974

great and difficult task of nation-building, compounded by recent natural disasters, I express sincere greetings. We are certain that your contributions to this our common Organization will be most
positive and reflect the commitment to peace and
co-operation which you have so ably demonstrated
in the past.
222. We share a special link of cultural affinity
and friendship with the island State of Grenada.
It is our fervent hope that we shall work closely
together in the United Nations to advance its high
purposes, and that our relationship in every respect
will grow ft:om strength to strength as the feelings
of friendship and brotherhood which bind us become
ever firmer. Heartiest best wishes on this notable
occasion which heralds the arrival of a new voice
for peace, understanding, equality and justice in this
great Assembly of nations.
223. Finally, we greet our sister African State, the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, into these ranks with the
highest sentiments of brotherly regard and affection.
Its long night of colonialism has come to an end.
The national independence, which nearly one year
ago it won by toil, blood and sacrifice, has now been
consolidated and preserved. It takes its rightful place,
with sovereign equality, among the nations of our
world. As a people that has been in the recent past
denied freedom, I am certain that it will be among
its strongest defenders at this forum and elsewhere.
As a people that has suffered from the devastations
of a war to secure its freedom, it will, I am sure, be
among the strongest advocates of international peace
1l1nd justice. Possessed of hope and confidence in
tbe future of mankind, this nation and people will
inspire hope and confidence in others.
224. Yet, as we celebrate this solemn day, let us
not forget that other peoples in southern Africa remain
subject to racism, oppression, suppression, repression and alien domination; that they are denied the
opportunity to speak here or, indeed, to be free men
in their own land. So our joy is tempered with sorrow,
and the Organization remains lamentably incomplete. And yet we do have the sure confidence that
in the end mankind will triumph, that these evils
will be abolished, and that the United Nations will
truly represent the world-the home that we know
of the family of man.
225. Mr. BENNETT '(United States of America):
Mr. President, permit me at this time to offer my
sincere congratulations and those of the United
States to you as you assume the presidency of the
twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly.

I
f\

Iili

1

1:

226. As representative of the host country, I now
have the great honour of welcoming three new Members to this parliament of the world. Although Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea-Bissau are located in
three very different regions of this planet, they jointly
share a desire, and have done so most convincingly,
to participate in the Organization. Nothing could
symbolize more dramatically the universality of
man's aspirations, for which the United Nations
stands.
227. The United States recognized the Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh on
4 April 1972. Formal diplomatic relations were estab-

21

lished on Hl May of that year. My Government has
had continuous representation in Dacca since 1949.
Through these years, ties of trade, shared concern
for economic development, and personal friendships
have grown ever stronger. Consequently, the United
States Government has taken particular satisfaction
in the development of the friendly bilateral relations which now happily exist between our two
countries.
228. The American and Grenadian peoples have
had warm and co-operative relations through the
years. We share a deep interest in the affairs of the
Caribbean region. We have been and will continue
to be good neighbours. On 7 February this year,
my Government welcomed Grenada into the family
of independent nations, and we wish Grenada well
?.s it tnwels the road of independence.
229. And now Guinea-Bissau joins the world Organization as the culmination of a major historic process.
As President Ford stated, the United States Government looks forward to a productive and friendly
relationship with the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
which we recognized on 10 September. In the months
and years ahead the United States hopes to broaden
and strengthen the bonds between the Governments
and peoples of our two countries. We look forward
to the constructive contribution that we are confident
Guinea-Bissau will make to the important work of
the United Nations.
230. The President of the United States will speak
to the Assembly tomorrow, and I would at this time,
Mr. President, like to express the hope of my Government that the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly· will bt. a productive one where we will
take new steps to move fro.m ideological confrontation toward resolvine of differences among nations.
231. Mr. SICLAIT (Haiti) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, it is with pleasure that,
joining the speakers who preceded me, I extend my
warm congratulations to you, a great and brilliant
statesman at the service of peace, a son of Mrica,
and, awaiting the speech of the head of the Haitian
delegation from this podium, I should like to state
that the Haitian delegation is pleased at your election to the presidency of the General Assembly and
that we pledge you our entire co-operation.
232. We should also like to express our profound
admiration for and our deep gratitude to Mr. Leopoldo
Benites, the outgoing President, for having skilfully
and competently guided the work of the twentyeighth session. Under the able presidency of that
eminent son of Latin America, the General Assembly
adopted resolutions of broad pc.~;~ical,50cial and
economic scope which, with the consent of peoples
and Governments, can lay th~ foundations of peace
and co-operation in the international community.
233. Now, on behalf of my delegation, I should
like to welcome the States of Bangladesh, Grenada
and Guinea-Bissau, which have just attained their
independence. It is with great pleasure that the Haitian
delegation welcomes them as St~.;~s Members of
the United Nations. I am pleased to congratulate
them warmly on behalf of my Government and to
express to them our best wishes for success in their
ell:terprises and in their future work in the Organiza-

22

tion to promote international peace and the wellbeing of their countries. May I also assure them of
our desire for co-operation in the achievement of
the common ideals of social progress and economic
development.
234. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President,
in due course the head of the delegation of the Soviet
Union in his statement in the general debate will
congratulate you on your election to the post of President of the General Assembly. Today ! should like
to express my sincere satisfaction at the fact that you
have been elected to this important international
post by a unanimous decision of the General Assembly. May I sincerely wish for you as you occupy
this important post that the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly may go down in the history
of the United Nations as the Assembly for the strengthening of peace, security, disarmament, development
and decolonization.
235. May I likewise pay due tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Benites, the President of the twentyeighth session, which achieved great results under his
expert leadership.
236. The twenty-ninth session has begun its work
. with the admission of new States to membership
in the United Nations; thereby, a further important
step has been made towards genuine universality
in the United Nations. As is known, the Security
Council unanimously recommended that the General
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session accept into the
United Nations community three new young States:
the People's Republi-; of Bangladesh, the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau and Grenada. In this connexion,
the delegation of the Soviet Union expresses great:
satisfaction. We already had an opportunity of welcoming those three States when the question of recommending their membership was considered in the
Security Council. Today we .are particularly pleased
again to congratulate them on the unanimous approval
of that recommendation by the General Assembly.
All of them have gone through the complex and
difficult course of struggle for their liberation and
independence, and this event is bound to produce
satisfaction among all the peace-loving forces of the
world.

The founder of the Soviet State, the grea~
Lenin, constantly emphasized the bond between
the struggle of the workers of the country of the
Soviets and the successful development of the national
liberation movements of enslaved peoples. He wrote:
237.

"The revolutionary movement of the peoples
of the East can be resoived only through direct
contact with the revolutionary struggle of our
Soviet Republic against international imperialism."
238. The principles of the policy of the Soviet State,
as formulated by Lenin in relation to the countries
of Asia, Africa and Latin America, include full equality of rights and respect for the soverei~ty of States,
the development with them of friendly reiations, the
early provision of all-round assistance to formerly
backward countries in their struggle for their political
and economic liberation fro~ oppression by colonial
Powers.

"2"39.

The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Brezhnev, when he was awarded the International Lenin Prize "for strengthening peace among
peoples", stated:
"We have always believed, and believe today,
that it is our inviolable duty, deriving from our
communist convictions and our socialist morality,
to give the broadest support to the peoples who
fight for the just cause of freedom. That has always
been and always will be."
240. The application of the People's Republic of
Bangladesh for membership In the United Nations
was fully substantiated from the time it was sent
to the Organization more than two years ago. For
reasons known to all of us, the question was not
resolved positively at that time. But, as was pointed
out at that time by the Soviet delegation, the victory
must be and, of course, will be on the side of the
people of Bangladesh. Today we share the happiness
of the Republic of Bangladesh, on the occasion of
its admission to membership in the United Nations.
Our conviction has been confirmed by the unanimous
decision taken today by the General Assembly to
admit this YOUQg Asian State. The Soviet Union is
proud of the fact that from the very first day it was
on the side of those who were in favour of the acceptance of the People's Republic of Bangladesh to membership in the United Nations.
241. During the short period of its independent
existence, the People's Republic of Bangladesh has
justly acquired considerable authority and recognition in international affairs. From the first days of
the proclamation of the independence of that country,
its Government and people have exerted tremendous efforts to put an end to tension and to normalize
the situation in southern Asia. Favourable transformations in the world situation and the relaxation of international tensions, which is in accordance
with the vital interests of the peoples of all countries,
have made a favourable impression upon thf' relations between the States of that region as well. 1 ,inks
to the joint collective efforts of the leaders of ~dia,
Bangladesh and Pakistan. considerable successes
have been achieved on the way towards ensuring
a stable peace and tranquillity in that important part
of the world. It is precisely those purposes that are
being served, in our' opinion, by the agreements
signed by the countries concerned in Samla and Delhi.
As was stated recently by the Foreign Minister of
India, Mr. Singh, loyalty to the principle of the speedy
implementation of the Simla agreement of 3 J,'! j
1972 is the only way to normalize relations between
the States of the subcontinent and to establish a
lasting peace in the region. The Soviet Union is sincerely interested in those countries resolving the
problems existing between them in a spirit of friendship, mutual understanding and peace.
242. The Soviet Union is building its relations
with the People's Republic of Bangladesh upon the
pririciple of total equality, mutual respect, sovereignty and independence, without any interference
whatsoever in the internal affairs of each other. The
Soviet people have great sympathy and respect for
the people of Bangladesh and for the policy of nonalignment and co-operation which is practised by the

·1

I

1
t

:1

I

I

2233rd meetlng-17 September 1974

:lm-

ion,
maong
lay,
our
lity,
Nho
'ays
: of

ions
~ent

For
not
lted
tory
the
less
1 of
Dns.
10US

to
n is
was
eptlem{

dent
has
Ignis of
Itry,
nenilize
'ansaxaance
ries,
rela:mks
dia,
:sses
lring
part
t are
lents
'elhi.
~r of
eedy
Jr'!;
Neen
sh a
sinthe
iend-

tions

1 the

>Verence
The
t for
nony the

1

i

1

I
1I
"

,I
'I
~i

J

I

'1

'" I

lA"
--';/
cl

!j

'~ {,
~', :\

,j

rn

,)
,~

i%

;-

I

r

I,

I;

r

People's' Republic of Bangladesh. That policy is
aimed at the relaxation of international tensions
and the development of friendly relations and cooperation among peoples.
243. I should like to take this opportunity to point
out likewise that co-operation between the Soviet
Union and the People's Republic of Bangladesh
is being successfully developed and strengthened.
The Soviet Union is providing assistance in the economic development of that young developing State
whose' people have suffered exploitation and plundering for centuries. A number of agreements have
been signed between the Soviet Union and Bangladesh concerning co-operation in the building of
industrial projects, the conduct of geological research
and the restoration of its fleet and fishing industry.
The Soviet Union is also providing assistance in
the restoration of rail transport. and the training of
personnel in various branches ofthe national economy.
'244. There is no doubt at all that Bangladesh, a
State with a population of 75 million, has all the necessary elements to enable it to carry out the obligation's placed by the Charter upon States Members
of the United Nations. Acceptance of Bangladesh
for membership will contribute to the attainment
of the universality of the United Nations. Full-fledged
participation by this new Asian State in the life and
'activities of the United Nations will enable it to make
a positive contribution to the solution of important
problems before the United Nations, to the strengthening of international peace and security and to the
development of co-operation among States.
245. The General Assembly has likewise today
accepted into membership the youngest African
State, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. For 11 years
the patriots of Guinea-Bissau, under the leadership
of the PAIGC, weapons in hand, have waged a heroic,
selfless struggle for the liberation of their cou~try
from international colonial domination. This struggle
was difficult and complex, but the hour of liberation has come. I quote the words of the founder of
the PAIGC, and the leader of the liberation struggle,
Amficar Cabral, who spoke at the eighth Pan-African
Conference of Heads of State and Government:
"Individuals, and fighters may despair, but
peoples never lose their"hope ... We cannot fail
to believe in the futuFe of Africa and the ability
of any African people fully to liberate itself from
colonialist and racist oppression to become master
of its own fate."
These prophetic words have becQme the truth, these
prophetic words of a gallant patriot, a talented son
of Africa, a fighter who has given his life for the freedom and happiness of his people. His long-suffering
country has now become a free and independent
State, the Republic of Guinea-Biss'iu. During the
year that has passed since the proclamation of its
independence, the young Republic has already been
recognized by approximately 100 States of the world.
The struggle for freedom and national independence, headed by the PAIGC, is now nearing its
triumphal conclusion. The people of this young
country have new questions before them which are
just as complex: the building and development of an
independent sovereign State in peace, and the solution of economic and political tasks.

23

Proceeding from its consistent anti-colonial
policy, the Soviet Union has always supported the
heroic struggle of the people of the Republic of GuineaBissau for full liberation and national independence
and has provided it with moral and political support
and material assistance in this just struggle. The
Chairman of the Council of State of Guinea-Bissau,
Luis Cabral, speaking at a meeting of the People's
National Assembly of Guinea-Bissau, stated:
"The victories won by our people, and the proclamation of our new State were likewise the fruit
of the' concrete assistance given us throughout
these long years of struggle by the socialist countries. Our sincere thanks therefore go to the peoples
and Governments of those countries for their
assistance and solidarity, which are th.e natural
expression of the principles governing the way
of life and the actions of those countries in the
international sphere. In particular, we have to
express our thanks and solidarity with the people,
the Party ~md the Government of the Soviet Union,
whose unconditional assistance was and ,·,in continue to be decisive for the defence of our efill,c;TI"ging
State and the total liberation of our people.
"The s:acrifices made by the great people of
the Soviet Union to provide our people, and all
peoples struggling against colonialism and racism,
with the assistance they need for their defence
operaand the development of their libera',·
tions, place the Soviet people, its grea\ '.rty and
its Government in the vanguard among the unconditional friends of the oppressed peoples." 1
247. In a,congratulatory telegram to the General
Secretary of the PAIGC, Aristides Pereira, in connexion with the proclamation of the independence
of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Brezhnev, stated:
"The success of the national liberation movement, inspired by your Party, in an important
contribution to the struggle of the African peoples
and all anti-imperialist forces for the national
liberation of oppressed peoples, for peace and
social progress...
246.

248. After the proclamation of the independence
of Guinea-Bissau, the Soviet Union was one of the
first to recognize that sovereign State as a newly
independent State and to establish. diplomatic relations with it. Beal~ng in mind the relations of friend,.
ship and comprehensive co-operation that are being
developed between the Soviet Union and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, the Soviet Union has actively supported in the Security Council,' as well
as in the General Assembly; the application by the
Government of the Republicaf Guinea-Bissau for
admission as a Member of the Organization. It is
difficult to over-emphasize the significance of the
achievements of the people of Guinea-Bissau in
their struggle for nationalliberation.2od freedom.
249. In their message to the Chairman of the eleventh session of the Assembly of Heads of State~nd
Government af the OAU, the President of thePre,.
sidium of the Supreme Sovic' ./i the USSR, ,Mr.· Podgorny, and the Chairman of the Council. of Ministers
of the Soviet Union, Mr. Kosygin, stated that the

24

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session-Plenary Meetings

year which had elapsed since the previous session
of the OAU had been marked by major attainments
by the African peoples in their struggle for the strengthening of national sovereignty and the strengthening
of political and economic independence and the
elimination of the last remaining hotbeds of colonialism, racism and apartheid.
250. The delegation of the Soviet Union expresses
confidence that in the near future the Security Council and the General Assembly will consider the applications for membership of other sovereign States
which will be created upon the territories of former
colonial possessions of Portugal: 1 refer to Angola
and Mozambique.
251. The Soviet delegation voted with great satisfaction in the Security Council in favour of recommending to the Assembly the admission of the State
of Grenada to membership in the United Nations.
This event in the life of the people of Grenada is an
important step towards the total Iiberation of peoples
from the secular colonial past.
252. In congratulating the people and Government of Grenada upon their independence, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR,
Mr. Kosygin, in a telegram of 1 February 1974 addressed to Mr. Gairy, the Prime Minister of Grenada,
wrote:
"The Soviet Government, proceeding from its
steadfast policy based upon the principles of equality of rights and the self-determination of peoples
and aimed at the development of friendship and
co-operation among ail States, states that it recognizes Grenada as an independent and sovereign
State and expresses its willingness to establish
diplomatie relations with it."
253. In welcoming three new States to membership in the United Nations, the Soviet delegation
wishes to say that the Soviet Union has supported
and will in future support ail peoples that are waging
struggles for freedom and national independence.
254. Mr. KARKI (Nepal): Mr. President, al10w
me to extend to you on behalf of my delegation and
on my own behalf our hearty congratulations on
your unanimous election as President of the twentyninth session of the General Assembly.
255. It gives my delegation immense pleasure to
welcome heartily one of our sister nations, Bangladesh, into this world body. In view of the most
cordial and friendly relations existing between Nepal
and Bangladesh, we have been fervently 100king
forward to this momentous occasion.
256. We are also happy to welcome the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau, whose entry into the United Nations brings us much doser to the eventual elimination of colonialism from the world. This accelerated
process of decolonization is a great victory for all
peoples struggling against colonialism and imperialism in ail their forms and manifestations. Il has
once more proved the invincibility of the peoples
fighting against injustice and colonialism. We hope
to welcome the independent nations of Mozambique,
Angola and Namibia to the United Nations and thus
mark the elimination of oppressive régimes from
the African continent.

257. Finally, we should like to take this opportunity to welcome to our midst the newly independent country of Grenada.
258. The addition of these three new Members
will, we believe, go a long way towards making the
universality of the United Nations a reality and will
make the Organization effective in solving the problems facing the world today. We should like to assure
the new Members of our full co-operation.
259. Mr. ALARC6N (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, may 1 first of ail express
the satisfaction of our delegation on your unanimous
election to the presidency of the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly. Your election is a recognition of the role played by the People's Democratic
Republic of Aigeria in the international arena in defence
of the rights of peoples to their full independence and
in defence of international peace and security. In your
election we also see a personal recognition extended
to you, who have been able to guide brilliantly Algerian
foreign policy, and who have played and continue to
play a very important l'ole in the movement of the nonaligned countries, and partieularly that of progressive
forces in the third wo.r1d whieh, with Algeria and with
you, have attained the dearest expression of their
commitment to independence.
260. Now, on behalf of my delegation, 1 should
like to congratulate the three new Members of the
United Nations, the People's Republic of Bangladesh, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and Grenada
-three States from three regions in the world which
symbolize the struggle of peoples for their independence in the face of colonialism, three regions where
the historie process of colonial oppression has developed concurrently with the hard struggle of peoples
to defeat that process. They come today to the Organization as a proof that peoples subject to a foreign
yoke will always and everywhere attain undisputed
victory.
261. Today we rejoice at the admission of the People's Republic of Bangladesh because we were one
of the first States to recognize that State and to support the right of its people to claim their national
independence, to conquer their full rights, rights
which as the Assembly knows it attained through
a difficult and painful process.
262. We also rejoice in welcoming the delegation
of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, a people with
which we have maintained the closest relations of
brotherhood since the time when the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau was occupied and oppressed by foreign
colonialism. Through its glorious party, the PAIGC,
we have given the people of Guinea-Bissau ail the
political, moral and material support that it was
within our means to offer throughout its long and
arduous struggle for independence. That is why we
consider the admission of Guinea-Bissau to the Organization and the full recognition of its national independence and sovereignty as also a victory for our
own people, as a source of pride and satisfaction
for us.
263. We should also like to express our satisfaction at the admission of Grenada, our neighbour
island in the Caribbean, and we express our confi-

2233rd meeling-17 Seplember 1974

J
f

,
1

1
!

dence that the new State wiÜ fully join the general
process which seeks the full independence and the
consolidation of the freedom of ail the countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean.
264. In admitting as Members of the Organization
three States coming from three continents which
for centuries have been victims of colonial exploitation and the imposition of the foreign yoke upon
their peoples, we should like to say that we are certain
that the struggle of those peoples will culminate in
the complete eradication of colonialism throughout
the Caribbean, throughout Africa and throughout
the world.
265. We would be remiss if, on behalf of our delegation, we did not pay our warmest tribute to the man
who is absent from this room tonight, the man who
with wisdom, courage and integrity was able to guide
the selfless struggle of his people against colonialism,
the man who was able to organize and direct his
people in that struggle, the man who was able to
lead the political and armed struggle against foreign
colonialism while he was also devoting his efforts
to constructive work in the liberated zones of his
country, Guinea-Bissau, the man who to this very
Organization brought the message of his struggling
people and who asked for the solidarity of the world
in their struggle, the man who through his sacrifice
for the cause of freedom has become the highest
symbol of the struggle for independence in Africa
-Comrade Amilcar Cabral, who today is reborn
in the independence of his people and who will be
l'eborn and who will live for ever tomorrow when
colonialism finally disappears from the face of Africa.
266. Mr. VEIGA SIMÂO (Portugal): The formaI
compliments of my delegation will be presented to
you, Mr. President, by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Portugal when he speaks in the Assembly
next week. Meanwhile, 1 personally extend my
sincere congratulations to you on your unanimous
election to the presidency of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly, which we hope will
be a new milestone in the path of liberty for mankind
and of progress and peace in the world.
267. Three new States-Bangladesh, Grenada and
Guinea-Bissau-advance as of today to become a
part of the United Nations. It is with great joy that
we salute their entry into the Organization. We are
sure that this event, which raises the potential for
international co-operation by these States, will also
contribute ta the well-being of their respective populations, on whose behalf we hope for a promising
future based on democratic structures, which will
better correspond to their dreams and desires.
268. It will certainly be understandable that at
this moment 1 refer in greater detail to one of the
countries whose entry into the United Nations 1 have
just finished saluting, a country in the Portuguesespeaking world-the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. If
on 12 August 1 experienced the great satisfaction
of participating in the meeting of the Security Council which unanimously recommended the admission
of Guinea-Bissau into the United Nations, and if
1had the opportunity of sponsoring it in the Assembly,
then il is with redoubled pleasure that today 1 have
participated in the implerrientatioil of that recommendation. Effectively speaking, we are dealing

25

with an act of great political- transcendence, not
only for the State which enters the Organization
but also for that Organization which admits the State,
and obviously for each Member of the United
Nations.
269. For Guinea-Bissau, given the growing importance of international bodies in the structure of the
world community, particularly the United Nations,
entry into the Organization naturally represents
a fundamental step in its life as a sovereign and independent State. In a world where problems become
increasingly interdependent, it is natural that States
desire not to be just objects of the consequences
of international socio-political evolution but to be
able themselves to participate in the construction
of the future. That participation operates in large
part through constructive action which the various
States come to take in international bodies. Thus,
the entry of Guinea-Bissau into the United Nations
opens for that State new perspectives for action
within the world community which its wise leaders
will certainly use to advantage in pursuit of the weIlbeing of their people.
270. However, we are not dealing with a one-sided
benefit, as may seem to be the case at first glance.
Actually, since the United Nations is an Organization with a universal vocation and many ofits attitudes
are based on this characteristic, it can be considered
that the entrance of new States is an indispensable
factor for the maintenance of the true identity of the
Organization; otherwise there would result a divorce
between an apparent structure of the United Nations
and the substratum serving as its base, which would
only contribute to its isolation and would eventually
lead ta its destruction.
271. The admission of Guinea-Bissau represents
an event which cannot be regarded with indifference
by either the United Nations or the States which
are integrated within il. Portugal is, however, the
country living this moment most intensely, a moment which is also part of its own history.
272. The road which led Guinea-Bissau to independence was not exempt from trials and suffering for
its people and the Portuguese people; but this is not
the moment ta rewrite history or to build constructions which present the unfolding of events from
angles of national pride, which is shared by ail peoples.
273. We remember ail those who have died in combat and those who have humbly given themselves
to the lands of Guinea-Bissau in the building of a
more dignified and happier life for their people.
274. The Armed Forces Movement of 25 April.
identified with the Portuguese people, created firm
bases for the establishment through free elections
of a multi-party democracy in Portugal, of which
the President of the Republic is the supreme guarantor to the people. This movement of freedom
allowed the hastening of the end of a hopeless war
in the lands of Guinea-Bissau.
275. Thus, the Accord for peace and progress
which was signed in Algiers between the PAIGC
and the Portuguese Government and the consequent
recognition of the independence of Guinea-Bissau
by the President of the Republic of Portugal-who

7

26

i,l

General Assembly-Twenty-nlnth Scsslon-Plenary Meetings

Is mdëed the symbol of a multitude oCPortuguese
who have worked, with recognized enthusiasm,
for the social and material progress of Guineaare decisive factors in the history of our two peoples
and mark the initiation of an era of fruitful co-operation between two friendly nations joined in dignity
and independence.
276. The Portuguese lived in the area for 500 years
and rooted in their souls are sentiments of fraternity
and love for the Guinean people that no force will
ever succeed in destroying. We are united through
language and friendship. In full cognizance of these
indestructible sentiments, the Governments of our
two countries decided immediately, in Aigiers, to
promulgate bilateral agreements of friendship and
active co-operation in the economic, financial, cultural and technical fields, on a. basis of independence, mutuai respect, equality and reciprocity of
interests and harmonious relations between the
citizens of both Republics.
277. The world can be certain that there will be
no place for neo-colonialism, for there was an understanding, in a rare sense, of historical responsibility
and enlightened intelligence between the delegations
of the PAIGC and the Portuguese Government regarding the opening of new perspectives for an active
and fraternal co-operation between our nations and
peoples.
278. We hope soon to extend, in a spirit of real
community, that same co-operation to the new States
of the Portuguese heritage, in response to a creative
challenge which the world casts to us at this turningpoint in our history.
279. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
1 call now upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Mr. Kamal
Hossain, to address the Assembly.
280. Mr. HOSSAIN (people's Republic of Bangladesh): 1 should like to share with ail those assembled
here our sense of profound satisfaction as 75 million
people of Bangladesh are taking their rightful place
by your side. On this historic occasion the people
of Bangladesh reaffirm the pledge embodied in their
Constitution to uphold the principles of the United
Nations Charter. ]ndeed, the people of Bangladesh
have been in the fold of the United Nations ever
since the inception of the Organization. Today,
however, Bangladesh enters the United Nations
on the basis of its recognition as a distinct nation.
This marks the fulfilment of the aspiration to take
our place in the Organization as a sovereign, independent State, vindicating the right of self-determination for which millions of our people laid down
their lives in a struggle for national liberation. We
must acknowledge with gratitude that even before
our formai admission, the United Nations extended
valuable assistance in meeting the gigantic task of
rehabilitation and reconstruction with which we
were faced upon independence, and more recently
in meeting the emergency caused by the devastating
floods in Bangladesh.
281. ]t adds to our satisfaction, Mr. President,
that you have been elected to preside over the twentyninth session of the General Assembly, for you symbolize the forces of freedom as a true representative

of the emerging world and a great champion of peace
and justice. Please accept our warmest congratulations on your election. We are confident that under
your presidency the Assembly will be able to take
those creative initiatives and, in your words, shape
those "constructive solutions" that are needed to
meet the urgent challenges of our times.
282. 1 should like to thank ail the members of the
Security Council for unanimously recommending
the admission of Bangladesh to the United Nations,
the Member States that have sponsored and supported our application for membership and ail those
who have so warmly welcomed us in the Assembly.
283. We are partlcularly happy to join in expressing
our sincerest congratulations to Guinea-Bissau and
Grenada, which are entering the United Nations
with us. We celebrate their entry as a victory of the
forces of nationalliberation, presaging other victories
that will enable the United Nations to admit as Members nations still struggling to vindicate their right
of self-determination.
284. The history of Bangladesh has been one of
relentless striving for freedom and justice. The struggle for Bangladesh in microcosm represents the
struggle of the emerging world-the struggle of people for whom national independence holds the promise of making good lost opportunities of the past,
of harnessing their unrealized potential to build a
better future for themselves and of transforming
a society which has in the past suffered as much
from the ravages of nature as from those of man.
285. Bangladesh has consistently pursued an independent non-aligned foreign policy, promoting friendship with ail countries of the world on the basis of
mutual respect for sovereignty, equality, territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internai affairs
of other States. We have obtained nearly universal
recognition and steadily developed friendly relations with ail countries of the world.
286. We are keenly conscious that we are entering
the Organization at a time when the momentous
events which have occurred during recent years
have opened up great possibilities: the possibility
of securing a just peace in Western Asia, of opening
a new chapter of good-neighbourly relations in the
South Asian subcontinent, of a significant and conclusive acceleration of the process of decolonization and of laying the foundations of a just international economic order. It is our hope that ail of us
will respond to these challenges with wisdom and
vision, so that these possibilities may be fully real·
ized for the benefit of ail our peoples.
287. On this historic occasion we reiterate our
total commitment to peace, not only in our subcontinent but in our region and in the world. Bangladesh
reaffirms its pledge to uphold the principles and
ideals of the Charter of the United Nations and to
work with the Members of the United Nations to·
wards the establishment of an international order
based on peace and justice in which the deepest aspirations of mankind may be progressively fulfilled.
288. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
1 cali now on the Prime Minister of Grenada, Mr. Eric
M. Gairy, to address the General Assembly.

.

,
~

1,

2233rd meeting

289. Mr. GAIRY (Grenada): It is with overwhelming
emotion and a deep sense of gratification that 1 accel?t
the privilege and the honour afforded me at t?IS
moment to address the Assembly, and, speakmg
for and on behalf of the Government and the people
of our new nation Grenada, known as the Isle of
Spice, please permit me to express my grateful tha~k­
fulness to the most gracious members of the Secunty
Council for their kind and unanimous recommendation of our membership to your very august and
distinguished Organization. Permit me also to express
again my thankfulness and appreciation to our sponsors
and ta every State Member of the United Nations
that has supported the recommendation giving us full
membership in the Organization with ail the rights,
privileges and obligations entrenched within the
Charter.
290. The fullness of our obligations entrenched
within the Charter has been clearly demonstrated
and fully expressed within the terms of the pre amble
to the Constitution of Grenada, in which;
"We the people of Grenada have affirmed that
our nation is founded upon principles that acknowledge the fatherhood and supremacy of God and
man's duties towards his fellow man;
"We recognize that, inasmuch as spiritual development is of supreme importance to human existence, and the highest expression thereof, it is our
aspiration to serve that end with aIl our strength
and resources;
"We firmly believe in the dignity of human
values and that aIl men are endowed by the Creator
with equal and inalienable rights, reason and conscience; that rights and duties are correlative in
every social and political activity of man; and
that while rights exait individual freedom, duties
express the dignity of that freedom;
"We express our respect for the rule of law;
and since moral conduet constitutes the noblest
flowering of our culture and our plural heritage,
regard it as the dut Y of every man always to hold
it in high respect;

r

"We reiterate that the ideal of [ree men enjoying
freedom from fear and want can be best achieved
if conditions are created whereby everyone may
enjoy his economic, social and politiea!, civil and
cultural rights."

(

291. We desire that our Constitution should reflect
the above-mentioned principles and beliefs, which
represent those high ideals upon which our nation
is founded, and make provision for ensuring the
protection in Grenada of fundamental rights and
privileges.

t
1

~

!"

f'.

292. The General Assembly's twenty-ninth session
is in many ways its most significant and somewhat
critical one. As we move swiftly-all too swiftlytowards the end of the twentieth century, no area
in the world, indeed no nation, is entirely free of
disease, hunger, poverty, iIIiteraey. Nor is anyone
endowed with the full blessings of peaee for which
we strive.This poses a chal1enging situation for aIl
-the large and the smaIl, the great and the humble.
Yes, it is al80 a challenge to the new and developing
nations so full of hope from this day on. And 1 wish

17 September 1974

27

to extend sincerest congratulat(ons ta Bangladesh
and Guinea-Bissau.
293. Grenada' s presence here today in t.his.world
assembly is in itself an expression of falth In the
United Nations and a reiteration of that confidence
referred to by the late Dag Harnmarskjôld, the second
Seeretary-General of the United Nations, when
he spoke of "the capacity of men and Governments
to have the common sense to find their way out of
the awful labyrinth of seemingly ir~ecom:i1able conflicts and the insoluble problems In whlch we are
now wandering".
294. We are here, too, because of a cornmon identity of interests between the nations represented
here and our new nation, Grenada. Our common
interests are fundamental to the successflil resolu~
tion of our problems at both the national and the
international levels.
295. It is precisely because of our unshakable faith
in fundamental human rights, and in the dignity and
worth of man, which underscores the principle of
self-determination, that the people of Grenada have
chosen the thorny path from colonial servitude to
national independence.
296. It is also precisely because of our faith in the
sanctity of the equal rights of men and women that
we have enshrined in our Constitution the provisions
which guarantee that the rights of Grenadian women
are equated to those of Grenadian men, especially
in the context of citizenship, thereby setting a precedent for this aspect of human equality within the
Commonwealth of Nations.
297. May 1 put on record here today that Grenada
if firmly committed to the concept of the rule of law
-a concept in which we have been schooled and
a concept we irrevocably accept and endorse.
298. My address here today is not intended to be
our definitive statement on foreign poliey. This will
be fully expounded at a later time.
299. As the e1ected leader of our nation, 1 assure
you that Grenada stands today as a free nation, a
nation committed to the cause of world peace. Within the General Assembly, as in the other organs in
which we shall serve, we shan co-operate to the
fullest extent ta achieve a reduction of international
tensions and an improvement and promotion of the
climate of understanding among nations and peopies. Members of the United Nations thus equally
committed to the cause of world peace can readily
rely on Grenada's support in exercises aimed at
achieving the goal of ail mankind: the elimination
of the negative and counter-productive forces of
friction and the achievement of a world order based
on the principles of human dignity.
300. 1 feel so strongly, so totally committed to the
cause of world peace that whenever and wherever
the opportunity presents itself, l would, if asked,
unhesitatingly join in any efforts at mediation tending
towards a peaceful settlement of international dis-'
putes.
301. Our poHcy commitment to the cause of universaI peace, in the context of the present disposition of international poli tics , is firmly rooted in the
principle of respect for the territorial integrity of

28

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Sesslon-Plenary Meetings

--------------------

nations. We are therefore opposed to the division
or dismemberment of sovereign States through outsicle inte1ference or subversion.
302. Disturbances, wars and political pressures
do certainly transcend ail boundaries, whether religious, ideological, political or otherwise. Naturally
and consequently, even the smallest terri tories are
immediately, directly or indirectJy, affected by any
form of tension.
303. Over the past 29 years of the existence of
the United Nations, we have followed with unswerving tenacity the activities of the Organization
and its unflinching determination to bring freedom
to peoples in every corner of the globe; and it was
in this very respect that 1 was afforded the privilege
on two occasions in the past year to address the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples on matters relating to human justice
and to freeing Grenada and its people from colonial
rule. In turn, we today pledge ourselves, without
any reservation whatever, to join ail nations within
the ambit of the United Nations, and even those
outside, in continuing the relentless fight for the
emancipation and freedom of all peoples of the world
-a world in which most are people of colour, my
black brothers and sisters in various parts of the
hemispheres.
304. We ourselves, in our struggle to attain the
status of national independence, which is the prerequisite of our being here, have experienced the not
uncommon birth pains that precede the transition
from colonial status to full freedom and independence. And now that we are accepted as a full-fledged
Member of this noble body, this fact must essentially
provide aIl sane, loyal and patriotic citizens and
ail friends of Grenada with a very deep sense of satisfaction. And in this context 1 sense the spirit of
every Grenadian citizen and friend harmonizing
with me at this very moment in giving praise to the
great Gad, the Supreme Architect of the universe,
the Universal Power, the great source of ail existence, the centre of aU creation-God, holding and
binding aU things together. And so we say in unison:
"0 praise the Lord, ail ye nations: praise him, ail
ye people. For His merciful kindness is great toward
us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Praise
ye the Lord." (Psalm Il7)
305. Today we would like to place on record our
homage to the original authors of the United Nations
Declaration on decolonization of 14 Deeember 1960
[reso1ution 1514 (XV)], and in particular to the African
group of States, who ehampioned this principle in
this very cham ber almost 14 years ago. In our struggles we were indeed heartened, encouraged and
inspired by the clear and unequivocal message contained in that Declaration.
306. Grenada pledges its unswerving support for
the principle of decolonization. Like other nations
which have had to struggle against great odds to
achieve independence, we know that there can be,
and there must be, no compromise in the matter
of freedom.

307. Within the framework of this august Assembly
and elsewhere, the firm and total commitment of
our nation to the establishment and maintenance
of human dignity, freedom and equality will be characterized by a dedication to the redressing of aU social
evils.
308. If we are conscientiously resolved to put into
effect those lofty principles inherent in our faith
in the equal rights of men and women, if we are conscientiously resolved to establish human equality,
we must essentially recognize and accept the fact
that there is a marked tendency to leave behind us
what l consider to be a most Integral and most vital
part of our human resources-woman. Il is in this
context, therefore, that Grenada has been paying
due recognition to the position of the women in our
society and to the contribution that they can make
in the daily life of our nation. Our philosophy is evidenced by the faet that Grenada is the first and the
only country in the Commonwealth in which a woman
was recommended-by me, as head of Governmentand appointed as a Governor.
309. Again, in keeping with our philosophy, Grenada .is the first and only Government within the
Commonwealth to provide in its Constitution, in
article 98, that women's rights shall be equated to
men's, particularly in regard to citizenship.
310. A further illustration of our philosophy and
in eloquent testimony to the confidence and high
esteem with which we value the contribution our
women can make to world affairs, my Government
has chosen a woman, Mrs. Marie-Jo Mclntyre, who
is here with us today, to be our first plenipotentiary
permanent representative in this world body.
311. l look forward with excited expectation to
the time when the great Powers of the Western Hemisphere will include a woman technologist in outer
space exploration; for if man is to dwell one day
on the moon or on any other planets, he cannot do
that successfully without woman.
312. We in Grenada have also given profound
thought to the so-called population explosion, and
we believe that the real solution consists in greater
efforts to achieve maximum production from our
arable lands and a more equitable distribution of our
products.
313. When we consider the perfection of God, it
is diffieult, extremely difficult for us, to conceive
that God has created and is creating more people
than those for whom He has made provision. Il is
again in this context that Grenada welcomes this
opportunity to be able to make a contribution at
sorne later date towards the solution of this problem
in a manner that is efficacious and lasting.
314. The Grenada that you have admitted to membership in the United Nations today is a land of beauty,
of hope, of peace and of stability. Il is a land of good
beaches, with perhaps one of the best beaches in
the world. Il was the Prince of Wales in the 1920s
who proclaimed the world famous Grand Anse beach
in Grenada as the best in the world, and l hesitate
to challenge the validity of that statement.
315. Since the destinies of ail our nations here
represented are interrelated and interdependent

2233rd meetlng-17 September 1974

i'

1

i

r
1

f
1

r

1
1

,l
,

!
~

with the well-béing of each individual Mémbèr, Grenada welcomes ail willing foreign enterprise to enter
into a meaningful and mutually beneficial participatory exercise in bringing about the development
of our nation. In a spirit of international co-operation, we welcome ail who wish to assist us with their
technical knowledge and their resources, so that
we may strengthen our self-reliance. Such co-operation must, however, be based on the principle of
mutual respect for each other's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and it must be based
most particularly on the inviolable right of ail nations
fully to exploit their natural resources for the maximum
benefit and development of their citizens.
316. It might be appropriate at this time to mention that arrangements are already being made in the
United States to establish a Grenada trust fund,
designed primarily to assist our youth in the pursuance of secondary, technical and university education. Our pre-independence birth-pains have greatly
affected our plans for education and have done serious damage to our educational structure. In our
effort to reconstruct our educational system, we need
co-operation going beyond words.
317. 1 could not end without expressing my gratitude for the contacts aiready afforded me by sorne
of the long-established independent nations. 1 was
overwhelmed by the hospitality and friendliness
of President Nyerere during my recent visit to the
Unitèd Republic of Tanzania on the occasion of the
Pan-African Congress, and 1 regret that 1 was not
able to be present to join in welcoming him in the
Caribbean. 1 extoi the brotherly friendship and generous hospitality of General Gowan and the Government and people of Nigeria. To meet General Gowan,
a comparatively young man with a tremendous responsibility of such a large population and powerful
nation, a young man of such simplicity and modesty,
was indeed a source of inspiration and lasting satisfaction. General Yakubu Gowan is indeed a great
personality.
318. My recent visit to the continent of Africa afforded me many opportunities and, having met
Mr. Benedict Tolbert, the son of the President of
Liberia, and roving ambassador, 1 am fully conyinced
today that Liberia will continue to make an invaluable contribution to world peace and to the various
areas to which this august body directs its attention.
319. Mr. President, if 1 omitted at the commencement of my address to congratulate you, let me not
be guilty also of the same omission before the conclusion. So let me ex tend to you heartiest congratulations on your election to the high and enviable
office which you now hold.
320. May 1 in conclusion exhort you to join me in
rededicating ourselves and recommitting ourselves
to the pursuit of world peace with ail the vigour,
aU the enthusiasm and ail the energy, mental, physical and spiritual, at our disposai for the fostering
and maintaining of world peace, so that there may
be justification for the people we represent today
thanking us for our efforts. God, the supreme and
divine Architect, may bless us for our sincerity of
purpose, our enemies may i,n silence and in conscience admire us for our unswerving determination, and generations yet unborn may praise us for

29

their heritage as we today ask the cosmic Father:

o God of ail nations, help us to knowwho weare; Lord,
teach us to know ourselves; Lord, help us to understand better the purpose for which we have been
placed on this earth plane; and Lord, help us to perform our duties and obligations more promptly and
more effectively, to your greater satisfaction and
glory and for the salvation of mankind as a whole.
May God bless our deliberations.
321. The PRESIDENT (interpretationJrom French).'
1 now calI on the Commissioner for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Victor Saude
Maria.
322. Mr. SAUDE MARIA (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation Jrom French): The historie decision just
taken by the United Nations to admit us as the one
hundred and thirty-eighth Member State is for our
people a great source of pride and encouragement
which will for ever mark the history of the African
liberation struggle. May we on this occasion, on
behalf of our people and our Governrnent, congratulate very warmly our brother and cornrade-in-arms,
Abdelaziz Bouteflika, Foreign Minister for the Peopie' s Democratic Republic of Aigeria, on his brilliant
election to the presidency of the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly. This choice is in keeping
with the historic magnitude of the Algerian revolution which, through its thousands of martyrs, gave
impulse to the liberation of our African continent,
and is a great honour not only for the peoples of
Africa but also for ail those who love peace.
323. Faced with the complexity of the problems
which confront us today, problems which are sometimes grave and could jeopardize international peace
and security, such as the situation in Africa, the
Middle East, Asia, Cyprus and elsewhere, and well
aware, Mr. President, of your remarkable qualities
since the day when you were an officer in the national
liberation army and, now when you are in the forefront of Aigerian diplomacy, we are certain that
you will discharge brilliantly the difficult mission
with which you have been entrusted by the international community. During the negotiations in
Algiers between the Portuguese Govemment and
our party, we had an opportunity of appreciating
highly your qualities as a great diplomat and the
skill which you displayed throughout the development of those negotiations. This leads us to ask you
to convey our gratitude to your Government and
people, while extending to you our best wishes for
continued success in the fulfilment of your new
mission.
324. To the outgoing President, Mr. Leopoldo
Benites, Ambassador of Ecuador, who presi~ed
brilliantly over the work of the twenty-eighth sessIOn
at a time when we were still at war, goes our deep
appreciation of the wisdom with which he successfully discharged his mandate. We should like on
this occasion to extend to him our warm congratulations and our best wishes in his diplomatie career.
325. To the United Nations, through ils SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, we address aU our
gratitude for the firm support which it has always
accorded us in our difficult struggle. Through the
various actions of the Organization to promote the
definitive solution of the colonial problem, we have

30

General Assembly-Twenty-nlnlh Session-Plenary Meellngs

always been aware of the personal efforts, the devotion and the good sense of the Secretary-General,
to whom we pay the highest tribute.

326. Mr. Secretary-General, in the exercise of the
mandate with which you have been entrusted, despite
your crowded schedule, not to mention the urgent
problems of the hour such as the situations in the
Middle East, Viet Nam and elsewhere, you have
spared no sacrifice and no effort to deal personally
with the problems of the Portuguese colonies. Your
special attitude towards our country and towards
our people in its national liberation struggle has
moved us profoundly and will be inscribed in the
annals of the history of the people of Guinea-Bissau
and Cape Verde. Future generations will long remember your untiring efforts to secure international
peace and security, co-operation and social progress.
Your personal efforts have given new momentum
to the Organization and have been a landmark in
international relations. May we once again express
to you our deep gratitude for your efforts and extend
our best wishes to you in the exercise of your difficult
mission at the service of peace, social progress and
the happiness of mankind.
327. At this memorable moment when we are about
to assume our rights and obligations in the Organization, members will understand the joy and emotion
we fee!. Therefore, may we be permitted to extend
to the people you represent here our warm greetings
and our gratitude for the support always accorded
our people in its just struggle for national independence.
328. During the 12 years of our armed struggle
for liberation, we were able to appreciate fully the
various actions of your peoples and Governments
designed to find a successful solution to our conflict
with the Portuguese Government. The Special Comrnittee on decolonization, which has made untiring
efforts in these last few years, contributed greatly
to the search for a just solution to the painful conflict which pitted our people against the Fascist and
colonialist State of Portugal. We still remember
the important and historic Special Mission of the
Special Committee to our country at the most difficult moment of our national Iiberation struggle
and des pite the danger and risk to the lives of those
pilgrims of peace. The report submitted by that Mission 2 and adopted by the General Assembly was
in itself a striking victory, not only for the United
Nations but also for our people and for Africa as a
whole. That Mission of the Committee to our country
unquestionably marked a new era in the struggle
of oppressed peoples.
329. As we take our tirst steps in this great international community, we are in duty bound to recall
the outstanding role played by our African brothers,
who have spared no effort in their steadfast defence
of the supreme interests of our people, which aspired
only to freedom, peace, social progress and the exercise of its sovereignty. Mr. President, you who have
been and remain forever the untiring combatant for
the Iiberation of the African man deserve our deep
tribute at this decisive moment in the history of our
people. Thanks to those various actions, a definitive
solution was reached with the signature of the AIgiers

cease-tÎre agreement and the de jure act of recogn~
tion of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau by the new
Portuguese authorities. That decision thus puts an
end to a long tragedy and paves the way to solution
of the conflict in the other Portuguese colonies.
330. The violent nature of our national liberation
struggle was the result of the categorical refusais
and the obstinacy of the colonialist Governments
of Salazar and, later, of Marcelo Caetano. But our
Party, in the person of ils Secretary-General, the
first militant of our Party and the founder of our
nation, the late, lamented Amflcar Cabral, the architect of ail our victories and of ail our political, military and diplomatic successes, never ceased to affirm
that our struggle was essentially a political one and
that it was not at ail directed against the Portuguese
people. Today, thanks to the concerted efforts of
us ail, that affirmation has come true. The proclamation of the State of Guinea- Bissau is a political weapon
and a means to arrive at the total liberation of our
people in Guinea-Bissau and in the Cape Verde
Islands.

331. From this rostrum we reaffirm to the present
leaders of Portugal our tirm desire to find a satisfactory solution to the problem of the Cape Verde
Islands as a sine qua non for the creation of a solid
basis for fruitful and fraternal co-operation between
our two peoples and Governments.
332. While we feel particular joy in joining today
the great United Nations family, it is none the less
true that the thought of the efforts we still have to
make to achieve the total Iiberation of our peoples,
particularly the people of the Cape Verde Islands,
is a sobering one. Our thoughts are also with our
comrades-in-arms who continue ta struggle for national Iiberation in Angola and Mozambique, Sao
Tome and Principe and in ail other countries under
foreign domination. We hope that, thanks ta our
resolute action and to the assistance of the international community, this tragedy we are living through
now will soon be only a distant memory.
333. To the People's Republic of Bangladesh and
the Republic of Grenada, just admitted along with
us, we should like to say that we rejoice at their success, and we extend to their peoples our best wishes
for progress and happiness.

334. In concluding my brief statement, 1 should
Iike once again to pay a tribute to the African countries, particularly to our neighbours, for the full support they have always accorded us. Ta the socialist
countries, whose contribution was decisive for our
victory, we express our entire gratitude. To the other
countries of Western Europe, particularly the Scandinavian countries, whose humanitarian assistance
has played a very important role in the reconstruction of our Iiberated areas; we pay our deepest tribute.
May we also thank the peoples of Asia and America
whose various actions also contributed to the success of our struggle.
335. Today a new phase begins in the Iife of our
people: that of national reconstruction. As we emerge
from many centuries of domination and from 12 years
of war, you will weil understand the difficulties that
we face in building our country. Since we aspire

31

2233rd meeting-17 September 1974

to work for universal peace and social progress,
we are confident th~t we shall find in each of you and
of your States the support and advice that we expect
from all the members of the international community.
336. The PRESIDENT (illlerpretation!rom French):
On behalf of the General Assembly, I should like
to repeat our sincere and warmest congratulations
to the three Republics that have now swelled the
ranks of this noble and distinguished Assembly.
In particular I wish to thank the last speaker for the

.- -

"',1.·:"'"

kind things he said about my country through' my
modest person.
The meeting rose at 9./5 p.m.

NOTES

See A/91%/Add.l. p. 7.
See OjJidal Records of the Ge"eral Assembly. TlI'etltyse\'etlth Sessio". S/lpplelllellt No. 23. chap. X. annex I.
I

2

.
