UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2534). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16514). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SlPV.2534

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ojjkial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2534th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 4 May 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President:

I have received a letter from the representative of Algeria in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

/

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.

agenda (SIAgenda12534)

1. Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The first speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

4. Mr. WIJEWARDANE (Sri Lanka): I wish to thank
you, Sir, and the other members of the Council for
affording my delegation an opportunity to address the
Council on the situation in Cyprus. I also wish to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of May. We are confident that, with your
mature judgement, experience and well-known diplomatic skill, y&u will be able to guide the Council to a
speedy and satisfactory conclusion of this debate. May
I also take this opportunity to express our appreciation
td Mr. Kravtts of the Ukrainiafl Soviet Socialist Repubiic for the able nianner lil which he conducted the
Cotmcil’s tiork during the mdnth of April.

was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Sectirity Council (S/16514)

1. The PRESIDENT [ihterpretation from Russiaiz]:
In accordance with the decjsidfis taken at the previous
meetings on this iteni (253Zst to 2533rd ri?eetitigs]
I invite the tepresehtatities of Cyprus, Greece &fid
Turkey to take places at the Ctiuncil table; I invite the
representatives ;of Afghaiiistan, Afitigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Ecuadoi-, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab R&
pubiic and kugosiivia to take the places ieserved for
thein at the side of the Cotincil chamber.

5. The situation in Cyprus has engaged the attention
of the United Nations for fwo decades. During the past
20 Leafs this issue has been brought before the Council,
BSwell as the Gexi&al Assenibly, on numerous occasions. The deteriorating situation in that country necessitated the reconveriifig of the thirty-seventh session of
the General Assembly in, hay of last year, and within
six months the Security Council had to be convened as
a result of the decision taken by the Turkish Cypriot
side to declare uirilateral independence.

At the irivitation of the President, Mr. Zacovou (Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) ahd Mr. Kirca (Turkey)
took places at the Cotincil tab!e: Mr. Za~t~(AfghanLtan), Mr. Jacobs (Antigua andBarbtida),
Mr. Woolcott
(Australia), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. Wijeirjardane
(Sri Lanka), Mr. AIAAtassi (Syriati Arab Republic) and
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Councii chamber.

6. SeCuiity Council resolution 186 (1964), adopted in
Match i964, dealt with the problem of the situation in
Cyprus. The third preambular paragraph of that resolution made reference to the cardinal principles enshrined
in Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations. Since
then the Security Council and the General Assembly
have adopted resolutions on the subject, including
Council resolution 365 (1974) and Assembly resolution

2. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
1

3212 (XXIX). In paragraph 1 of the latter the Assembly
“Calls upon all States to respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the
Republic of Cyprus and to refrain from all acts and
interventions directed against it”, and in paragraph 2 it
“Urges the speedy withdrawal of all foreign armed
forces and foreign military presence and personnel
from the Republic of Cyprus, and the cessation of all
foreign interference in its affairs”. Regrettably, these
resolutions remain unimplemented
to date, except in so
far as they led to the revival of intercommunal
dialogue.

the Turkish Cypriot side than the Minister for Foreign
Affairs issued a statement, which the Sri Lanka delegation quoted in the Council on 18 November 1983. In that
statement the Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka said that
the “illegal
and unilateral declaration
of independence . . . is a regrettable setback to the efforts being
made to achieve a peaceful, unified and stable Cyprus
through the efforts of the Government of Cyprus, the
United Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement”
[see
2499th meeting, para. 271. He further stated that Sri
‘Lanka would not extend any form of recognition to that
‘.
entity.

7. In 1974, when Cyprus was invaded and occupied,
the international
community
believed that what
happened in Cyprus was an aberration in international
relations and only a temporary phenomenon. However,
throughout the ensuing decade this belief has continued
even when certain ominous developments took place in
Cyprus, such as the unilateral announcement of February 1975 which declared that the occupied part of
Cyprus would become “the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus”.

12. Cyprus has come before the Security Council
once again because it is the principal organ of the
United Nations which is responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security. The Council
should not be complacent merely because there is no
violence or bloodshed in Cyprus at present. It has to
take into consideration the fact that the armed intervention against Cyprus took place 10 years ago and that the
occupation of that country has continued since then.

8. As we are aware, the Security Council and the
General Assembly have recommended the continuation of intercommunal
talks and have entrusted the
Secretary-General
with the responsibility
of pursuing
his mission of good offices. However, the international
community, to its dismay, finds the situation in Cyprus
continuing to deteriorate. Regrettably, while the Secretary-General was making every attempt to fulfil his
mandate, the Turkish Cypriot side, on the other hand,
was continuing its strategy of working against the resolutions of the Security Council.

13. In his report of 1 May; the Secretary-General
has
emphasized the importance of maintaining a continuing
process of communication
and negotiation and uninterrupted deployment
of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
The delegation
of Sri Lanka wholeheartedly supports this position. It is
my delegation’s fervent hope that the Security Council,
having taken into consideration the report of the Secretary-General and the statements made before the Council, will decide on appropriate measures that would
arrest the deteriorating situation in Cyprus. It is also
our hope that the Council will give a fresh mandate to
the Secretary-General
to intensify his mission of good
offices and call on all parties concerned to give their
wholehearted co-operation to him, which is essential to
finding a just and lasting solution to the problem of
Cyprus.

9. Having declared unilateral independence in November last year, which was declared legally invalid
by the Security Council, the Turkish Cypriot side has
taken other steps, such as announcing its intention to
adopt a flag of its own in March this year and holding
“constitutional
referendum”
and “elections”
in
August and November 1984,‘respectively,
as indicated
in the Secretary-General’s
report [S/Z6529]. The situation has been further aggravated by the decision to
exchange ambassadors. We have to bear in mind that all
these activities were set in motion by the Turkish Cypriot side at a time when the Secretary-General
was
conducting an active dialogue with the Government of
Cyprus and the Turkish Cypriot side.

14. In addition to any their decisions the Council may
wish to make, it should also examine the most effective
ways of implementing
its previous resolutions on the
subject, preferably within a given time-frame.
15. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
Mr. Rauf Denktag, to whom the Council extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at the 2531st meeting, wishes to make a further
statement. With the consent of the Council, I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

10. As a member of the Commonwealth,
the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the contact group
on Cyprus, Sri Lanka has closely followed the events in
Cyprus. Sri Lanka views the recent developments that
have taken place in Cyprus with deep concern and
regret. We have consistently supported the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus and have called for both
the withdrawal of foreign troops and non-interference
in the internal affairs of Cyprus.

16. Mr. DENKTAS:
I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me a second opportunity
to speak before the
Council in order to make a further statement in reply to
what we have heard about the Cyprus problem, yesterday and today, from various speakers.

11. No sooner had the Government
of Sri Lanka
learned of the unilateral declaration of independence by

17. The representative of Sri Lanka has just spoken in
very eloquent terms, and this morning [2533rdmeetingl
2

the representative of Yugoslavia spoke in equally eloquent terms. In this connection all I want to mention is
this. These two countries are members of the contact
group. The contact group has been one-sided and what
they said was one-sided. With all the good intentions in
this world, if our point of view is not understood, if we
are not treated as part of Cyprus, as people some of
whom have died in order to protect the independence of
Cyprus from being destroyed in the name of enosis, as
people who for 20 years have been treated in.a manner
which no other people would have accepted, then, of
course, the situation will not be improved.

22. In order to prevent a Greco-Turkish
war and to
put an end to a civil war in Cyprus, a suigeneris state of
partnership was established. It is this partnership which
was destroyed in 1963, and the whole exercise since
then has been tore-establish this partnership, for which
there is a formula.
23. In 1977, I agreed with Makarios to settle this
problem by establishing the partnership in a bi-zonal
federal republic. So if we have not gone there it is not
because, as the Greek Cypriot side now proclaims, that
Turkey, as an aggressor, has invaded Cyprus. Who has
invaded Cyprus? I would like to remind the Council by
citing Archbishop Makarios himself, who on 19 July
1974, talking to the Security Council, said:

18. Intercommunal
talks are, as named, “intercommunal” talks. The concept of a legitimate Government
within the intercommunal
talks or over the intercommunal talks cannot be supported, having regard to the
facts of Cyprus. And it is because this concept has
been bolstered by people and countries that know little
about Cyprus and that have been misinformed for many
years that progress is not being made. I beg that the
Secretary-General’s
hands be untied, so that he may be
free from this concept in conducting his good-offices
mission. Otherwise, in making offers with this concept
of “the Government of Cyprus’* as his starting-point,
he is hindered from doing justice to the two sides.

“The coup . . . is clearly an invasion from outside, in
flagrant violation of the independence and sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus. The so-called coup
was the work of the Greek officers staffing and commanding the National Guard.” [See 1780th meeting,
para. 18.1
24. The 15 July 1974 coup was an invasion and the
invasion continues so long as there are Greek officers in
Cyprus. This invasion could not be stopped by any
country except Turkey, as a guaranteeing
Power.
Greek officers are still in Cyprus, their numbers are
increasing, and there is the threat that they will increase
even more. Yesterday I quoted Prime Minister Papandreou’s statement that he regards Cyprus as a Greek
State and that he aims at uniting the two Greeces and
making them into one,

19. I shall now refer to the allegations made by
the Greek Cypriot
side yesterday
[253Zst and
2532nd meetings]. I shall begin by again pointing out
that the Greek Cypriots who occupy the seat of Cyprus
do not have the mandate of the whole of Cyprus. They
are usurpers of power, usurpers of the name of the
Government of Cyprus. They have no mandate under
the Constitution
because, were the Constitution
still
valid-and
it is not, since they have consigned it to
the waste-paper basket long ago-the Turkish Cypriot
side would have to countersign their credentials and
appointments to their posts, and there would also have
to be Turkish Cypriot representatives with them. Since
they have wiped out all Turkish Cypriot personnel from
the organs of the State, they have no Turkish Cypriot
representative there. It is a 100 per cent Greek Cypriot
racist regime that is being presented to the Council and
to the world as the Government of Cyprus.

25. That is the position, and I ask whether representatives who have been accusing us of fomenting a secessionist movement and of defying the Security Council
are aware that, if we had not resisted what Greek Cypriots were doing in Cyprus, we would have been dead,
or we would have been completely out of our own
State. We have saved our State. We have saved our
partnership rights and we are entitled to sit with our
Greek Cypriot partner and reestablish the partnership;
if that is what they wish to do.
26. It was stated yesterday by the Greek Cypriot representative that Turkey is the alien and undesirable
element in Cyprus, that Turkey has come and partitioned the island. You will recollect that the green line
was drawn in 1963 when Greek Cypriots attacked us
with their secret armies in order to down us as a partner.
community and in order to unite the island with Greece.
The green-line division started then. The green line is
where we stopped the Greek Cypriot aggressor. The
green line is where the two communities,
the two partners, fell apart because of the Greek Cypriot attack. To
say that Turkey came and partitioned the island is misinformation and does not impute good will to us.

20. That is the first point I wished to make, and I shall
make it repeatedly because- this is the law and this is a
fact in Cyprus; and unless we pay due regard to the laws
and to the facts of the case, we shall not be able to find
justice. Justice cannot be sought in the abstract and
without a fair statement of facts and the law pertaining
to them.
21. What are the facts of Cyprus? I stated them yesterday [2531st meeting]. The Republic of Cyprus-its
independence and sovereignty-was
not won by the
Greek Cypriots. It was won by the two peoples of
Cyprus as a result of a conflict-the
conflict of union
with Greece, which Greek Cypriots regarded as liberty-and our resistance to it because we regarded it as
neocolonialism.

27. On this point let me refer to the Greek representative’s statement in July 1974, when he said:
“Contemptuously
disregarding the written warnings
by former Foreign Minister Averoff, he”-Maka3

rios--“insisted
on proposing the 13 points for the
amendment of the Zurich Constitution, thus opening
Aeolus’ bags, which resulted in the tragic clashes of
December 1963 and the de facto partition of the
island by the so-called green line.” [ibid., paru, 46.J
:
::
::
:

:

men who love freedom? That is what we refuse to do,
that is why the Cyprus problem has proceeded so far
and that is what they are still doing to Cyprus.
32. We want the Government of Cyprus to be established as a binational government. We have made proposals, and we are waiting for the Greek Cypriots to
come to the table and start the negotiations from the
point where we left off. There is no other way and there
is no other solution except the establishment of a federal republic of Cyprus, if Cyprus is going to be united.

So this Greek Cypriot’s presentation that Turkey came,
invaded and divided the country is false information.
Turkey came and prevented the utter invasion of Cyprus by Greek forces. Then we have all the records of
the Secretary-General which show how the Greek army
came into Cyprus first clandestinely and then openly.

33. When I last addressed the Council I said that if the
unity of Cyprus was really desired its duality must be
accepted--otherwise,
there is no need for unity; unity
exists. If the Government of Cyprus exists as a legitimate organ, there is no reason for the intercommunal
talks at all, because the purpose of those talks is to
establish a legitimate, bicommunal, binational, bi-zonal
Government.
So how can the Security Council, the
General Assembly or the Non-Aligned Movement blow
hot and cold at the same time, asserting that the legitimate Government has to be obeyed and that what it
says is the order of the day, and tying the Secretary-.
General’s hands so that he cannot move away from this
concept, which blocks the way to peace, to a final
settlement? This is my question to you all.

28. I should like to refer the Council to Papandreou’s
book where he boasts about his father in the following
words:
“On June 14” -this is 196A‘he
sent Grivas, by
then a Lieutenant General in the Greek army, to
Cyprus, for the purpose of co-ordinating future military actions against the Turkish Cypriots. He also
made good on his promise to smuggle in troops from
mainland Greece. He entrusted Defence Minister
Peter Garufalias with the responsibility
of directing
this operation. According to the noted journalist,
Takis Torikopalos,
Garufalias managed to pull off
a magnificent
coup under cover of darkness.
Using only small yachts and fishing boats, 9,000 men
and 950 officers, ‘fully equipped and heavily armed,
landed in Cyprus.”

34. It becomes clearer to me with every meeting that
the more votes they receive on their resolutions
-which have nothing to do with the realities of Cyprus,
and therefore we are forced not to accept those resolutions, because they are one-sided and based on the
wrong concept-the
surer they become of themselves,
and we hear statements such as the one we heard yesterday that they are the sole legitimate Government of
Cyprus and that is why they are in the Security Council.
A 100 per cent Greek Cypriot administration,
representing only the Greek Cypriots, not having dealt with the
Turkish Cypriots for 21 years, except by attacking them
and depriving them of their rights, says that it is the
legitimate Government
of Cyprus. According to the
Security Council’s resolutions, Cyprus is a binational
State, and intercommunal
talks are required, urged and
advised in order to settle the problem.

These troops became the backbone of the new National
Guard, the unconstitutionally
created Cypriot army,
Why? In order to pursue military actions against the
Turkish Cypriots and to unite Cyprus with Greece.
29.

And this is what Newsweek reports:

“Before dawn each day the great iron doors of the
Port of Limassol are slammed shut.‘Turkish Cypriot
dockers are sent home. United Nations guards are
barred. A few hours later the doors swing open and
covered lorries, weaving on heavily overloaded
springs, roar out of the Port and head northwards
towards the Troodos Mountains”.
30. I put the following question to any representative
who invites us to submit to the kind of organization
represented by the Government
of Cyprus: if three
fourths of the population of your country accepted all
these troops from another State with the intention of
destroying your country; if they clandestinely defied
United Nations Forces and prepared for action against
one fourth of the population,
and you were the one
fourth; if they destroyed the constitutional
setup and
threw the whole Constitution and rule of law into the
waste-paper basket, would you have accepted them as
we are supposed to accept the Government of Cyprus?

35. How can this be? It becomes possible with the
one-sided resolutions and with this concept of the legitimate Government.
I am not asking the Council to
reverse its decisions on those points. All that I am
asking representatives to do is to whisper into the Secretary-General’s
ear that they know what kind of a
legitimate Government the Greek Cypriots are at this
stage, and know that at the negotiating table it is not
necessary to ask the Turkish side to accept anything
emanating from the so-called legitimate Government,
as the Greek side does not have to accept anything
emanating from the Northern Republic of-Cyprus. It is
the two peoples, the co-founders of the Republic of
Cyprus, the people who created the Republic of Cyprus
as partners, talking in order to make a partnership State
again possible.

31. How can representatives expect us to accept a
situation to which they themselves would never bow as
men of honour, as men who love their countries and as
4

36. I say to the Council: “If this is the end you.all
want, I am sure you will be careful in your resolution.
You will not hit us and pat the Greek Cypriot side on the
back, because by doing so for so many years you have
unwittingly prevented a solution.” It is not realistic that
we should be asked to be obedient and pay allegiance to
an organization
to which .we owe no allegiance, an
organization 100 per cent Greek Cypriot, an organization which has done nothing but harm to us for 2 1 years.

“The Special Representative conveyed this position to Mr. Glafkos Clerides, the President of the
House of Representatives, who stated that the Turkish Cypriot members could attend provided agreement .were reached beforehand on the following
points:
“(a) The Turkish Cypriot members would resume
their seats permanently rather than only for the purpose of the present debate;

37. Yesterday I read out to the Council passages from
a report of the Secretary-General,
to the effect that as a
result of the 1963 onslaught on us, all our Turkish
Cypriot personnel had been ejected from the bicommunal Republic of Cyprus. I shall read out again from
the report of the Secretary-General
of 10 September
1964, as follows:

“(6) The Turkish Cypriot members would accept
that the laws enacted by the House of Representatives would be applied to the whole of Cyprus”laws enacted while Turkish members are out-and the
House cannot act legitimately
on a great deal of legislation without the Turkish members voting for or
against-but
we must accept as proper all legislation
that they pass. Paragraph 8 continues:

“The UNFICYP
authorities, from the beginning
of their mandate in Cyprus, gave serious consideration to this question and on several occasions raised
it with the Cyprus Government. All negotiations on
the possible re-employment
of the Turkish Cypriot
civil servants in Nicosia and their financial compensation from January 1964 have so far ended in a deadlock, as the matter is considered by the Government
to be highly political and closely linked with the final
settlement of the Cyprus question.”
[See S/.5950,
para.

“(c) While the Greek Cypriot members would regard attendance at the House by the Turkish Cypriot
members as implying recognition by them of the . . .
Cyprus Government”-it
has no Turk in it, but that
must imply recognition of the Cyprus Govemment“the Turkish Cypriot members would not be called
upon to make a statement to that effect.”

108.1

Secretly we would agree that we accepted them as the
Cyprus Government. They know they are not, so they
are putting this condition to us at gunpoint, that we
must accept them-a 100 per cent Greek Cypriot racist
regime-as
the Cyprus Government,
and it is that
organization that the Security Council and the General
Assembly have continued to treat as the legitimate
Government of Cyprus. Paragraph 8 continues:

That political question has not been settled so far, and
for 21 years all Turkish civil servants have been unable
to work at their posts, so they have worked for the
Turkish Cypriot community
in order not to let them
down, in order not to leave them in a vacuum. But
the Council was told seriously yesterday: “We never
expelled anyone from the Government service. Turkish
ministers were threatened out of o&e by Turkey.”
Can the Council accept so much for so long? Can it be
misled so openly on important matters where the life
and liberty of a people are at stake? Can it act on such
misinformation,
and can representatives then go home
and rest and sleep with their consciences clear that they
have done justice to Cyprus?

“(d) It must be understood that the provision in
article 78 of the Constitution
concerning separate
majorities had been abolished and every member of
the House would have one vote for all decisions.‘*
The Constitution
had been abolished-by
whom? By
the Greek Cypriots. And we had to accept it.

38. What is the political matter which has to be settled? I refer to the Secretary-General’s
report of 29 July
1965 [S/6.569]. Turkish Cypriot members of the Cyprus
Parliament have been kicked out. They cannot go because of the situation, but they must go. We see that
Greek Cypriots are making headway. We see that they
are pleased with the fact that they have kicked us out,
so we make representations to go, and I quote paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Secretary-General’s
report:

39.

The report goes on, in paragraph 9:

“Mr. Clerides informed UNFICYP
that he was
prepared to discuss the situation during the afternoon of 22 July with a group of Turkish Cypriot
members of the House. He subsequently indicated,
however, that he would not receive this delegation if
they came escorted by UNFICYP
soldiers”-people
are afraid to go to the Greek side, but they must not
be escorted--” though he would not object to their
being brought to his office in an UNFICYP
automobile driven by an UNFICYP
employee.”

“The
Turkish
Cypriot
members
requested
UNFICYP
to extend its good offices to enable them
to receive information
about the time of meeting
of the House, and to make arrangements for the
Turkish Cypriot members to attend such meetings in
safety. . . .

40. This, 1 hope, gives members of the Council a
picture of Cyprus, of the condition my community was
in: we were without the protection of the Constitution,
5

::

._
:.-

without the protection of law. without a legitimate
Government-only
people who had assumed the role of
the Government of Cyprus and who were threatening
us, that we must submit to them or else. The report
continues, in paragraph 9:

power, for the rule of one set of people without their
consent by another set of people. or for clandestine
importation of troops from another country in order to
destroy the sovereignty and independence of a State
and unite it with Greece.

“Finally, Mr. Clerides stated that unless the Turkish
Cypriot members accepted the conditions laid down
by him, he found it pointless to supply to them copies
of the pending bills.”

46. We have been shouting these things; why do the
non-aligned peoples not hear us? What is wrong with us
that we cannot make ourselves understood? We are
fighting for our country, for our independence and for
our sovereignty, which for 21 years have been grabbed
from us. Every action we take is taken in order to
establish that we exist, to prove to the world, and to
them, that we shall never submit.

41. The report then notes that this was passed on to
the Turkish side and that the Turkish Cypriots did not
accept it. They pointed out that it was contrary to the
Constitution.
In paragraph I I the report goes on:

47. And they come and say to the Security Council
that they never threw anyone out. Were Turkish Ministers threatened out of office by Turkey? And they say
that there are “at least a few courageous Turkish
Cypriots who defied Turkey and are still working
with us”. I think of the prestige of the Council when
such lies can be uttered. Only 134 Turkish Cypriots live
in the south. We have exchanged populations; populations have moved because of the war and since the
war; UNFICYP
has carried them. Two zones have
been established. Most of the 134 Turkish Cypriots who
live in the south are old people attached to their homes.
And the Council is told that “some courageous Turks
have defied Turkey and are working with us” and
that 150,000 cowardly Turks have obeyed Turkey and
are not working with them.

“During the afternoon, the Turkish Cypriot members visited the President of the House, who reiterated the substance of the points set forth in
paragraph 8 above. He made it plain that, unless
agreement was reached on these matters, he would
not permit the Turkish Cypriot members to attend
the House. Mr. Clerides also stated that the constitutional provisions concerning promulgation
of the
laws by the President and the Vice-President
[conjointly] .were no longer applicable. He subsequently
stated that in his opinion the Turkish Cypriot members had no legal standing any more in the House.”
42. We have been urged by the representative of India
and others to submit to this Government. Would they
submit to such an institution as the legal Government of
a State? Would they bow to such indignity? Would their
leader, the fighter, the renowned Gandhi, have advised
them to submit to that indignity? That is the question.

48. Is the Council going to accept that presentation of
the Cyprus facts? Is it going to condemn us on that
presentation? Is it not going to look into the facts
coolly? Is it not going to ask the Secretary-General
to
report on the realities of Cyprus as a beginning for his
mission of good offices? Is it going to have him bogged
down with the resolutions adopted on the basis of such
misinformation?
Those are my questions to the Council. Its resolution will either finish the intercommunal
talks completely and leave Cyprus divided, or will-if
there is to be a reasonable, good and balanced resolution-help
the reactivation
of the talks. We want
reactivation of the talks.

43. This was the state of affairs. This is what people
accepted as the Government of Cyprus and those who
sit at the other end of this table are the remnants of that
Government.
44. We did not bow to them, and we feel very proud of
the fact that we did not. We lived in caves; we went
hungry; Red Crescent food was denied us. But we did
not bow to them. Turkey was not there invading the
country; Greece was there with 20,000 troops, as I read
out from Papandreou’s book. We did not bow to them,
and we expected the Security Council to say to us,
“Well done; you are upholding the validity of international treaties; you are upholding the independence
and sovereignty of Cyprus; you are upholding human
dignity with this fight.” But there was no one to tell the
Council the truth. The few people, who were in the
embassies of Cyprus were kicked out, so the Council
heard only the Greek Cypriots.

49. We are told that the representative of the “Cyprus
Government”
never regarded Turkish Cypriots as
second-class citizens. How true: we were regarded as
fifth-, sixth-, or seventh-class citizens. We were regarded as rebels in our own country for having defied
them, for having defied their armed activity and their
conspiracy with Greece to annex Cyprus. We were
regarded as rebels to be shot on sight, and we were shot
on sight. We lost 103 villages. And he says to the
Council that they never regarded us as second-class
citizens. Just think what they would have done to us if
they had so regarded us.

45. If non-aligned principles recognize such Govemments as Governments fully entitled to rule other people by oppressing them and by denying them justice,
then we must take a second look at those non-aligned
principles. I do not think, though, that those principles
provide for the oppression of a people by usurpers of

50. Let us have a very short look at how they treated
the Turkish Cypriots whom they did not regard as
second-class citizens, and ask yourselves, gentlemen
6

ceiving some kind of assistance from the Red Crescent relief amounted to about 56,000.”

-and you, Sir, the representative of the land of Gandhi
and a distinguished representative, ask yourself-if
a
so-called Government which had taken over control of
all the organs of the State by force of arms and was
trying to destroy you, treating you in the way you shall
hear when I read it out to you, whether you would have
then submitted to it, or whether you would have fought
for your liberty and for your vested rights in the body
politic of your land.

Nearly half of the population
cent relief for years.

was living on Red Cres-

53. Would the members of this Council ask us to
accept those who treated us like this as the legitimate
Government of Cyprus? If you do, then the Charter is
not working. If you do, then the principles of non-alignment are not there. It is the right of man to be ruled with
his consent, with his participation in the Government,
not to be kicked around by gunmen who assume the role
of the Government of Cyprus.

51. I shall read out from the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 8 December 1967:
“thousands
of Turkish Cypriots fled from their
homes, taking with them only what they could drive
or carry, and sought refuge in what they considered
to be safer Turkish Cypriot villages and areas.” [See
S/8286, para. 126.1

54. We ask members only to have a look at the facts,
to ask the Secretary-General
to take a new look at the
facts, and not to take as a starting-point this Cyprus
Government. Once you have that, you have missed the
road and you have mistaken your goal. We all want to
proceed towards a united Cyprus in a bi-zonal federal
system. If that is also what the Greek Cypriots want,
then they should accept this, and Mr. Kyprianou should
not raise his nose and say, “I shall never speak to
Mr. Denktas.” Why? “Because Mr. DenktaS or his
people have established a State.” But we had a federated State which was functioning fully as a State, and he
talked to me, and it was for the good of Cyprus. What
has happened now? Because of his intransigence we
had to take a further step. If this intransigence continues, what shall we do, gentlemen? We shall take even
further steps, because there is a body politic living in
Cyprus. You cannot kill it; you cannot destroy it; you
cannot ask my people to live without the protection of a
Government, without the protection of a State. They
are entitled to it. They are human beings, and the Charter which gives you life provides that they should have
this right.

From what were they .fleeing? Were they fleeing from
the legitimate Govemment’of
Cyprus or from those
who had usurped the title, who had planned secret
armies under different leaders, who had taken an oath
to unite Cyprus with Greece and who had attacked us
because the then Foreign Minister, Mr. Kyprianou, had
reported to Makarios that the non-aligned were now
ready by their votes to abrogate the 1960 treaties, and
Turkey would never be allowed to intervene under
those treaties?
52. From the report of the Secretary-General
dated
10 September 1964 [S/5950]-and
I shall summarize,
from paragraph 190:
“In addition to losses incurred in agriculture and in
industry during the first part of the year, the Turkish
community had lost other sources of its income, including the salaries of over 4,000 persons who were
employed by the Cyprus Government and by public
and private concerns located in the Greek Cypriot
zones.”

55. From the report of the Secretary-General
31 May 1973:

But we are told Turkey divided the country. No-their
attack divided the country into Greek and Turkish
zones. The paragraph continues:

dated

“Practically
no progress has been made during the
period under review towards a solution of the problem of the Turkish Cypriot displaced persons. There
have been no’ negotiations on the general question
for two years, but from time to time efforts are made
to resettle abandoned villages.”
[See S/20940,
para. 67.1

“The trade of the Turkish community had declined
considerably . . . owing to the existing situation, and
unemployment
had reached a very high level, as
approximately
25,000 Turkish Cypriots had become
refugees. Expenditure
of the Turkish Communal
Chamber on development and other projects, as well
as other expenditure, had dropped ,considerably as a
yearly subsidy formerly received from the Govemment had ceased to be granted in 1964.”

56. In the report dated 1 December 1972 we learn that
103 villages have been abandoned and that we want to
return to some of them. UNFICYP
tries to help; people
come and go to the so-called Government of Cyprus;
but nothing happens.

The subsidy was for the education of our elementary
schoolchildren;
that also had been stopped, and our
children had to go to school in barns, in garages and
places like that. The paragraph goes on:

“No progress has been made towards solving the
general problem of Turkish Cypriot displaced persons. The request for resettlement of the Turkish
Cypriot village of Vroisha in Lefka district has been
rejected by the Government on the basis that it would
be economically
unsound for the villagers.”
[See
S/10842, para. 48.1

“In accordance with figures published by the Turkish
Communal’ Chamber, the number of persons re7

We resisted that, and we are accused of dividing
the country. Because we succeeded in defending
ourselves, the country was divided. Had we not succeeded, we would all have been dead and forgotten, and
Cyprus as an independent non-aligned country would
have been dead and forgotten with us. It would have
become part of the Greek grandeur and glory, part of
Greece, part of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO).

How kind.
57. From the report dated 10 September 1964:
“Although no casesof starvation have been noted in
the Turkish-Cypriot areas, serious inconveniences
have been caused to the people subjected to these
restrictions and in some cases conditions have
reached the hardship stage.” [See S/5950,paru. 205.1
The offtcial list of restricted items had reached 31items.

62. They never did any harm to us? This is from UPI,
dated 20 August 1974: “Every hour new ditches and
numerous corpses are being discovered. It is very difficult to endure the job.” My people are discovered in
the ditches.

58. In September 1965the Turkish Cypriot leadership
drew the attention of UNFICYP to the general question
of housing for refugees. The question of supplying the
Turkish Cypriots with building materials for improving
the accommodation of the refugees was repeatedly
taken up by UNFICYP with the highest authorities of
the Republic, both as part of the general problem of the
maintenance, repair and construction of houses and
buildings in Turkish Cypriot areas and as a separate and
special problem. Whatever the approach to the problem, the Government did not approve the release of
building materials for the refugees. They did no harm to
us. We were not second-class citizens. They are the
legitimate Government of Cyprus.

63. From The Washington

“In a Greek raid on a small village near Limassol,
36 people out of a population of 200 were killed. The
Greeks said they had been given orders to kill the
inhabitants of Turkish villages before the Turkish
forces arrived. *’
We were hostages in their hands. If Turkey moved to
save us, we would be killed; if Turkey did not move to
save us, we would be destroyed. Is this the approach of
peace, of equality, of Cypriotism, of the Government
of a land?

59. There are several other quotations, but I shall not
waste the Council’s time. I shall now deal with other
matters which the so-called Cyprus Government
thought fit to impose upon us. The quotations are so
many, one loses one’s self in the deluge of authorities.

64. From The Washington

Post of 30 July:

“In Alaminos village, near Lamaca, 14 Turks between the ages of 25 and 55 have been killed and
buried in the earth with bulldozers , . . in a Greek raid
on a small Turkish village near Limassol, 36 out of
200 killed. Greeks said they had orders to kill the
Turks before the Turkish forces arrived.‘*

60. We were not second-class citizens; they treated us
as Cypriots. But we should not mind when they said,
“Enosis is the aim, and we shall unite the island with
Greece at all costs.” That is what the President of the
country, the man the non-aligned suppose is dying for
the preservation of the independence of Cyprus, said on
27 October 1964, while Turkish blood was flowing to
protect the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus.

That confirms the previous quotation.
65. From the Voice of Germany, on 30 July 1974:

“Cyprus is Greek. Cyprus has been Greek since
the dawn of its history, and will remain Greek. Greek
and undivided we have taken it over, Greek and
undivided we shall preserve it, Greek and undivided
we shall deliver it to Greece.”

“The human mind cannot comprehend the butchery of the Greeks. In the villages around the Famagusta region the Greek national guards have displayed unsurpassed examples of savagery. Entering
Turkish homes, they ruthlessly rained bullets on
women and children. They cut the throats of any
Turks.”

Do you now understand, honourable members of the
.Council, why there exists this anger that we have secured our part and are not going to allow them to unite
the island with Greece? That explains the anger.

66. From The Times of London, ‘22 July 1974:
“Thousands of Turks are held as hostages. Turkish women were raped and Turkish children killed
on the streets. The Turkish Quarter in Limassol was
burned down. The incidents have been confirmed by
Greek Cypriots.”

61. He continues:
“Greece has become Cyprus, and Cyprus is
Greece. I firmly believe that the Pan-Hellenic struggle for the union of Cyprus with fatherland Greece
will shortly be crowned with success,and its success
will serve as the beginning of a new era of Greek
grandeur and glory.”

Would it add anything if I kept on reading out accounts
of such ghastly scenes and of the treatment of my
community?
8

.

Post of 23 July 1974:

67. And the representative of Cyprus tells the Council, looking me in the face-1 had to leave the chamber
because I was going to shout, and members would
wonder what kind of a man is this-“The
Turkish
Cypriot community constitutes a precious and inseparable part of the people of our country, and that is how
it has been treated.”

“People were buried like dogs by the junta. There
were also bodies which had been dumped outside the
cemetery. They were not identified and not claimed.
As a priest my conscience is troubled, but they were
holding a pistol to my head ,at the time.
“I remember the day they first came to me. They
said: ‘Father, we have some dead bodies which we
want you to bury.’ Gf course, I replied, and asked
how many bodies they had. ‘Seventy-seven’,
they
said. An hour later a lorry arrived and I heard someone say, ‘Dump them outside.’ They were dead bodies; they were all put into one common grave, without
waiting for identification by their relatives. The junta
man is commonly called ‘Muskos’ supporter and so
on. When he was asked if there were Turks among
the dead, he said ‘Yes’.”

68. Now we understand. The earth is dug. Greek
vases are discovered all over Asia Minor, Cyprus, in
the Greek islands. They are very valuable, very precious. That is why they chose to bury us: so that we
would become precious findings later. That is all I can
say to a man who, knowing history, knowing what has
happened in Cyprus for the last 21 years, knowing the
plans of the Greek Cypriot leadership, being part of it,
the terrorism and the secret armies and the importation
of Greek troops to Cyprus, comes and tells the Council
that we are a precious and inseparable part of the people
of Cyprus. That we are, of course we are. But we were
not accepted like that, and we were not treated like that.

73. What happened? The coup was for union of Cyprus. Today the Council was asked: “Why has Turkey
come because of the coup? It had not harmed us.” This
is the approach, the mentality. Then he directed questions to all representatives:
“Which country amongst
us does not have a little trouble? Is that enough reason
for Turkey to go and invade Cyprus?”

69. And then he says, should our community be let
free the world would stand witness to one of the most
moving scenes of reunion among countrymen with a
common destiny and country.

74.

I repeat: Cyprus is not a proper State; it is a sui
partnership
State created by international
agreements. And, because we did not trust the Greek
Cypriots, we wanted guarantees. Only those guarantees have saved us from the ditches and saved the
independent Republic of Cyprus. Had Makarios given
us time for evolution, Cyprus would have grown up into
nationhood-maybe.
But revolution of this nature has
destroyed it.
generis

70. Turkey was not in Cyprus before 1974, and what
I have read out to the Council is what happened to us
before 1974. Turkey was not there. We lost 103 villages
because Turkey was not there. We lost 1,500 lives
because Turkey was not there. Half of my people became destitute because Turkey was not there. We had
30,000 refugees because Turkey was not there. And we
had no law, no order, no justice at all because Turkey
was not there. And he says, “Turkey has come and
stopped all that beautiful arrangement,”
and, “If we
are left alone again we shall be so pleased you will see
joy in the country.” Is this information for the Security Council, or is it propaganda for people who know
nothing about Cyprus?

75. With regard to the complaints about Turkey’s
interfering and so on, I told the Council yesterday that
during the past three or four months Mr. Kyprianou has
been to Athens 14 times getting orders, instructions and
aligning policy with Greece. And if the negotiations
have come to a halt, it is because of the policy of
Papandreou which he underlined on 24 November 1983
in Brussels to the Athens News Agency, in the following words: “We can hold negotiations only for a unitary
Cyprus. For us, neither federation nor confederation is
an acceptable solution.” So why are we talking-intercommunal talks, good offices of the Secretary-General-if we are not talking about federation? And why
are the talks not progressing? Because Greece is not
allowing progress-that
is why.

71. Then we are told that Turkish Cypriots were not
threatened by the coup, so we should have done nothing about it. The coup was for the union of Cyprus
with Greece. Let us see how the Turkish Cypriots were
threatened.
72. The Greek cemetery priest Papasetsos, who made
a statement to the Greek press on 28 February I976,
said:

76. There have been complaints about our flag. When
we had the Turkish flag and they had the Greek flag,
they told the world that Turks had the Turkish flag.
Now that we have our own flag they complain that we
have our own flag. What is the implication? The implication is that we should have the Greek flag. We have
refused it, we refuse it and we shall refuse it. The Greek
flag is not our flag. We have our flag.

“In the cemetery there were two open graves and
two bodies lying beside them. I went to see if I could
recognize them. One was dead, but the other, acurlyhaired, fair complexioned
18-year-old youth, was
moving. Startled, I turned back and shouted, ‘But
officer, this man is alive.’ ‘Shut up, you dirty priest,
or I will shut you up for good,’ the officer retorted.
Then the youth was pushed into the open grave,
which was tilled with earth. I swear to God that they
buried this youth while he was still alive.

77. They have complained about a national anthem.
Who are the complainants? Greek Cypriots who use the
9

Greek national anthem when they receive dignitaries
-and they have received the Prime Minister of Indiaby playing the national anthem of Greece. They pass
that off as the national anthem of Cyprus. They have
complained
that we have, or are going to have, a
national anthem. Why? Because we must have the national anthem of Greece. We have refused it, we refuse
it and we shall refuse it; we shall not have it; we shall
have our own national anthem. And then they will bring
us again to the Security Council for having done it.

of Cyprus and get Cyprus money. Because all ports
were in their hands we had to go to the Greek market to
buy goods, and they were enriching themselves to the
tune of 13 million pounds sterling a year-that
was the
aid we received from Turkey-in
order to survive.
83. When Turkey
liberated
us-thank
God-we
asked Turkey not to send us hard currency, of which it
was very short, and we started to use Turkish lira. They
have been complaining that that indicates aninvasion of
Cyprus. This indicates the stealing of our rights in the
Cyprus pound; it indicates nothing else. .But again, like
the flag, in order to avoid further misunderstanding
we
are working on a scheme for producing our money, if
there is no solution very soon. We have to, because this
accusation is being repeated. How can .we reply to
them? We cannot steal Cyprus money from them; it is
all in the south. We cannot get it unless we give foreign exchange for it. What are we to do? Live without
money, by exchanging beads? This is .not the era for
that. Therefore we must have our money, but when we
have it we shall be brought here again.

78. Should we have brought them to the Security
Council for adopting, under false pretences, the national anthem of Greece and presenting it to the world
as the national anthem of Cyprus? And would India
have agreed to three fourths of the nation securing a
neighbouring country’s flag and presenting it as India’s
flag without its consent?
79. Are we persons entitled to the same rights under
the Charter as any other persons? Or, are we the slaves
of the Greek era, denied everything? They are entitled
to everything; we are denied everything in our own
land, in our own partnership State. That is the picture of
Cyprus. That is the trouble of Cyprus. That is the
problem of Cyprus. And so long as the Council allows
them to speak as the Government
of Cyprus, as a
100 per cent racist regime, the problem of Cyprus will
continue to bother the Council for ever.

84. The Greek Cypriots say: “They now defy the
Security Council, and they are going to have their own
currency. ” That is why I say: a body politic has to live
and has to survive. This is not defiance; this is a necessity of life because of what they have done to us. I beg
members to understand that and to appreciate it. We
are too little a people to defy the Security Council or
any country at, all. We defy injustice; we defy wrong
decisions; and we ask for correction while we try to give
more information.
If I have been speaking at great
length-and
I am sure members of the Council must be
tired-it
is because I do not get an opportunity
like
this all the time, whereas their ambassadors are going
around, even today, purveying more misinformation
to
the world. We do not have that facility.

80. We are accused of secessionist activities. I reject
the accusation. One can secede from a legitimate existence. We were thrown out, kicked out, of our own State
for 21 years. Then, when we put the “roof” of statehood over our heads, the Security Council, I am sorry
to say, hurried to condemn us, without paying due
consideration to the facts, because the leading countries hastened to condemn us for their own purposes.
But I do not see that as a final position. I say: please
take a look at your facts and please do so with compassion.
81. This is, again, what Makarios
1955:

85. They say that we are using Turkish time. Well, our
connections are with Turkey, thanks to you; you have
cut us off from the ,world completely.’ All connections
are with ‘Turkey; so what is more natural than to use
Turkish’ time? And, indicatively,
Turkey uses European time. Sometimes it goes one hour ahead; that does
not matter; we are one hour earlier; it is our misfortune;
it does not matter; it does not harm them. What have
they done to us that we should use their time? Are we
together? We have been separate for 21 years. But it is a
question of complaint here; it is very significant.

said on 2 March

“Before Cyprus could unite with Greece, Greece
had already united with Cyprus. How? Greece had
sent her sons to struggle and die, if necessary, for
their beloved brethren on the island.”
Non-aligned peoples, countries and nations, that is the
problem of Cyprus.

86. Then they say: “We give the Turkish Cypriots
water and electricity free.” At the talks there is stil1 a
paper on compensation for exchange of properties, for
what they owe to us, for what we owe to them, which
we have not yet touched upon. All this will be touched
upon. But they never say that since 1963 they have been
using the waterworks of Larnaca-our
water for the
whole of Lamaca-free
of charge. This is what happened when separation came in 1963, not in 1974. We
are taking account of all this, and we shall settle with
them one way or the other. But these are matters of
complaint against us.

82. There have been complaints by one or two countries-which
were informed only by the Greek Cypriots
and the so-called representative of the Cyprus Govemment-that
we are using Turkish lira. From 1963
we have been cut off from Cyprus pounds. We could
not get Cyprus money unless we produced foreign
exchange to the Central Bank of Cyprus, where all our
reserves had been frozen-and
are still frozen. We had
to get help from Turkey in order to pay the Central Bank
10

87. I shall now take the liberty of- reading out one
sentence which 1 did not understand: “Even former
non-believers admit that they are confronted with an
unparalleled case of international deceit .” [Ser> 2532nd
meeting, prim. 86.1 1 really do not know what that
means. and I do not know who among you are, in his
view. “non-believers”.
We have placed our trust in all
men and in all nations. whether they are believers or
not, whether rightist or leftist, whether socialist or
capitalist, because we know we are in the right. We are
fighting for our existence in our own land, and we want
the Council’s help in order not to be dominated, not to
become the servants of the Greek Cypriots. Their
record is in the Secretary-General’s
reports.

Mr. Kyprianou as to how he regards the State of Cyprus, which had become 100 per cent Greek because of
the Greek armed onslaught; and as to why he is so much
attached to it and thinks that by not recognizing him
we are doing him a great deal of injustice. This is his
statement:

88. The rule of law is what we want. Those who
destroyed the 1960 set-up by force of arms and shed the
blood of my community for 11 years in order to annex
Cyprus to Greece are not entitled to preach anything to
us about the rule of law. We do not rely on might; we
rely on right. Turkey has come to Cyprus to save us in
accordance with international treaties. Had there been
no such treaties, I am sure Turkish public opinion
would still have obliged the‘ Turkish Government to
come and stop the butchery of the twentieth century.
We are grateful to Turkey for the sacrifices it has made
in saving us from being destroyed.

I ask members: Where are we if it is a national issue for
Cyprus and Greece? Where are the Turkish Cypriots?
Where is Cypriotism? He continued, “And the solution
cannot be anything else but enosis.”

“Another essential prerequisite is the maintenance
by the Greek Cypriots of their national issue as such”
-there is no Cypriot national issue. “They should
never think that the Cyprus question can be considered a political matter even for a moment. It is
neither a political, nor a party nor a personal matter.
It is a national issue, both for Cyprus and Greece.”

92. At this critical stage which the Cyprus struggle is
passing through there is a great advantage which did not
exist in 1955, and that is the fact that Cyprus now has a
voice of its own in the international field. In spite of
a large number of disadvantages, Cyprus is now an
independent and sovereign State and, therefore, its
struggle for union with Greece is easier and shorter than
before. The non-aligned countries tirst, and the whole
United Nations thereafter, have been and are being
used to this end, because no one has raised the curtain
to look beyond the name “the Government of Cyprus”
and see what it is and why it is. For them it is the State of
Cyprus. For us, it is the end. It is not a means to an end.
For us it is homeland; it is our State, our independence,
and we do not want it to be made Greek.

89. In this statement-and
again I apologize for its
length--I- have tried to draw a correct picture of.the
events. But I have been accused by the other side of
picking out scattered events over the past. 20 years.
Therefore, let me show members again what are those
facts. First, the planned onslaught for enosis and the
destruction of independence still goes on. Secondly,
the ejection of Turkish Cypriot personnel from all parts
of the administration
and all organs of the State still
goes on. Thirdly, the ejectionof members of Parliament
still goes on. Fourthly, confiscation or freezing of all
Turkish Cypriot assets at the Central Bank of Cyprus
still goes on. Fifthly, the denial of all constitutional legal
and fiscal rights still goes on. Sixthly, the ousting of
Turkish Cypriots from the budget of Cyprus has been
going on for 21 years. There is also the destruction of
103 villages and IO7 mosques and forcing people to
leave as refugees for 11 years; relief came only ‘with
Turkey’s arrival. There are the dead and the missing.
Those are the permanent edifices which continue to
stand high, confirming my version of events, and no
elocution can conceal the true facts if only one takes the
trouble to consider them.

93. Finally, I will iust cite a quotation from the Greek
daily, Eleft&rotyph,
of 29 April 1984, in order to show
the Council the Greek mentality: ’
_.
“The developments in Cyprus will fohow the path
wished by the Turks and Denktas. The Cyprus problem can only be solved by the Greek army. This
ignominy started in Izmir in 1920/1922”-when
they
tried to invade Turkey; they were thrown back“The ignominy which started in Izmir, and ended
with the’establishment
of a State by Denktag, can
only be washed away by bloodletting.
The Greek
army has responsibility and honour. It is high time to
show up along the borders and hack the feet of the
new Atilla. **

90. A State exists for the protection, happiness and
prosperity of its people and is formed by the people.
The non-aligned and all Members of the United Nations
have taken it for granted that because they have retained the name of “Government
of Cyprus” that is
how they will look upon the State of Cyprus.

That is the mentality of those who request Council
resolutions giving them title to Cyprus and condemning
us as enemies of Cyprus, as secessionists. They will
then use those resolutions to attack us and clear Cyprus
of the Turks.
.
94. I hope the Council will examine the facts of Cyprus anew and will give the Secretary-General the task
of acting on the facts of Cyprus without having his
hands tied by the imagined existence-of a legitimate

91. I shall read out from .the official press release
No. 4 of 1 April 1967 of the Greek Cypriot Public
Information
Office, which contains a statement by
11

Government of Cvorus. and 1 hone he will be able to
bring Cyprus to ihe port of peace: that is, a bicommunal, bi-zonal, federal republic. We shall help him in
that direction. We hope he succeeds. If he does not,
allow us to exist in our State as free men, pending the
realization by the Greek Cypriots that the United Nations, the Security Council, the Charter, have not been
invented in order to make free people the servants of
others and to penalize a binational island by force of
arms.

and peaceful struggle for the recovery and full exercise
of its inalienable rights in the territory occupied today is
an historic struggle that many non-aligned countries
have had to wage against powerful countries.
100. Furthermore, Cyprus is a founding member of,
and enjoys great prestige and respect in, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, which has constantly tried
to find a just and lasting solution to the problem of
Cyprus, not only through the communiques issued after
its various summit or ministerial meetings, but also by
setting up a contact group made up of members of the
Movement which have made many efforts along these
lines.

95. I thank you, Mr. President, and I apologize for the
length of my statement.
96. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua) [interpretationfiom Spunish]: As this is my first statement in the
Council this month, Sir, may I express my personal
satisfaction at seeing you acting as President of the
Council. We are familiar with your diplomatic and political experience and your skill in confronting and resolving difficult situations. Our two peoples and Governments enjoy fraternal relations of friendship based
on full respect for the principle of the sovereign equality
of States, regardless of their size,population or military
or economic might, and we share respect for recognition of the fact that inter-State relations must be based
on respect for the principle of self-determination. All
this guarantees the success of our work and ensures
that we will find solutions to the difftcult problems
confronting mankind. One such problem is the important one before us which, in our opinion, is the result of
foreign military intervention in Cyprus.

101. For these reasons, and because of the importance of the subject, we would like to begin our statement with a reference to the message sent by Mrs.
IndiraGandhi, Prime Minister of India and Chairperson
of the Non-Aligned Movement, to our heads of State,
following the unilateral declaration of independence
which is the precise reason for this meeting. In that
message,which reflects the feelings of the great majority of the international community, our Chairperson
said that the Movement as a whole could only express
its surprise and concern over that declaration, which
not only undermined the unity of Cyprus but also violated its territorial integrity and sovereignty and jeopardized the non-aligned status of the island as a whole.
102. The members of the Movement, whose membership should be based on faithful compliance with its
principles, have an unshakeable commitment to the
sister non-aligned Republic of Cyprus to work to revoke the unilateral declaration and to support the Secretary-General’s efforts to ensure full respect for the
unified status of Cyprus and to curb all activities aimed
at recognizing or supporting the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which is nothing but a new
term for foreign occupation, intervention and interference.

97. Also, Mr. President, through you, I would like to
congratulate the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic for the splendid manner in which he
conducted the proceedings of the Council last month.
We personally witnessed, because of the complaint we
brought, the skill he demonstrated in conducting the
work of the Council.
98. My delegation listened yesterday [243Jst meeting]
with great interest to the brilliant presentation by
Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, President of the Republic of
Cyprus. We were much impressed with his faith in the
international community and, furthermore, with his
hope that this body would assume its rightful responsibility in maintaining peace and international security
and consequently take appropriate action to ensure
compliance with its resolutions on the subject. We were
also impressed with his people’s clamouring forjustice.
His is a small but proud country, a non-aligned country
which, against its will, has seen 40 per cent of its territory militarily occupied. He has demanded a just and
peaceful solution to the problem and to the military
intervention which has existed since 1974.

103. Nicaragua, as a non-aligned country, expresses
its fu!l support for the sister Republic of Cyprus, its
people and Government, and reiterates its commitment
to continue to give all the solidarity and support necessary to bring about the complete revocation of the
unilateral declaration of independence, the immediate
withdrawal of all occupying forces, the comptete demilitarization of Cyprus as proposed by its President,
and the realization of its legitimate right to independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and nonalignment.
104. Since the invasion and occupation of part of Cyprus by foreign forces in 1974, both the Security Council and the General Assembly have adopted numerous
resolutions aimed at bringing about a just and lasting
solution to the problem of Cyprus. Security Council
resolution 365 (1974)-which urged the immediate
implementation of General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX), unanimously adopted by the General Assem-

99. The problem at present before us is of great concern to my Government, not only because of the important universal principles that are being violated, respect
for which is of fundamental importance to the international community, but also because Cyprus’ lawful
12

bly on 1 November 197Ais particularly relevant at the
present time, when the situation in that country has
worsened. Those resolutions, as well as those adopted
subsequently, contain the necessary elements for a just
and lasting settlement of the problem of Cyprus.

Cyprus there occurred an exchange of ambassadors between Turkey and the new, so-called Turkish
Cypriot State. These new actions not only ignore the
efforts of the Secretary-General and the authority of the
Security Council, which had given him his mandate, but
also, inter uliu, violated Council resolution 541 (1983),
in paragraph 7 of which it “Calls upon all States not to
recognize any Cypriot State other than the Republic of
Cyprus”.

105. In those resolutions the international community
has reflected its full support for the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity-of Cyprus and
its repudiation of the occupation of part of its territory by foreign forces, demanding the immediate withdrawal of all the occupation forces. At the same time,
those resolutions consider that the defucto situation
created by the invading forces cannot form part of a
solution to the problem and urge the parties to refrain
from any unilateral acts which could have a negative
impact on the prospects for a just and lasting solution to
the problems of Cyprus.

110. It is my delegation’s opinion that the Security
Council must not allow its resolutions and its authority
to continue to be undermined, for ultimately what is at
stake is our ability to prevent the use of force, military
adventurism and foreign intervention and occupation
-direct
or indirect, overt or covert-from
prevailing
in international
relations, contrary to the norms of
international
law, which every day is violated more
frequently by some Members of our Organization.

106. As long ago as 1975 the Security Council had to
consider the decision taken at that time to turn the part
of Cyprus occupied by foreign forces into a “Federated
Turkish State”, and it adopted resolution 367 (1975),
which, inter aliu, regretted that unilateral decision and
reiterated the principles contained in previous resolutions, requesting the Secretary-General
to undertake a
mission of good offices and calling upon the two communities to co-operate.

111. Ever since 1975, when we gave him his present
mandate, the Secretary-General
has acted with great
prudence and skill and has tried to bring about a just and
lasting political solution to the problem of Cyprus. In
his report of 1 May 1984 [S/16529] he has told us of his
most recent actions. His proposals to the parties have
been marked by great moderation, as we could see in
the plan submitted to the leader of the Turkish Cypriot
community
on 16 March this year [ibid., puru. 141.
This plan, consisting of five points, has not met with
the necessary receptiveness which would allow further
progress in his actions.

107. Furthermore,
Security Council resolution 541
(1983), adopted last November, was produced when,
to the perplexity of the whole world, new attempts
were being made to divide the Republic of Cyprus, in
flagrant violation of previous resolutions which called
on all States to-respect the sovereignty, independence,
integrity and non-alignment
of Cyprus and not to take
any action which would violate those rights. That resolution, for which our delegation voted, deplored the
declaration by the Turkish Cypriot authorities of the
secession of part of the Republic of Cyprus, and, in
paragraph 2, considered the declaration legally invalid
and called for its withdrawal. It also called upon all
States not to recognize any Cypriot State other than the
Republic of Cyprus, renewed the Secretary-General’s
mandate to pursue his mission of good offices and
called upon the parties to co-operate with him.

112. We see that while the Secretary-General
appealed to the parties not to take any actions complementary to the declaration of 15 November 1983, or
to continue carrying out the initiatives which were
under way, a few days earlier-on
6 March 198,‘the
Turkish Cypriot leaders had announced their intention to adopt their own flag. After the SecretaryGeneral submitted his plan on 10 April, Mr. Denktas
announced that he would carry out a constitutional
referendum and an election in August and November
this year. All this shows that the intent to consolidate
the so-called Turkish Cypriot State continues to exist,
and that for one of the parties Security Council resolution 541 (1983) is a dead letter.

108. In this respect, it is important to recall here that
after the declaration by the Turkish Cypriot community
purporting to establish an independent State called the
“Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus”, the Secretary-General made a statement [see 2497th meeting,
pm-u. 91 in which, in addition to expressing his opinion
that the step was contrary to the Security Council resolutions and the high-level agreements of 1977 and 1979,
he said that the declaration impeded the efforts of his
Special Representative,
who had arrived in Cyprus
only a few days earlier.

113. This Council and, through it, the international
community have heard the appeal of the President of
Cyprus for an end to a situation which in fact represents
the partition of Cyprus and which constitutes an attack
on the very existence of that small State. We have heard
what we already knew about the great flexibility shown
by the legitimate Government of the country in the
negotiations with the communities,
despite occupation
by a foreign military force.
114. We think it is very important that the Council
assume its proper role in the settlement of the problem
before it. The words of President Kyprianou should
give us pause; especially in view of the disappointing

109. In recent weeks we have seen how the SecretaryGeneral’s
Special Representative
has again been
exposed to a similar situation,- when while he was in
13

results of the efforts made by Cyprus itself, by the nonaligned, and by the United Nations to find a solution to
the problem of Cyprus within the framework of international law. Therefore, we must see to it that the
Council’s resolutions do not continue to be ignored.
That is the challenge before us; we must meet it without
hesitation.

developments and to take decisions which we may not
rue in the future.
119. The last occasion on which the situation in Cyprus was the subject of a full debate in the Security
Council was in November 1983, when the Turkish Cypriot community and its leadership made a proclamation of independence. That debate culminated in the
adoption of resolution 541 (1983). We opposed that
resolution on the ground that it failed to take into
account the historical and cultural aspects of the process of political evolution in Cyprus and the profound
sense of disappointment
and outrage of the Turkish
Cypriot community,
engendered by the frustration of
the political process envisaged at the birth of the
island’s independence.

115. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): May I take this
opportunity, Mr. President, of associating myself fully
with the tributes paid to you by my colleagues who
spoke before me. Since this is the second time my
delegation has participated in the deliberations of the
Security Council under your presidency, we are keenly
aware of your exceptional personal qualities and your
wealth of diplomatic skill, experience and statesmanship. We are confident that your tested leadership will
enable the Council to conduct its business successfully
and effectively during’your presidency. I avail myself
of this opportunity also to express our deep appreciation of the excellent manner in which your predecessor,
Mr. Vladimir Alekseyevich Kravets, guided the work
of the Council during the month of April.
.:
116. On this occasion the Security Council has been
convened to consider the exchange of envoys which
took place last month between Turkey and Northern
Cyprus, and the intention of the Turkish Cypriot leadership to conduct a constitutional
referendum and
elections later this year. We have listened with great
attention and due care to the statements by President
Kyprianou and by those who have spoken in support of
the territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus, which,
indeed, is a common concern of both sides to the dispute. We have also paid equal attention to the eloquent
presentations made by Mr. Denktas and by the representative of Turkey concerning the genesis of the
Cyprus problem and the circumstances which made the
latest developments inevitable.
.

120. The defiant course to which the Turkish Cypriot
community has been obliged to resort is a product of its
despair at the bleakness of efforts made over the past 20
years to ensure the fulfilment of its historical, cultural,
political and humanitarian aspirations as guaranteed to
a co-founder of the State of Cyprus under the 1960
Constitution.
Viewed in its proper historical perspective, the Turkish Cypriots’ decision to proclaim independence last November was no more a violation of
international
law than the numerous grave violations
which had preceded it. That is why we regarded the
adoption of resolution 541 (1983) as compounding
rather than mitigating
the circumstances
which
threatened to shake the very foundations of the State.
121. In disassociating
itself from resolution
541
(1983). Pakistan cautioned the membersof the Council
that such a resolution would neither serve the cause of
conciliation in Cyprus nor help the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices, which it was intended to promote. We were not, therefore, surprised when, following the adoption of the resolution, it was categorically rejected by the Turkish Cypriot leadership.

117. It,is easy to work oneself into a rage on the basis
of one set of assumptions, or into despair and condemnation on the basis of another. It would not be at all
helpful in the present circumstances, however, to take a
one-sided view, when a genuine attempt has to be made
to bring about a negotiated and peaceful settlement of
the Cyprus question, the origins of which lie in the
developments
which immediately
followed the independence of Cyprus, in particular the breakdown of its
constitutional
setup in 1963.

122. The one-sided nature of resolution 541 (1983)
could not have been expected to facilitate the task of the
Secretary-General
while renewing his mandate to use
his good offices. In view of the inherent flaw in the
resolution as a basis for initiating conciliation efforts,
it redounds to the Secretary-General’s
prestige and
statesmanship that he succeeded nevertheless to reactivate contacts with the two Cypriot communities and
offer them a five-point scenario which yet holds the
promise of developing into a framework for the resumption of high-level intercommunal
talks. Here, I should
like to draw the attention of the members of the Council
to the compatibility
of the five-point scenario with the
four-point proposal made by Mr. DenktaS in his letter
of 18 April to the Secretary-General
[ibid., annex ZV).

118. The Security Council has been seized of the Cyprus question for the past 20 years, during which events
have marched inexorably towards the present state of
affairs, when Cyprus is virtually divided into two separate entities. Those who allowed the distortion of the
political processes in Cyprus 20 years ago by neglecting
the historical and cultural realities of the situation did
not appear to have comprehended its implications or to
have foreseen its culmination
in the present impasse.
Today, all of us are called upon to take an impartial,
farsighted and statesmanlike
view of the current

123. Like the proclamation
of independence by the
Turkish Cypriot community last November, the recent
developments in the field of diplomatic exchanges between the Turkish Cypriot community
and Turkey
must not be seen in isolation from the unresolved con14

flict and unredeemed hostility which have embittered
relations between the two Cypriot communities
over
the past decades, and in particular following the disruption of the delicate balance of an independent, bicommunal, bi-zonal federation. The feelings of despair and
hopelessness felt by the Turkish Cypriot community
have been further exacerbated by the protracted deadlock in the intercommunal
negotiations, which, in their
perception, prolonged and could perpetuate the denial
of their status of equality and their legitimate national
rights.

tiations for a comprehensive
settlement in his letter
of 18 April addressed to the Secretary-General.
127. It is quite clear that a basis does exist for a fruitful
continuation of the Secretary-General’s
good offices. It
is imperative that this basis not be impaired by the
adoption of another one-sided resolution which could
result in the irretrievable loss of co-operation by one of
the communities
so vital to the success of the Secretary-General’s
efforts. Despite his disappointments,
which are inherent in the evolving situation in Cyprus,
the Secretary-General
has not given in to despair, and
in his report in document S/16519 of 1 May 1984 he has
once again assured the Security Council that he is prepared to carry on his mission of good offices as long as
there is unambiguous support for it. He also mentions
the continued deployment of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force as another essential requirement for the
success of his efforts.

124. In the statements made before the Council by
Mr. Denktas there are important
elements which
strengthen our belief that it is not too late to retrieve the
situation in Cyprus and to nourish the roots of conciliation and coexistence in a federal State, which lie in that
situation. His statements made it quite clear that the
Turkish Cypriot community continues to adhere to the
concept of a united Cyprus within a bicommunal,
bizonal and federal framework, as provided for by the
high-level agreements between the leaders of the two
Cypriot communities in 1977 [see S/12323, paru. 51 and
1979 [see S/13369, para. 511 and by the 1980 opening
statement of the Secretary-General
[S/14100, annex].
The continued loyalty of the Turkish community to the
federal concept is predicated on its expectation that
such a framework would ensure the fulfilment of its
legitimate aspirations to equal partnership in the conduct of the affairs of the State. The right of the Turkish community to equal status and partnership is sui
generis, being inherent in the 1960 Constitution,
and
cannot be qualified or diminished by the stipulation of
customary distinctions between a majority and a minority community-within
a State.

128. In order to revitalize the search for a peaceful
settlement of the Cyprus question the Council is now
called upon to adopt a resolution which would provide
the necessary political support to the good offices of the
Secretary-General
and facilitate his task by encouraging dialogue and the negotiating process. This purpose can be served only by the adoption of a resolution
which is not rejected by either side. It goes without
saying that a mandate based on a resolution unacceptable to one of the communities would hardly generate
the kind of political support which the SecretaryGeneral regards as essential for the renewal and success of his mission of good offices.
129. Here is another opportunity
for the Security
Council to turn the course of events in Cyprus in the
right direction. Pakistan will extend its full co-operation
to any effort to promote conciliation,
understanding,
confidence and trust between the two Cypriot communities and will support any step which would put the
Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices back on
the tracks, reviving the hope for a peaceful and just
solution of the Cyprus question. By the same token
Pakistan may not be expected to associate itself with
any step which would further embitter the relations
between the two communities,
complicate the task
entrusted to the Secretary-General
and perhaps
extinguish forever the hope for a united Cyprus built on
the consensus of the communities that constitute it.

125. In these circumstances we may ask how the
Council should respond to the developments in Cyprus
and how it should pronounce itself on the matter that
has been brought before it? In our view the Council
would be shirking a major responsibility
if it were to
limit itself to announcing a verdict on the immediate
developments, which are but a symptom of a deep and
recurring malaise. The lesson of the tragic happenings
of the past 20 years is that the panacea for this malaise
lies in the establishment
of a bicommunal,
bi-zonal
federal structure for the State of Cyprus. While this
option is still available and the unity of the State of
Cyprus within a federal framework is still a viable
proposition, a beginning has to be made towards that
end with the resumption of the intercommunal
dialogue. Any preconditions
which are unacceptable to
one or the other community would only serve to freeze
the negotiating process and lead inevitably to the consolidation of the defucto partition of the island.

130.

Mr.

ARIAS
STELLA
(Peru) [interpretation
It is a particular pleasure for the delegation of Peru to see you, Sir, presiding over this meeting.
Your diplomatic
abilities and poise, your calm and
amiable manner, as well as your warm personality,
guarantee success in the discharge of your responsibilities as President of the Security Council for this
month. I should also like to express the gratitude of my
delegation to Mr. Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic for the skill and brilliance with which he
conducted the proceedings of this body last month. We
extend to him our most sincere congratulations.

from Spanish]:

126. The Turkish Cvoriot communitv’s
readiness for
a dialogue and the resumption of intercommunal
talks
through the good offices of the Secretary-General
is
vouched for in the statement made before the Council
by Mr. Denktas, who also speaks ,of the Turkish
Cypriot community’s
desire to engage in serious nego15

13 1. In this debate the parties involved in the auestion
of Cyprus have made a-point of reminding us ihat the
hostilities, the vicious circle of slow advances and retreats and the recent deterioration of the situation have
been occurring over a period that has now lasted more
than 20 years. We wish to stress that over that long
stretch of time the United Nations has striven intensely
to attain the goals for which the Organization
was
created. It has maintained and continues to maintain
in Cyprus a juridical, political and humanitarian presence in accordance with the decisions of its competent
organs and through the useful and timely deployment of
its peace-keeping force.

138. Secondly, to ensure a decisive step forward,
there must be a compromise that will make possible the
immediate resumption of communication
between the
parties. It is obvious that without intercommunal
dialogue there can be no progress. The Secretary-General
has been sufficiently clear on this score in his report.
These conversations should be held in the same spirit of
cordiality and calm that prevailed on previous occasions. Only that spirit will make it possible to adopt a
constructive approach to the crucial elements of the
controversy.
139. Thirdly, it is necessary to revitalize the goodoffices mission of the Secretary-General with the most
solid and unequivocal support, both of the parties directly concerned and of the international community.

132. Almost half this time has been spent in pursuing
what, in ourjudgement,
constitutes the keystone of this
ongoing conciliation
effort-namely,
the discharge of
the mission of good offices the international community
has entrusted to the Secretary-General and which it has
renewed on successive occasions.

140. If the Security Council has to take a further decision on the question of Cyprus, we believe it should
do so in the light of the elements I have just mentioned.

133. The Security Council and the General Assembly
have from the very beginning, and on repeated occasions since, right up to December of last year, taken a
position on the facts which have kept the question of
Cyprus on the list of the most burning international
conflicts. The resolutions that have been adopted also
contain the guidelines for the negotiation of a broad,
just and definitive political settlement.

14 1. My delegation is aware that the question of Cyprus is extremely complex and delicate. In this case,
and in the positions taken by the countries concerned,
we have seen the introduction or frequent influence of
elements alien to the essence of the problem and to the
interests of the Cypriot people, the effect of which is
undoubtedly
disruptive and distorting. It cannot be
denied that these factors, whatever the explanation for
them may be from the various national standpoints,
underlie the procrastination and the danger of paralysis
that are affecting this process.

134. It is well known that the Peruvian Government
has given its wholehearted support to the framework
laid down by the United Nations and the consistent
positions adopted by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries which have been reaffirmed at so many of its
meetings, because we believe that those positions are
based on the common objective of ensuring strict respect for the norms of international law set forth in the
Charter and other international instruments, norms that
have largely been violated in the case of the Cypriot
people. We believe it to be our duty to stress now that
those positions retain their validity and their force.

142. My delegation cannot refrain from expressing its
appreciation for the work being done by UNFICYP,
which, apart from discharging its lofty mission so efficiently, has, as Secretary-General
does welI to point
out in his report, been lending its co-operation in the
solution of immediate humanitarian
problems, and in
this regard it is important for us to recall that the situation in Cyprus is also a basically human probIem, with
its tragic toll of lives, disappearances and the mass
displacement of people from their homes.

135. For these reasons, and bearing in mind the renort
of the Secretary-General
in document S/16519, Peru
shares the legitimate concern of the international community in noting that in spite of the process promoted
by the United Nations, results have not so far been
forthcoming that give grounds for hoping for any early
understanding between the parties to the dispute.

143. With a view to reinitiating the common quest for
formulas that will clear the way to a negotiated agreement that would take into account the interests of the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities,
that
is to say the Cypriot people, under the auspices of the
Secretary-General,
we urgently appeal to the responsible Governments and leaders to adopt realistic and
constructive positions. We appeal to them to demonstrate unequivocally
their dedication to peace and a
genuine poiitical will. Neither isolated or unrecognized
unilateral acts, no matter how numerous they ‘may be,
nor intransigent or extreme positions, no matter how
comprehensible
they may be, will contribute to the
common goal of restoring harmony in the island.

136. It is our understanding that at the present stage of
this conflict there are three substantive aspects that
must be given priority attention.
137. First, we must bear in mind the principle that the
final understanding which is the ultimate objective of
the ongoing attempts must ensure recognition of and
respect for the federal nature, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus, as well as its
non-aligned status, with all the attributes necessary for
it to exercise those rights effectively.

The meeting
16

rose at 6.3.5 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
ma> be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PCBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

90-61313~January

1993-2,050
