S/PRST/2016/16

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 November 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7801st meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 November 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Mali”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council strongly condemns the repeated violations of the
ceasefire arrangements by the Plateforme and Coordination armed groups in
and around Kidal over the last months, which threaten the viability of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The Security Council urges
the signatory armed groups to cease hostilities immediately, to strictly adhere
to the ceasefire arrangements and to resume dialogue without delay for the
implementation of the Agreement.
“The Security Council urges the Government of Mali, the Plateforme and
Coordination armed groups to fully and sincerely maintain their commitments
under the Agreement. The Security Council recalls its readiness to consider
targeted sanctions against those who take actions to obstruct the
implementation of the Agreement as well as those who resume hostilities and
violate the ceasefire, as expressed in its resolution 2295 (2016).
“The Security Council acknowledges the steps taken by signatory parties
over the last year to implement the Agreement, welcomes the progress towards
establishing interim administrations in the north of Mali and expresses its deep
concern over the persistent delays for the full implementation of the
Agreement. The Security Council underscores the pressing need to deliver
tangible and visible peace dividends to the population in the north and other
parts of Mali in order to keep the momentum of the Agreement .
“The Security Council urges the Government of Mali, the Plateforme and
Coordination armed groups to take urgent and concrete action to fully deliver
on their obligations under the Agreement without further delay, in particular to
deploy joint security patrols, to accomplish the process of establishing interim
administrations in the north of Mali, to operationalize the commissions for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of armed combatants, and to
accelerate the redeployment of the Malian Defense and Security Forces
(MDSF) throughout the country within the framework of the Agreement.

16-19247 (E)

031116

*1619247*

S/PRST/2016/16

“The Security Council urges the Government of Mali to engage with the
Secretary-General, through his Special Representative for Mali, to establish
concrete benchmarks and timelines to assess the progress toward the full
implementation of the Agreement and recalls its request to the Secretary General to include them in his December 2016 report.
“The Security Council calls on members of the Comité de suivi de
l’Accord and other relevant international partners to sustain their support to
the implementation of the Agreement. The Security Council emphasizes the
central role the SRSG should continue to play to support and oversee the
implementation of the Agreement by the Government of Mali, the Plateforme
and Coordination armed groups.
“The Security Council encourages bilateral and multilateral partners to
increase their support to accelerate the redeployment of the Malian Defense
and Security Forces, once reformed and reconstituted, to the north of Mali,
particularly by providing relevant equipment and training, in coordination with
the Government of Mali and MINUSMA and within the framework of the
Agreement.
“The Security Council reiterates its concern over the expansio n of
terrorist and other criminal activities across Mali, and, in particular, into
central and southern Mali, as well as the intensification of intercommunal
violence in the Centre of Mali. The Security Council emphasizes that the
Malian authorities have primary responsibility for the provision of stability
and security throughout the territory of Mali.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the continuing attacks,
including terrorist attacks, against the Malian defense and security forces,
MINUSMA and the French forces. The Security Council underlines the need
to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of these
reprehensible acts of terrorism to justice. The Security Council urges the
Government of Mali to take measures to ensure that those responsible for these
attacks are held accountable.
“The Security Council acknowledges the significant capability gaps
within MINUSMA and underlines its request to the Secretary-General to
expeditiously identify options and take all appropriate addition al measures to
enable MINUSMA to fully implement its mandate and to ensure the safety and
security of its personnel. The Security Council urges Member States to
urgently provide adequate capabilities to MINUSMA, in particular aviation
and transportation capabilities, to fill in these gaps.
“The Security Council reiterates its serious concern over the insecurity
which hinders humanitarian access, condemns attacks against humanitarian
personnel, and emphasizes the need for all parties to respect the principles of
humanitarian assistance (humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence)
in order to ensure the continued provision of humanitarian assistance. The
Security Council also emphasizes the need for all parties to ensure the safety
and protection of civilians receiving assistance and the security of
humanitarian personnel operating in Mali.

2/3

16-19247

S/PRST/2016/16

“The Security Council calls on Member States in the region, notably
through the G5 Sahel and the African Union Nouakchott Process, to advance
their cooperation with MINUSMA in order to strengthen regional security and
facilitate the implementation of its mandate.”

16-19247

3/3
