A/71/932–S/2017/508

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2017
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 36
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-second year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2344 (2017), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my report of 3 March 2017 (A/71/826-S/2017/189). It
also provides a summary of key political and security developments and regional
and international events relating to Afghanistan.

II. Relevant developments
3.
The National Unity Government made some progress on priority reforms, as
well as on high-level appointments. Afghan authorities advanced electoral
preparations with the approval of a polling centre assessments package. The
reporting period was otherwise dominated by the return to Afghanistan of
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) faction. Hekmatyar’s
return took place at a time of flux in Afghan politics, which is partly driven by
increased jockeying among political figures ahead of the 2019 presidential
elections. The First Vice-President, Abdul Rashid Dostum, left the country in
mid-May reportedly for medical treatment in Turkey, his Junbish -e Milli party
became increasingly vocal in its opposition to the Government, and pers onalities
within the Jamiat-e-Islami party started positioning themselves. Meanwhile, there
was no discernible progress on peace talks between the Government and the
Taliban. An increase in multilateral engagement at the regional level was, however,
observed. Afghanistan and Pakistan made efforts to improve relations despite
occasional border clashes. The security situation remained very volatile, with an

17-09158 (E)

190617

*1709158*

A/71/932
S/2017/508

increase in security incidents in the first five months of the year over the same
period in 2016. On 31 May, Kabul witnessed a suicide attack, which killed at least
65 people and injured more than 300, further straining the already fragile political
situation and leading to several days of public demonstrations, some of which
became violent. High levels of violence against civilians and significant internal
displacement continued to be recorded. Economic growth, while slightly improved,
remained low throughout the reporting period.

A.

Political developments
4.
The President, Ashraf Ghani, and the Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah,
made progress on high-level appointments, which had previously been a source of
tension within the National Unity Government. A security appointments board was
established in March, headed by a new Minister of State for Refo rm in the Security
Sector, to address the need for merit-based promotions in the security sector. On
11 March, the Chair of the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission was appointed, a position that had been vacant since December 201 5.
The Government made further senior-level appointments and nominated four
cabinet members: the Minister of Mines and Petroleum, the Minister of Labour,
Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled, the State Minister for Parliamentary Affairs
and the State Minister of Tourism Affairs. However, the future of six other ministers
who were the subject of parliamentary no -confidence votes in November 2016
remained uncertain, and some parliamentarians continued to call upon the
Government to introduce new candidates for those ministries.
5.
On 27 March, the lower house of the National Assembly interpellated the
Minister of Defence, the Minister of the Interior and the Director of the National
Directorate of Security following a deadly attack on a military hospital in K abul
earlier that month. All survived no-confidence votes. However, the Minister of
Defence and the Chief of Army Staff subsequently resigned from their positions
following an attack on an Afghan army base in Balkh Province on 21 April, which
resulted in mass casualties and a significant public backlash against the country’s
security leadership. Separately, the lower house of the National Assembly suspended
the salaries of nine members as a result of their frequent absences.
6.
The approaching presidential election of 2019 began to affect various political
alliances. Divisions within the Jamiat-e-Islami political party were increasingly
apparent. The Governor of Balkh Province, Atta Mohammad Noor, publicly
criticized Chief Executive Abdullah on 13 March for failing to obtain sufficient
positions for Jamiat members within the Government and continued to engage with
President Ghani to achieve that goal. Separately, on 16 April, President Ghani
dismissed the Jamiat Deputy Chairperson, Ahmed Zia Massoud, from hi s Cabinetlevel position as Special Envoy for Reforms and Good Governance. Massoud had
been an early supporter of Ghani’s campaign in 2014, although after being
dismissed he publicly expressed his regret for having done so. Meanwhile, the
Jamiat-e-Islami party expanded its leadership council, and the party announced on
23 May its intention to nominate a presidential candidate for the elections in 2019.
7.
First Vice-President Dostum remained under investigation for the alleged
abduction and sexual assault of a political rival in November 2016. He was confined
to his home in Kabul until 19 May, when he travelled to Turkey, reportedly for
medical treatment. On 11 March, hundreds of supporters from Dostum’s Junbish -e
Milli party gathered at his house and named his son, Batur Dostum, acting head of
the party. On 26 April, about 2,000 Junbish supporters rallied in Shibirghan city,
Jowzjan Province, and on 5 May in Mazar-e Sharif, Balkh Province, to protest

2/14

17-09158

A/71/932
S/2017/508

against the Government’s perceived exclusion of the First Vice-President and
alleged bias against non-Pashtun ethnicities.
8.
The leader of Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin), Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, appeared in
public in Afghanistan for the first time in more than 20 years on 29 April in
Laghman Province. Hekmatyar’s return was part of a peace agreement concluded
between the Government and Hizb-i Islami in September 2016. On 1 May, President
Ghani signed a decree authorizing the release of the first batch of prisoners
affiliated with Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin), and the following day the release of
55 prisoners was announced. On 4 May, Hekmatyar arrived in Kabul in an armed
convoy and gave a speech at the Presidential Palace to a large audience of State
officials and other political leaders. President Ghani, Chief Executive A bdullah and
the former President, Hamid Karzai, were in attendance, but some prominent
members of the rival Jamiat-e-Islami party were notably absent. President Ghani
welcomed Hekmatyar’s return as an important step towards peace and
reconciliation. However, human rights defenders and civil society groups expressed
concern that Hekmatyar’s return could lead to a reversal of the gains in human,
political and civil rights made since the collapse of the Taliban regime. Hekmatyar
began discussions with Hizb-i Islami (Arghandiwal), a political party faction whose
members already participate in the administration. Rival political actors expressed
concern that if the Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) and (Arghandiwal) united, it could
become the country’s largest political party.
9.
On 1 April, the Government outlined its vision for peace in a document
released to international donors. The document highlighted the need for an inclusive
peace process to bring an end to the conflict and to consolidate credible institutions
to channel political differences. It also proposed structural changes and a curtailed
mandate to the High Peace Council. Subsequently, the Government circulated a
draft peace and reconciliation strategic plan to international donors on 18 May. Also
on 1 April, the President appointed a new Head of the secretariat for the High Peace
Council, which had been vacant since 19 November 2016. On 6 June, President
Ghani announced the appointment of the former Vice-President, Karim Khalili, as
the new Chair of the High Peace Council. There was, however, no discernible
progress on peace talks between the Government and the Taliban.
10. Within the context of a broader Afghan-led process, United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) supported nine ongoing loca l peace initiatives in
nine different provinces during the reporting period. Through those initiatives,
UNAMA provided technical and logistical support to assist Afghan entities in the
sustainable and non-violent resolution of conflicts and grievances. Conflicts
addressed include land disputes, the security of highways, and religious
radicalization. On 6 April, UNAMA supported a conference on women’s role in the
peace process in Herat Province, which 100 participants from 13 districts attended.
Participants called for concrete action to implement the country’s national action
plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
11. The Government made some progress on electoral preparations during the
reporting period. In April, the Independent Election Commission approved a polling
centre assessment package, which includes an operational plan, procedures and
budget. The assessment fulfils one of the recommendations of the Special Electoral
Reform Commission. On 1 March, the President appointed a new Chief Electoral
Officer to head the Independent Election Commission secretariat, which had been
vacant since June 2014. Meanwhile, the Electoral Complaints Commission started
to draft a gender policy aimed at, among others, improving the representation of
women in the Commission and began its recruitment process. While the
Government reiterated its commitment to holding elections during the current

17-09158

3/14

A/71/932
S/2017/508

Afghan year, which ends in March 2018, key decisions, including on the
constituencies, budget, timeline and funding modalities, have not been made.
12. The Government and the Independent Election Commission continued to
consider options for the introduction of new technology for future elections. On
11 March, the Independent Election Commission presented a technical study to the
Government and donors, which determined that new technology should be used for
the next elections, and in April, the Independent Election Commission
commissioned a feasibility study to assess the possibility of introducing new
technology. The Government and the Independent Election Commission continued
to explore modalities to introduce the use of new technology.
13. In March, the Government reached a decision on an electronic national
identification card, after a long impasse. The distribution of such identification
cards is one of the commitments in the 2014 political agreement on the
establishment of the National Unity Government. On 20 March, the Government
adopted an action plan and decided to commence distribution of the cards. On
22 April, President Ghani issued a legislative decree, subsequently approved by the
lower house of the National Assembly on 8 May, amending the Population
Registration Law to provide that ethnicity and nationality would be reflected on the
cards. On 13 May, a Presidential decree was issued, which, among others, required
commencement of a pilot phase of the plan within 90 days.

B.

Security
14. The security situation in Afghanistan remained intensely volatile. UNAMA
recorded 5,687 security-related incidents in Afghanistan between January and the
end of March 2017, the highest total ever recorded for that period since 2001.
Between 1 March and 31 May, the United Nations recorded 6,252 security -related
incidents, which represents a 2 per cent increase against the same period in 2016. In
line with established trends, armed clashes accounted for the majority (64 per cent)
of security incidents, followed by improvised explosive devices (16 per cent).
Targeted killings and abductions decreased by 4 per cent compared with the same
period in 2016. The eastern and southern regions were the most volatile, with a
22 per cent increase in incidents in the eastern region compared with the same
period in 2016. The Taliban focused their attacks on Badakhshan, Baghlan, Farah,
Faryab, Helmand, Kunar, Kunduz, Laghman, Sari Pul, Zabul and Uruzgan
Provinces. Taliban attacks against the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
around Lashkar Gah and surrounding districts in Helmand Provinc e were repelled
after the Afghan National Army Special Forces received support through
international military-conducted air strikes. The number of air strikes was
significantly higher (112 per cent) compared with the same period in 2016.
15. On 28 April, the Taliban announced the launch of their annual spring
offensive, “Operation Mansouri”. Their statement in 2017 described a two -track
approach involving military and political objectives, including advice to minimize
civilian casualties and to focus on targeting foreign forces in Afghanistan and their
Afghan partners. However, there has not been any significant improvement in
civilian casualty statistics. On the day of the announcement, the Taliban captured
the strategically important Zaybak district in Badakhshan Province, which borders
Pakistan. It was retaken several weeks later by Afghan security forces. During the
reporting period, the Taliban also temporarily captured Sangin district in Helmand
Province, Qal‘ah-i Zal district in Kunduz Province and Khwajah Baha’ al-Din
district in Takhar Province.

4/14

17-09158

A/71/932
S/2017/508

16. On 8 March, a complex attack was carried out against the largest military
hospital in Afghanistan, located in Kabul. The group Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant — Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) claimed responsibility for the attack, in
which 50 persons were reportedly killed, of whom approximately half were military
personnel (enjoying protected or hors de combat status), and 88 others were
wounded, including at least 22 civilians. On 21 April, the Taliban carried out a
complex attack against the headquarters of the Afghan National Army 209 Corps in
Mazar-e Sharif, in Balkh Province, which resulted in at least 140 security forces
killed and 60 others injured.
17. ISIL-KP maintained a presence in southern Nangarhar Province despite
increased military operations carried out by the United States of America and the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. International military forces
continued operations, including the use of a “massive ordnance air blast” that killed
a reportedly high number of ISIL-KP members in Achin district, Nangarhar
Province, on 13 April. In early May, government and United States military officials
confirmed that the ISIL-KP leader, Abdul Hasib, had been killed in a United States
Special Forces raid conducted on 27 April. ISIL-KP continued its attacks against the
civilian population and military and foreign military targets, and unverified local
sources claimed that ISIL-KP reinforcements and recruitment continued. The group
took responsibility for a complex attack on the National Radio Television of
Afghanistan station in Jalalabad on 17 May.
18. On 31 May, a suicide attacker detonated a truck-borne explosive device in the
city centre of Kabul. The explosion killed at least 80 people and injured 464, most
of whom were civilians. The bomb, one of the largest detonated in Kabul, caused
considerable damage to infrastructure in the surrounding area, including a number
of diplomatic facilities, forcing some embassies to evacuate personnel. The attack
led to several days of protests, in which some protesters were killed, allegedly by
security forces, including the son of a Member of Parliament. Suicide bombers at
the funeral ceremony for the deceased killed 6 civilians and injured 87, accord ing to
preliminary information, in an escalating cycle of violence.
19. By late April, the official number of Afghan National Army and Afghan
National Police personnel was at 90.4 per cent and 95.1 per cent of projected levels,
respectively, up from 86 per cent and 94 per cent in February, respectively.
20. A total of 11 recorded incidents had an impact on the United Nations,
including 1 case of intimidation, 1 incident relating to an improvised explosive
device and 5 criminal-related incidents; there were no armed clashes or abductions.

C.

Regional cooperation
21. During the reporting period, efforts were made by the Governments of
Afghanistan and Pakistan to improve relations, following a period of heightened
tensions from late 2016 to early 2017, as noted in my previous report. On 21 March,
Pakistan reopened the two official crossing points into Afghanistan, in Torkham and
Spin Boldak, which had been closed on 17 February, although the border was closed
intermittently throughout the reporting period. On 15 and 16 March, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland hosted high -level bilateral talks
attended by the National Security Adviser to the President of Afghanistan, Hanif
Atmar, and the Adviser to the Prime Minister of Pakistan on F oreign Affairs, Sartaj
Aziz, which were aimed at building confidence and resulted in the establishment of
a cross-border mechanism between the two countries. Tensions remained, however,
related partly to ongoing efforts by Pakistan to fence part of the bor der with
Afghanistan, as well as incidents of cross-border shelling. In a positive

17-09158

5/14

A/71/932
S/2017/508

development, a high-level Pakistani parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of
the National Assembly of Pakistan arrived in Kabul for meetings with Afghan
counterparts from 29 April to 1 May. The delegation also met President Ghani and
other officials. Shortly afterwards, the head of the Inter -Services Intelligence of
Pakistan visited Kabul and met President Ghani and other high -level government
officials. Such efforts to improve bilateral relations were subsequently disrupted on
5 May, when border guards from both countries clashed after Pakistani authorities
began conducting a census in two villages in a disputed area near the Spin Boldak Chaman crossing point. Following a negotiated ceasefire, the fighting has stopped,
and efforts continue at the political level to resolve the dispute.
22. A number of multilateral and bilateral initiatives continued. On 16 March, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and Tajikistan met in
Dushanbe to discuss the military-political situation in Afghanistan and the prospect
of enhanced Russian-Tajik cooperation. The Heart of Asia senior officials meeting
was held on 17 March in Baku, at which participants reaffirmed t heir commitments
to enhancing economic and security cooperation through the Heart of Asia -Istanbul
process. Uzbekistan also continued its increased engagement in Afghanistan,
including by appointing a Special Representative for Afghanistan on 25 May.
During a visit to the Russian Federation on 4 and 5 April, the President of
Uzbekistan, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, stated that peace in Afghanistan must be reached
through negotiations. In April, Kazakhstan held the second round of political
consultations with Afghanistan in Astana. On 14 April, the Russian Federation
hosted a conference on Afghanistan in Moscow, with representatives of China,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, the Russian
Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan in attendance. Other invitees included
Turkmenistan and the United States. Participants emphasized the need for direct
talks between the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. Following the
conference, on 15 April a spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Aff airs of
Afghanistan stated its intention to host the next talks in Kabul, and the Government
began preparations for a conference with wider participation, which was to be held
on 6 June. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization ministerial meeting was held on
21 April in Astana, during which participants reiterated the Organization’s
commitment to initiating a political dialogue between parties to the conflict in
Afghanistan.

III. Human rights
23. On 27 April, UNAMA released its conflict-related civilian casualty data for
the first quarter of 2017. Between 1 January and 31 March, UNAMA documented
2,181 civilian casualties (715 dead and 1,466 injured), representing a 4 per cent
decrease compared with the same period in 2016, which comprised a 2 per cent
decrease in civilian deaths and a 5 per cent decrease in injuries. UNAMA attributed
62 per cent of civilian casualties to anti-government elements, 21 per cent to
pro-government forces and 9 per cent to ground fighting where the perpetrator could
not be identified. The majority of the remaining 8 per cent were attributed to the
detonation of unattributed unexploded ordnance. Ground engagements caused most
civilian casualties (35 per cent), followed by improvised explosive devices (19 per
cent) and suicide and complex attacks (17 per cent). Of particular concern were the
24 per cent increase in women casualties (88 dead and 185 injured) and 17 per cent
increase in child deaths (210 dead, in addition to 525 injured). Women and child
casualties increased mainly from the impact of aerial operations, improvised
explosive devices and suicide and complex attacks.

6/14

17-09158

A/71/932
S/2017/508

24. As a concrete measure to mitigate civilian casualties from explosive remnants
of war, UNAMA welcomed the Government’s commitment to ratifying Protocol V
to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects and urged all parties to commence marking, clearing,
removing and destroying explosive remnants of war in areas under their territorial
control. UNAMA continued to conduct advocacy meetings with parties to the
conflict, including Afghan national security forces, anti -government elements and
international military forces, to promote respect for international humanitarian law
and take concrete measures to protect civilians from harm.
25. Children continued to suffer disproportionally from the violence. Between
1 January and 31 March, UNAMA verified 384 incidents resulting in 735 child
casualties (210 dead and 525 injured), representing a 3 per cent increase compared
with the same period in 2016. Children comprised 34 per cent of overall civilian
casualties. Ground engagements remained the leading cause of child casualties,
accounting for 42 per cent of all child casualties (312 child casualties), followed by
incidents related to explosive remnants of war (164 child casualties; 22 per cent)
and improvised explosive devices (114 child casualties; 15 per cent) in the first
quarter of 2017. A total of 81 per cent of the victims from the unexploded ordnance
were children.
26. With respect to the recruitment and use of children by the parties to the
conflict, UNAMA verified the recruitment of 13 boys, including 9 by the Taliban,
2 by the Afghan National Police, 1 by the Afghan National Border Police and 1 by
the Afghan Local Police. UNAMA verified three incidents of abduction by
anti-government elements involving five boys and two incidents of sexual violence
against two boys. As at 10 April, 135 children were detained on national security related charges, including for association with anti-government armed groups, and
held in poor conditions in the adult maximum-security detention facility in Parwan
Province. Regarding the protection of health and educational facilities and workers,
between 1 January and 31 March, 14 incidents affecting education were verified, the
same as in the corresponding period for 2016. UNAMA also documented 17 schools
used for military purposes. UNAMA notes a reduction in the military use of clinics,
recording 1 incident during the reporting period compared with 31 in the same
period in 2016. The country task force on monitoring and reporting docum ented
seven incidents of denial of humanitarian access, five attributed to the Taliban and
two to undetermined armed groups.
27. On 24 April, UNAMA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights released a joint public report on t he
implementation of the country’s national plan on the elimination of torture, covering
the period between January 2015 and December 2016. Of the 469 detainees
interviewed, 39 per cent gave credible accounts of having experienced torture or
other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment during arrest and
interrogation in numerous detention facilities run by the National Directorate of
Security and the Afghan National Police. The report also documented a pervasive
lack of accountability for such practices. Prior to the report’s release, the
Government withdrew its reservation to the Convention against Torture, and the
Cabinet approved in principle the signature of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture. Following this, the President o rdered the setting up of a
national preventive mechanism. On 12 May, the Committee against Torture, in its
concluding observations on the second periodic report of Afghanistan, expressed
deep concern at the allegations of widespread use of torture and ill -treatment and a
culture of impunity. The Committee called upon Afghanistan to make sure that all

17-09158

7/14

A/71/932
S/2017/508

allegations were investigated promptly, thoroughly and impartially and that alleged
perpetrators were prosecuted.
28. Violence against women remained prevalent. The annual report of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, covering the period from
March 2016 to March 2017 and released on 8 March, noted an increase of 8.6 per
cent in the number of cases of violence against women recorded by its office s across
the country. According to the Special Prosecutor on Elimination of Violence against
Women, 2,442 cases were registered with prosecution offices across the country,
with 149 cases adjudicated. A total of 22 per cent of registered cases were either
withdrawn or not followed up by complainants. Commissions on the elimination of
harassment against women have been established in 11 provinces. The draft law on
the elimination of harassment against women and children was not endorsed by the
President, following recommendations by the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and civil
society organizations to review it.
29. On 2 March, the revised Penal Code was passed by legislative decree after a
four-year transparent and inclusive process. The President endorsed it on 4 March,
and it is being printed for the Official Gazette. The decree delays the application of
the Code for nine months after publication, to allow the security and justice sectors
to be trained on and the public to be informed of the revised Code comb ining crimes
in more than 50 special laws enacted since the 1976 Penal Code. The Code
incorporates all of the country’s substantive treaty obligations, including all
mandatory crimes under the United Nations Convention against Corruption, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, and criminal liability against civilian
superiors or military commanders who fail to prevent or punish subordinates who
commit these crimes under the Rome Statute and the prohibition of the practice of
land-grabbing. It also expands the 1976 definition of the crime of torture to comply
with the Convention. The Code provides a progressive definition of rape, being
gender-neutral, requiring modern definitions of consent and protecting privacy,
dignity and bodily integrity. It furthermore reduces the number of crimes subject to
the death penalty by 74 per cent.
30. The Government presented an updated version of the budget ($52 million)
proposed for implementing Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. A small working group with representation from both the
Government and the international community was formed in March to review the
activities and budget with relevant line ministries, with a view to developing a
funding mechanism for the plan. On 18 April, the Government launched its national
action plan to eliminate early and child marriages for the period 2017 -2021.
31. Media workers and civil society actors continued to face intimidation and
abuse from anti-government elements. Lack of cooperation from local authorities,
including their occasional interference in the work of civil society actors, was also
registered during the reporting period. UNAMA recorded four cases of intimidation
and killing of civil society actors in Baghlan, Nangarhar and Kabul Provinces. In
April, UNAMA supported the relocation to Kabul of one human rights defender
under threat. On 7 May, two unknown gunmen on a motorcycle shot and killed a
prominent journalist, politician and civil society activist in Pul-e-Khumri city. In
Jalalabad city, Nangarhar Province, five media workers, employees of National
Radio Television of Afghanistan, were killed in the above -mentioned 17 May attack
claimed by ISIL-KP.

8/14

17-09158

A/71/932
S/2017/508

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and coordination of
development assistance
32. The Government continued to take steps to address the country’s significant
economic challenges. The International Monetary Fund and Afghan authorities
concluded a first review of the country’s Extended Credit Facility on 4 March. The
review estimated 2016 growth at 2 per cent, somewhat higher than earlier estimates.
An increase to 3 per cent was projected for 2017, driven by favourable agricultural
output. Fund staff commended authorities for prudent macroeconomic management
and strong progress on structural reforms in challenging circumstances. On 4 March,
the country’s central bank announced that the Government had substantially
addressed technical aspects of an action plan to improve its framework for
combating money-laundering and terrorist financing. Representatives of the
intergovernmental Financial Action Task Force conducted an on -site visit in Kabul
on 11 and 12 April to monitor progress in Afghanistan, which the Task Force
considers a high-risk jurisdiction. Recommendations from the visit will inform a
future decision as to whether Afghanistan will remain subject to enhanced
monitoring.
33. Follow-up to the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, held in October 2016,
remained a priority for the Government and donors. The Government continued its
efforts to detail its development priorities in 10 National Priority Programmes for
10 sectors, as envisioned in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. On 8 March, the Government launched the Women’s Economic
Empowerment National Priority Programme. On 4 April, the Ministries of Economy
and Finance outlined to donors plans to incorporate the Sustainable Development
Goals into the National Priority Programmes.
34. The Government’s budget execution report for the first three and a half months
of the Afghan financial year (21 December 2016-8 April 2017) showed no
improvement in the percentage of budget spent compared with the same period the
previous year (14 per cent in both years). In absolute terms, budget expenditures
were lower by $37.3 million. The total allotment or spending authority was, at
$2.5 billion, lower by about $731 million. Sectors that saw the greatest reductions
were infrastructure and natural resources, social protection, security, and economic
governance; expenditures for agriculture, rural rehabilitation and development,
education, and health were marginally higher than in the previous year. To improve
the execution of the national budget, the Government allotted $1 million to each
province to be spent in four sectors (health, education, rural rehabilitation and
development, and agriculture). That allocation serves as a pilot for the
implementation of the Provincial Budgeting Policy, which was launched on 19 April.
Ultimately, the Government would like 40 per cent of its budget to be spent by
subnational authorities.
35. On 25 April, UNAMA published its first anti-corruption report, which
acknowledges progress made in the Government’s anti-corruption efforts, such as
the establishment of the High Council on Governance, Justice and Anti -Corruption
and the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, the appointment of a high -level committee
to work on a national anti-corruption strategy, the completion of anti-corruption
plans by the five largest revenue-generating ministries, progress in improving
controls over public financial management, and increased transparency in national
procurement processes. The report recommended more effective implementation of
key reforms, such as merit-based public sector recruitment, revenue collection and
budget execution, and the implementation of stronger oversight and coordination.
Since its first trial in November 2016, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre has
adjudicated 14 primary court cases, finding 40 accused guilty, and affirmed 10 cases
17-09158

9/14

A/71/932
S/2017/508

on appeal, including those involving high-level officials on charges of bribery,
embezzlement and abuse of official authority to obstruct justice. The Centre’s
prosecutors accepted for investigation 96 cases during the reporting period, many of
which they are formally investigating at present.
36. After Afghanistan joined the global Open Government Partnership in
December 2016, the Government facilitated three awareness forums in coordinat ion
with major civil society networks to promote the role and representation of civil
society in six Open Government Partnership working groups, namely on fiscal
system openness, legislative openness, access to information, anti -corruption, data
openness and natural resources.
37. Further efforts were made to increase the number of women in the Afghan
National Police. On 24 April, 245 female police completed a two -month training
course and were posted according to their educational levels. The total number of
female police officers within the police force remained at approximately 2 per cent.
The civilianization of the police also continued. Out of 191 positions earmarked for
civilians in the Afghan National Police, 57 positions were filled during the report ing
period, resulting in 117 filled to date. In April, the Ministry of Higher Education
granted the National Police Academy the status of a university, allowing its cadets
to obtain a recognized degree.

V. Humanitarian assistance
38. The ongoing conflict continued to result in significant displacement and
protection risks. Between January and mid -May, more than 100,000 individuals
were newly internally displaced across the country, with 29 of 34 provinces having
recorded some level of displacement. The north, south, east and west of the country
were similarly affected, with the provinces of Kunduz, Baghlan, Kandahar,
Uruzgan, Nangahar and Faryab all reporting more than 6,000 people displaced.
Humanitarian assistance provided to affected populations by the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations included emergency food, shelter and non -food
items, cash, health services and supplies. The Government’s technical working
group on land under the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority developed a new
legal framework for the identification and provision of suitable land and housing to
displaced persons. The framework includes criteria to ensure the suitability of all
allocated land and to assess applicants’ eligibility.
39. The repatriation programme of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees resumed on 3 April, after which 24,414 registered
Afghan refugees returned from Pakistan to Afghanistan, each receiving $200 per
person to support their immediate humanitarian needs.
40. The deportation and spontaneous return of undocumented Afghans from
Pakistan continued, with 50,985 arrivals (50,254 spontaneous arrivals and
731 deportees) between 4 March and 20 May, accounting for 83 per cent of the total
arrivals from Pakistan in 2017. Since 1 January, the total number of undocumented
returnees arriving from Pakistan rose to 60,626, almost double the number that
returned in the same period in 2016. Returns from Pakistan continued to be driven
by a marked deterioration of protection space. During the reporting period, the
International Organization for Migration documented 81,099 arrivals from the
Islamic Republic of Iran (20,502 spontaneous arrivals and 60,597 deportees). It
assisted 37,344 returnees (73 per cent) from Pakistan and 2,7 09 (4 per cent)
returnees from the Islamic Republic of Iran during that period. Between 1 March and
24 May, the International Organization for Migration also assisted 1,095 returnees
from Europe (compared with 2,432 for the same period in 2016).
10/14

17-09158

A/71/932
S/2017/508

41. The temporary closure of the Torkham and Spin Boldak border crossing points
delayed the delivery of essential humanitarian supplies, including medicines,
education materials and food assistance, to thousands of beneficiaries. The closures
particularly affected the delivery of specialized foods for children under 5,
interrupting routine malnutrition treatment for 11,000 children. The continued influx
of returning Afghans and their tendency to congregate in Jalalabad and Kabul cities
also added to the pressure on existing resources and stretched the capacity of
humanitarian partners. Some 20 per cent of the population across Kunar, Laghman
and Nangarhar Provinces are currently returnees (approximately 500,000 people).
As part of long-term efforts to reintegrate returnees and manage internally displaced
persons, on 19 March the United Nations, the Government and donors endorsed a
comprehensive action plan developed under the auspices of the Policy Framework
for Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons to focus on the protection of
civilians in conflict-affected areas, the provision of immediate humanitarian
assistance, documentation, access to basic services, land allocation and adequate
housing.
42. In the first three months of 2017, United Nations agencies and hum anitarian
partners reached 1.3 million people of the planned 5.7 million. However, constraints
on humanitarian access continued to be recorded, with a total of 73 incidents
affecting the United Nations and humanitarian partners registered between 1 March
and 24 May. The incidents reported included the death of 1 aid worker and the
abduction of 11 aid workers and injuries to 2 others. As many as 26 per cent of all
incidents recorded were against health workers and health facilities. The number of
internally displaced persons located in hard-to-reach areas has continued to grow,
constituting 22 per cent (21,827) of the newly displaced in 2017. Addressing the
needs of those displaced in highly insecure districts not fully under government
control remains immensely challenging. The Taliban displayed some willingness to
facilitate access for vaccination campaigns following an outbreak of polio outside
Kunduz Province and to engage in dialogue over a response to conflict -displaced
people in previously unreached districts of Baghlan Province.
43. As at 21 May, the total funding for humanitarian action in Afghanistan stood at
$213 million, of which $115 million was for activities included in the Humanitarian
Response Plan.
44. The Mine Action Service and mine action partners continued to provide risk
education at encashment and transit centres to ensure that returnees from Pakistan
and the Islamic Republic of Iran were aware of the presence and danger of
landmines, explosive remnants of war and abandoned pressure -plate improvised
explosive devices. From 1 March to 30 April, 92,466 returnees received such
education. In addition, mine action partners, coordinated by the Mine Action
Service and the Directorate of Mine Action Coordination of Afghanistan, declared
18 communities mine-free, which enabled approximately 19,499 individuals across
8.9 km2 to move freely within their community. However, it is estimated that 3,511
minefields, 309 battlefields and 52 contaminated firing ranges remain, affecting
1,500 communities, in addition to the continued threat from pressure-plate
improvised explosive devices and explosive weaponry. The 2017 average monthly
incident rate of 87 victims represents a decrease compared with a monthly average
of 162 victims recorded in 2016; the vast majority (97.8 per cent) is due to
explosive remnants of war and pressure-plate improvised explosive devices rather
than landmines.

17-09158

11/14

A/71/932
S/2017/508

VI. Counter-narcotics
45. The Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, with technical support from the United
Nations, completed the Afghanistan socioeconomic report on opium cultivation for
2016 on 19 May. It found that the estimated value of opiates produced in
Afghanistan increased to $3.02 billion in 2016 from $1.56 billion in 2015. At 16 per
cent of gross domestic product, the value of opiates was more than two thirds of that
of the entire licit agricultural sector of the country. The increase between 2015 and
2016 was attributed to a 43 per cent rise in opium production together with
escalating heroin prices.
46. Annual opium poppy eradication efforts began in March. By 23 May, Afghan
authorities had eradicated 685 ha in Balkh, Badghis, Herat, Kunar, Kabul,
Kandahar, Laghman, Nangarhar and Nimroz Provinces (final eradication figures
will be confirmed only upon analysis of satellite imagery). This represented a
marked increase in eradication over the 2016 season, when, during the same period,
Afghan authorities eradicated only 98 ha of poppy in Badakhshan, Kandahar,
Laghman, Nimroz, Sar-e Pul and Takhar Provinces. The increase is attributable to
greater emphasis on eradication by the President, intensified efforts by the Ministry
of Counter-Narcotics, and improved follow-up by the National Security Council,
following poor results from governor-led eradication activities in 2016.
47. From 3 March to 24 May, Afghan law enforcement authorities conducted a
total of 745 counter-narcotics operations, which led to the seizure of 723 kg of
heroin, 34,820 kg of morphine, 15,263 kg of opium, 16 kg of methamphetamine,
9,951 kg of hashish, 21,535 kg of solid precursor chemicals, 32,790 litres of liquid
precursor chemicals and 29 K-tablets (synthetic drugs). In addition, 22 heroin
processing laboratories were dismantled, and 124 vehicles, 116 weapons, 209 mobile
telephones and five radios were seized. During those operations, 829 suspects were
arrested and two members of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces were
killed and two wounded.
48. The Sixth Steering Committee Meeting of the Regional Programme for
Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries was hosted by the Government of
Kazakhstan in Astana on 6 April. Senior representatives from the drug control
agencies and Ministries of the Interior and Foreign Affairs from the eight Regional
Programme countries, as well as donors, international partners and organizations,
reviewed the achievements in 2016 and identified priorities for 2017. Participants
noted the positive impact of strengthened regional cooperation and joint responses
to countering illicit drugs and transnational organized crime.

VII. Mission support
49. The Mission’s current vacancy rate is at 10 per cent, compared with the
approved vacancy rate of 14 per cent for international staff, and 4 per cent compared
with the approved vacancy rate of 6 per cent for national staff. The gender balance
stands at 86 per cent male and 14 per cent female for staff in all categories. Despite
special measures granted for the Mission to recruit and retain more national female
staff, national female staff representation remains at 7 per cent.
50. Between 1 March 2017 and 30 April, UNAMA conducted 178 road and 22 air
missions, as well as 508 reverse outreach missions, during which district
representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

12/14

17-09158

A/71/932
S/2017/508

VIII. Observations
51. On 14 June 2017, I visited Afghanistan to express my solidarity with the
Government and people of Afghanistan following the severe terrorist attacks in
Kabul on 31 May and 3 June 2017. I left the country deeply concerned about the
deteriorating security situation, which has caused not only immense human
suffering but also significant internal displacement, as I witnessed during a meeting
with internally displaced men and women. Despite their dire living conditions, their
courage and unwavering commitment to contributing to a prosp erous Afghanistan
should inspire us all to support them concertedly. Peace remains the foundation for
the country’s sustainable development.
52. In my meetings with President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah, I stressed
the importance of government unity. They expressed their deep concern at the
proliferation of different terrorist groups in the Afghan territory and the need for a
more concerted international effort to counter terrorism. The recent meeting
between President Ghani and the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif,
provides hope for an improvement in bilateral relations, an essential condition for
more effective counter-terrorism action.
53. I am encouraged that the Government continued to progress its reform agenda.
Efforts to address corruption and increase accountability among senior officials,
including in the security apparatus, are particularly welcome. Of note in this regard
is the work of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, as well as the Government’s
commitment to eliminating the practice of torture and ill-treatment of conflictrelated detainees, to ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and to
withdrawing its reservations to that Convention. I we lcome the Government’s
revision by legislative decree of the Penal Code.
54. The emerging focus on elections is encouraging; at the same time, it has the
potential to create new divisions and exacerbate existing tensions within the
political sphere. I welcome the continued commitment of the Government and
electoral institutions to holding credible and transparent elections. Initiating the
polling centre assessment package will be an important step towards electoral
preparations in general and will fulfil one of the key recommendations of the
Special Electoral Reform Commission: the preparation of polling centre -based voter
lists. It will be crucial to expeditiously make progress on the remaining issues for
preparations to start in earnest.
55. While the rate of economic growth has improved somewhat, it has been
outpaced by the population growth, including returns. The Government’s
development priorities are articulated in the Afghanistan National Peace and
Development Framework, to which the international com munity generously pledged
its support in Brussels in 2016. I encourage all stakeholders to make efforts to
improve the delivery of the Framework. For the United Nations part, I remain
committed to helping to realize the vision of delivering as one.
56. The security situation has deteriorated further. The Afghan security forces
continued to face an intensifying insurgency. The unrelenting nature of the conflict
has affected morale and is a matter that the Government believes must be addressed.
The heavy toll of the fighting on civilians, particularly on women and children,
reflects the need for all parties to the conflict to take urgent steps to halt the killing
and maiming of civilians. I am particularly concerned about the attack in Kabul on
31 May and the subsequent escalation of violence, which further demonstrated the
vulnerability of civilians in the conflict. I stress the need for accountability for
violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law. The need to
17-09158

13/14

A/71/932
S/2017/508

move forward with the implementation of the national civilian casualty prevention
and mitigation strategy is crucial in this regard. I note the commitment of the
Government to formally ratifying Protocol V to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and call upon the
parties to the conflict to remove explosive remnants of war left behind from fighting
in areas under their territorial control.
57. The high number of internal displacements remains of concern. In addition,
the number of people returning to Afghanistan in 2017 is at higher levels than
during the same period in 2016. Besides posing humanitarian challenges in the
immediate future, the successful absorption and integration of a large number of
returnees will require medium- and long-term development solutions, including
access to land and basic services. I commend the Government for its engagement
and commitment to determining measures towards addressing this issue. I note that
there has been a slight improvement in humanitarian access for the conduct of the
polio campaign and encourage all parties to increase access in the interest of the
health and welfare of all Afghans.
58. Progress achieved in the implementation of the peace agreement between the
Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin), including the return of its leader,
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, to Afghanistan and the release of Hizb -i Islami prisoners,
demonstrates the Government’s willingness to establish peace. Peace must be
attained through negotiations and not on the battlefield. For peace to be long lasting, it must be inclusive, ensure accountability for past abuses and uphold the
rights of victims.
59. Regrettably, there has been no discernible progress towards direct peace talks
between the Government and the Taliban. A regional environment conducive for an
Afghan-led peace process is essential. The Government’s initiative to convene the
Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation conference on 6 June was
conceived to that end. It is a testament to the Government’s resolve to achieve peace
that the conference went ahead despite the horrific levels of violence in the week
leading up to it.
60. On regional relations, a series of recent security incidents in Kabul cast a
shadow over efforts by the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan to improve
their relations. The renewed high-level contacts between senior military officials
from both countries and the visit by a senior Pakistani pa rliamentary delegation to
Kabul were positive steps towards enhancing confidence at various levels. I urge the
two countries to continue this constructive engagement towards improving bilateral
relations, which is a key to fostering peace in Afghanistan an d beyond.
61. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication to fulfilling
our commitments in support of the people of Afghanistan under very challenging
conditions.

14/14

17-09158
