IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international eco11omic co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 34/150 of 17 December 1979,
entitled "Consolidation and progressive development of
the principles and norms of international economic law
relating in particular to the legal aspects of the new international economic order",
Noting the report of the Secretary-General3 8 and the
views submitted by some Governments in response to
resolution 34/150,
Recognizing the urgent need for a systematic and
progressive development of the principles and norms of
international law relating to the new international
economic order,
l. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Research:
(a) To prepare a list of the existing and evolving
principles and norms of international law relating to the
new international economic order concerning the
economic relations among States, international organizations and other entities of public international law,
and the activities of transnational corporations, as contained, inter alia, in the following texts:
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations;3'
(ii) Declaration and Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order; 40
(iii) Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States; 41
(iv) General Assembly resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation;
(v) International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade; 42
(vi) Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive
Business Practices; 4 '
(vii) Final Acts of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development 44 and declarations
adopted by all United Nations conferences
relevant to the new international economic order;
(b) To prepare an analytical study, on the basis of
the list referred to in subparagraph (a) above, on the
progressive development of the principles and norms of
international law relating to the new international
economic order;
(c) To complete the study referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) above in time for the Secretary-

General to submit it to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
2. Urges Member States to submit relevant information with respect to the study not later than 31 July 1981;
3. Requests the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the regional commissions, the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and other relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations active in this field, as
determined by the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research, to submit relevant information and to cooperate fully with the Institute in the implementation of
the present resolution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Asst:mbly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the study made by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research for its consideration on a priority basis, under an item entitled "Progressive development of the principles and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order" to be
included in the provisional agenda of that session.
95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

(i)

" A/35/466.
" Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
"' Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl).
41
Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
"See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex.
"TD/RBP/CONF /10.
" Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations publication, Sales
No. 64.II.B. l l); ibid., Second Session, vol. I and Corr. I and 3 and
Add.I and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.68.II.D.14); ibid., Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.11.D.4); ibid., Fourth
Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.76.11.D. IO and corrigendum); and ibid., Fifth Session, vol. I.
Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.79.II.D.14).

265

35/167.

Observer status of national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of
African Unity and/or by the League of Arab
States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the resolution of the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States in Their
Relations with International Organizations relating to
the observer status of national liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or
by the League of Arab States,"
Noting that the Vienna Convention on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International
Organizations of a Universal Character"" regulates only
the representation of States in their relations with international organizations,
Taking into account the current practice of inviting the
above-mentioned national liberation movements to participate as observers in the sessions of the General
Assembly, specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system and in the work of the
conferences held under the auspices of such international organizations,
Convinced that the participation of the national liberation movements referred to above in the work of international organizations helps to strengthen international peace and co-operation,
Desirous of ensuring the effective participation of the
above-mentioned national liberation movements as observers in the work of international organizations and of
regulating, to that end, their status and the facilities,
privileges and immunities necessary for the performance of their functions,
'' See Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International Organizations, Vienna. 4 February-14 March 1975, vol. II (United Nations
publication. Sales No E.75.Y.12), p. 201. document A/CONF67/l5.
annex.
'"Ibid., p. 207, document A/CONF.67/16.

266

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

I. Invites all States which have not done so, in particular those which are hosts to international organizations or to conferences convened by, or held under the
auspices of, international organizations of a universal
character to consider as soon as possible the question of
ratifying,'or acceding to, the Vienna Convention on the
Representation of States in Their Relations with International Organizations of a Universal Character;
2. Calls upon the States concerned to accord to the
delegations of the national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or by
the League of Arab States, and which are accorded observer status by international organizations, the facilities, privileges and immunities necessary for the performance of their functions in accordance with the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International
Organizations of a Universal Character;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the
implementation of the present resolution.

95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/168.

Consideration of effective measures to enhance
the protection, security and safety of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives",
Recalling its resolution 33/140 of 19 December 1978,
Taking note of the comments made by the SecretaryGeneral in section VII of his report on the work of the
Organization, 47

Conscious of its duty to develop and strengthen
friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Convinced that respect for the principles and rules of
international law governing diplomatic and consular
relations, in particular those aimed at ensuring the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, is a basic prerequisite for the normal conduct of relations among States and for the fulfilment of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recognizing that for the same reason it is also necessary to ensure respect for the principles and rules of
international law aimed at protecting missions and representatives to international intergovernmental organizations,
A ware that respect for the principles and rules of international law concerning the status of officials of international intergovernmental organizations contributes to the promotion of international co-operation and
understanding and that non-observance of those principles and rules is a matter of serious concern to the international community,

Recognizing that acts of violence against diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives may seriously
41
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. I (A/35/1).

affect the maintenance of friendly relations and cooperation among States,
Deeply concerned at the increasing number of violations of, or failures to observe, the relevant principles
and rules of international law pertaining to the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
Expressing its sympathy for the victims of illegal acts
against diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
Recalling that the principles and rules of int~rnational law governing diplomatic and consular relat10ns also
contain an obligation, without prejudice to their respective privileges and immunities under international law,
for all persons enjoying such privileges and immunities
to respect the laws and regulations of the receiving State
and not to interfere in the internal affairs of that State,
Emphasizing the need for strict observance by all
States of the principles and rules of international law in
order to ensure the conduct of normal diplomatic and
consular relations,
I. Deplores all violations of the principles and rules
of international law governing diplomatic and consular
relations;
2. Strongly condemns in particular all acts of
violence against diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives;
3. Urges all States to observe and to implement the
principles and rules of international law governing diplomatic and consular relations;
4. Urges in particular all States to take all necessary
measures with a view to effectively ensuring, in conformity with their international obligations, the protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives in territory under their jurisdiction, including practicable measures to prohibit in
their territories illegal activities of persons, groups and
organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or
engage in the perpetration of acts against the security
and safety of such missions and representatives;
5. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so to
consider becoming parties to the relevant conventions
concerning the inviolability of diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives;
6. Calls upon all States, in cases where a dispute
arises in connexion with violation of the principles and
rules of international law concerning the inviolability of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
to make use of the means for peaceful settlement of disputes, including the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral;
7. Invites all States to report to the SecretaryGeneral serious violations of the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, and invites the State in which the violations
took place to report also on measures taken to bring to
justice the offenders and to prevent a repetition of such
violations and eventually to communicate, in accordance with its laws, the final outcome of the proceedings against the offenders;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to all
States, upon receipt, the reports received by him under
the terms of paragraph 7 above, unless requested otherwise by the reporting State;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to invite all States
to inform him of their views with respect to any measures
