S/2012/889*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2012
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Timor-Leste,
3 to 6 November 2012
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter dated 31 October 2012 (S/2012/793), the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General that the Council had decided to send a
mission to Timor-Leste from 1 to 7 November 2012. 1 The mission was composed as
follows:
Ambassador Baso Sangqu, Permanent Representative (South Africa),
Head of Mission
Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev, Permanent Representative (Azerbaijan)
Ambassador Manjeev Singh Puri, Deputy Permanent Representative (India)
Ambassador Raza Bashir Tarar, Deputy Permanent Representative (Pakistan)
Ambassador João Maria Cabral, Deputy Permanent Representative (Portugal)
Ambassador Kodjo Menan, Permanent Representative (Togo).
2.
The primary purpose of the mission, as set out in the terms of reference
approved by all Security Council members, was to reaffirm the Council’s
commitment to the promotion of long-term stability in the country; to commend the
Timorese people for their successful presidential and parliamentary election; to
encourage the Government, the Parliament, the political parties and people of
Timor-Leste to continue to work together and engage in inclusive dialogue to
promote further consolidation of peace, democracy, the rule of law, security sector
reform, sustainable social and economic development and national reconciliation in
the country, including fostering the role of women in the process; and to express the
Council’s support to Timorese leadership and ownership of the next phase of
development. The mission also wished to express the Council’s full support for the
work of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the
United Nations country team in Timor-Leste and to assess the progress in the phased
drawdown of UNMIT operations. The mission was further directed to discuss with
the Government its vision of an innovative working relationship of cooperation with
__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 21 December 2012.
1 The visit of the Security Council mission to Timor-Leste actually took place from 3 to
6 November 2012.

12-61376* (E) 241212

*1261376*

S/2012/889

the United Nations, and to underscore the international community’s long-term
commitment to sustainable peace and development in Timor-Leste and for
continuing support of bilateral and international partners to these Timorese efforts as
needed. The terms of reference of the mission and programme of work are contained
in annexes I and II to the present report.
3.
This was the second visit of the Security Council to Timor-Leste since the
establishment of UNMIT on 25 August 2006. The Council previously visited in
November 2007 following the first presidential and parliamentary elections since
the restoration of independence.
4.
The mission left New York on 1 November and returned on 7 November.
During the visit, the mission met with the President of Timor-Leste, Taur Matan
Ruak, the Prime Minister, Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, the President of the National
Parliament, Vicente da Silva Guterres, and the President of the Court of Appeal,
Claudio Ximenes (the four organs of sovereignty); the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation and other senior Government officials; the Minister of Justice, the
Prosecutor-General, the Public Defender General, the Anti-Corruption
Commissioner and the Deputy Provedor for Human Rights and Justice; members of
Parliament; the General Commander of the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL); the Acting Commander of the defence forces (Falintil-Forças Armadas de
Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL)); leaders of political parties (including the
Secretary-General of Fretilin); the Bishop of the Diocese of Dili; and representatives
of civil society and women’s groups. The mission also met with senior UNMIT
officials, including the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, Finn Reske-Nielsen, the Deputy Special Representative for Security
Sector Support and Rule of Law, Shigeru Mochida, the Police Commissioner, Luis
Carrilho, and the Chief of the UNMIT Military Liaison Group, Colonel Martin
Dransfield, and members of the United Nations country team, as well as the
Commander of the international security forces and the diplomatic community. In
addition, the mission visited the Police Training Centre in Dili for briefings by the
Centre Director and the PNTL and UNMIT police leadership as well as the town of
Same in Manufahi District for meetings with the President of Timor-Leste at the
District Administration building and with the PNTL and UNMIT Police Manufahi
District Commanders at the Same police station.

II. Visit of the Security Council to Timor-Leste
A.

Background and context
5.
In explaining the purpose of its visit to the Timorese authorities and other
stakeholders, the mission explained that it was guided by the parameters and goals
of Security Council resolution 2037 (2012) and the terms of reference approved by
the entire Council. The mission indicated that it had also taken account of the
assessment and recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report issued on
15 October 2012 (S/2012/765), which the Security Council would discuss on
12 November, and that the mission would also report to the Council on the same
day. Based on this reporting, the Council would subsequently make a decision
regarding completion of the UNMIT mandate.

2

12-61376

S/2012/889

6.
In referring to resolution 2037 (2012), the mission recalled that the Security
Council had decided to extend the mandate of UNMIT until 31 December 2012 and
had endorsed its phased drawdown plan, “in accordance with the wishes of the
Government of Timor-Leste, conditions on the ground and following the successful
completion of the 2012 electoral process”, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral and as reflected in the Joint Transition Plan between the Government and
UNMIT of 19 September 2011. The mission highlighted to all interlocutors that the
Council had underlined the importance of ownership of the medium-term strategy
by the leaders and people of Timor-Leste in the process of tracking progress in the
country and assessing the level and form of United Nations support and cooperation
with the Government. The mission emphasized that this principle of national
ownership and sovereignty would also underpin its discussions throughout the visit.
7.
Within this framework, the mission further recalled that, in its resolution 2037
(2012), the Security Council had requested the Secretary-General to submit a report
providing recommendations on the completion of the UNMIT mission and the
transfer of responsibilities in order to enable the Government and UNMIT to
finalize preparations for its withdrawal and had encouraged a timely decision by the
Government on the nature, activities and scope of the United Nations role
post-UNMIT, in coordination with UNMIT, the United Nations country team and
other relevant stakeholders. The mission explained that it had taken account of the
Secretary-General’s recommendation, in his report of 15 October, that UNMIT
continue to proceed with its phased drawdown until the completion of its mandate
on 31 December 2012, consistent with the views of the Government as set out in the
letter dated 20 September from the Prime Minister addressed to him (S/2012/736)
and as envisaged in the Joint Transition Plan. It had noted that, in that letter, the
Prime Minister stated that Timor-Leste no longer requires United Nations support
through the presence of either a United Nations peacekeeping or political mission
beyond the end of 2012 and, consequently, that there is no requirement for the
continued consideration of Timor-Leste affairs by the Security Council; that the
United Nations will continue to be an important partner in the new phase of the
development of the nation; that Timor-Leste, in accordance with the progress it has
achieved, and consistent with the principles of the Group of Seven Plus New Deal,
would like to establish with the United Nations an “innovative working relationship
of cooperation”; and that an example of such an approach could be a two-year
appointment of a special envoy of the Secretary-General with a focus on
institutional strengthening and development that could provide a direct link between
Timor-Leste and the Secretary-General’s good offices. In addition, the mission had
taken account that the Prime Minister had conveyed that the Government had
formed a working group to start discussions with the United Nations on matters
identified in the Joint Transition Plan for the post-2012 period (and that the National
Planning Matrix will be used to evaluate these activities), and that the SecretaryGeneral had asked his Acting Special Representative to ensure that the UNMIT
senior management team and United Nations country team partners fully collaborate
with it to facilitate its work. The mission also noted that the Secretary-General had
applauded the continued progress in the joint transition process and the close
partnership maintained between Timorese and UNMIT counterparts, and called on
all involved to continue to work together and intensify their efforts to facilitate the
effective implementation of the Joint Transition Plan’s remaining activities.

12-61376

3

S/2012/889

8.
In considering that the Secretary-General’s report of 15 October presents an
extensive assessment of progress achieved in UNMIT’s mandated priority areas and
remaining challenges, and that the letter of 20 September from the Timor-Leste
Government conveys its position on the post-UNMIT United Nations engagement,
the Security Council mission decided to focus on and obtain feedback from the
Timorese authorities and other stakeholders on three issues. First, so as to ensure a
responsible and informed decision by the Security Council on the transition, the
mission sought the view of each Timorese interlocutor on whether they favoured the
continued drawdown and closure of UNMIT by the end of December, taking account
of the status of implementation of Joint Transition Plan activities, the progress
achieved and residual challenges faced by the country, and available capacities and
arrangements to meet those challenges. Second, the mission asked the Timor-Leste
Government to elaborate on its vision of developing an innovative working
relationship of cooperation with the United Nations focusing on institutional
strengthening and development during the post-2012 phase, and on the outcome of
its working group on post-2012 United Nations activities to be undertaken; it also
sought the perspectives of other Timorese interlocutors on the desired form of future
United Nations engagement. While acknowledging the core principle of national
ownership in respect of the post-UNMIT United Nations role, the mission raised
with the Government whether there were any residual matters that would require
United Nations assistance, such as the estimated 61 cases that would not be
completed by the UNMIT Serious Crimes Investigation Team by the end of
December. Third, the mission encouraged the Timorese authorities and people to
continue the process of consolidating and building upon their achievements and
reforms.

B.

Recommendation for completion of the drawdown of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
9.
During discussions with Government and State officials and other Timorese
stakeholders regarding the UNMIT drawdown and closure at the end of December,
the Security Council mission commended the progress achieved in the country over
the decade since the restoration of independence and especially since UNMIT
commenced its work in August 2006 in the aftermath of the crisis. The mission
noted that, as had been highlighted by UNMIT and United Nations country team
officials (and in the Secretary-General’s report), there had been tangible progress in
multiple areas as well as a number of milestones reached this year, which reflected
further consolidation towards sustainable peace, democratic governance, rule of law
and socioeconomic development during the transition. Among the poignant
examples of the significant advances made, the mission noted the return of some
150,000 internally displaced persons and the closure of tented camps; the
maintenance of a calm and stable security situation since the 2008 attacks on the
President and the Prime Minister; a continued low reported crime rate after PNTL
assumed responsibility for all policing operations in March 2011; Timor-Leste’s
leadership as Co-Chair of both the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
State-building and the Group of Seven Plus fragile States to promote aid
effectiveness and the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals; the
strengthening of capacities of State institutions (including in the security, justice and
governance sectors); the conduct of three rounds of presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2012 in a peaceful environment with high voter participation that led to

4

12-61376

S/2012/889

the formation of a new Government and the inauguration of a new Parliament, with
women assuming 38 per cent of the seats (the highest in the Asia-Pacific region) and
the active participation of the opposition; and the certification of full reconstitution
of PNTL on 31 October as capable of conducting all police functions.
10. In addition to progress evidenced on the ground, the mission indicated that it
was very encouraged by the political maturity and forward-looking approach shown
by Timor-Leste in actively participating within regional and international arenas to
contribute to multilateral undertakings, as reflected by the Government’s prominent
role in recent General Assembly forums focusing on the Group of Seven Plus fragile
States, peacebuilding and Education First initiatives as well as in meetings of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. The mission also observed that
Timor-Leste’s aspiration to join the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) demonstrated its commitment to further strengthen its regional integration
and friendly ties with all of its neighbours — a point stressed by the Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, among others.
11. At the same time, the mission acknowledged, during discussions, that certain
challenges remained in all sectors. In this connection, the mission noted that the
Security Council had recalled, in its resolution 2037 (2012), that Timor-Leste had
progressed in many aspects of its political, economic and social development, as
well as in human resources development and institution-building, but “still faces
many challenges and needs continued assistance of bilateral and multilateral
partners in order to fully realize its potential for equitable and inclusive sustainable
growth”. Given further progress achieved over the past year since that resolution,
the mission sought the feedback of interlocutors on whether they foresee any
problems in proceeding with the drawdown and closure of UNMIT. In recognizing
that Timor-Leste was born only 10 years ago, the mission underscored that, like
other post-conflict countries, it will inevitably need to continue to tackle longerterm challenges which have no “quick-fix solutions” and will entail sustained efforts
over the coming months and years.
Consensus position among the Timorese authorities and other stakeholders
12. The Security Council mission was struck by the consensus among Timorese
interlocutors across the spectrum that UNMIT should proceed to close at the end of
its current mandate in December, with many of them citing the tremendous progress
made by the country in partnership with the United Nations as well as the nature and
scope of the remaining challenges to be addressed with the support of the United
Nations country team and bilateral and multilateral partners. Interlocutors from the
Government and State institutions presented a unified stance in reiterating the
position conveyed by the Prime Minister in his letter of 20 September to the
Secretary-General: that Timor-Leste, upon UNMIT closure, no longer requires
United Nations support through the presence of either a peacekeeping or political
mission and consequently there is no requirement to continue to be on the Security
Council agenda. Other stakeholders, including political parties outside of the
Government (such as Fretilin), civil society and women’s groups, similarly
conveyed that the UNMIT drawdown should proceed and that peacekeeping support
was not needed at this stage of the country’s development.

12-61376

5

S/2012/889

13. The mission also took note that Timorese interlocutors consistently raised
three points in connection with this consensus position on the UNMIT drawdown
and closure:
(a) First, nearly all interlocutors positively indicated that the progress
achieved in the country across various sectors and the maintenance of general
stability since the devastating events of 1999 (with some setbacks) was facilitated
by the support and partnership provided by consecutive United Nations missions
and the country team as well as bilateral and multilateral partners. A number of
these interlocutors further stressed that the collaborative relationship and
partnership with the United Nations was substantially enhanced through the various
modalities of the jointly owned transition process, which was driven by Timorese
Government priorities in steering the way forward (for example, the establishment
in September 2010 of the High-level Committee on Transition hosted by the
President and its joint technical working groups; the reorientation of UNMIT police
support to focus on capacity-building as presented in the February 2011 PNTLUNMIT Police Joint Development Plan; and the September 2011 Joint Transition
Plan between the Government and UNMIT);
(b) Second, all interlocutors emphasized that, though UNMIT’s
peacekeeping presence was no longer needed, it was critical, given the remaining
tasks and challenges faced across sectors, for support to continue to be provided by
the United Nations country team and bilateral/multilateral partners under
arrangements led by the Timorese authorities, which would take account of the
experience, expertise and language skills needed to tackle them. A number
emphasized that, given certain pressing tasks in sectors and the desire to expedite
delivery of tangible results that would impact the daily lives of the population, they
considered it preferable and more effective to seek assistance from the United
Nations country team and bilateral and multilateral partners, which could provide
experts with the required specialized knowledge and skills and familiarity with the
conditions on the ground. In addition, they mentioned that lusophone experts often
accelerated the pace of such assistance to Timorese stakeholders, including in
providing required training and mentoring;
(c) Third, most interlocutors, including the Prime Minister, stressed that,
after more than 13 years of United Nations missions operating in their country and
in view of the progress that it has made over that period, they felt that it was time
for Timor-Leste to break “the dependency cycle” and to stand on its own feet in
going forward and taking the lead in tackling remaining challenges as well as
identifying those to assist them. They explained that Timor-Leste is no longer a
weak, conflict-affected “recipient country”, but one which has accomplished many
peacebuilding goals and is now focusing on the process of State-building and
institutional strengthening and development. They explained that Timor-Leste is
also now focused on “giving back” to others in the world to promote peace and
development, including through its participation and leadership in bilateral and
multilateral initiatives (for example, as Co-Chair of the Group of Seven Plus), in
offering its police and military personnel to serve in United Nations missions in
conflict-affected regions, and in serving as a “lessons learned” example to countries
emerging from similar historical circumstances so that they might benefit from the
sharing of their experiences.

6

12-61376

S/2012/889

Remaining challenges and assistance sought for post-United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste phase
14. As mentioned above, in discussing the issue of the UNMIT phase-out,
Timorese interlocutors dealing with respective sectors consistently referred to
certain remaining tasks and challenges, which the mission found to be strikingly
similar across the different sectors. It was also striking that interlocutors considered
that these challenges, while significant in certain sectors, were not
insurmountable — with proper targeted assistance — and that they had to be viewed
in the context of the dire conditions that prevailed at the time of the country’s
restoration of independence a decade ago (with basic infrastructure and facilities
virtually destroyed). In recalling those difficult conditions, interlocutors proudly
pointed to the inroads and achievements that the Timorese leaders and people had
nevertheless made in proceeding with peacebuilding and State-building during such
a relatively short transition period to date. Indeed, as shared with all interlocutors,
the mission considered that what had been accomplished by Timor-Leste’s leaders
and people, particularly when seen within this historical prism, was nothing short of
remarkable and reflected an overriding unity of purpose and determination to
address core national needs as well as extraordinary resilience.
15. In making these observations, though, the mission considered that its
informative discussions with Timorese interlocutors could not be regarded in any
way as constituting a comprehensive assessment of the remaining challenges in each
sector (particularly given the visit duration and limited travel outside of Dili).
Moreover, the Government’s working group is currently discussing the types of
programmes of activities to be undertaken by the United Nations country team in the
post-2012 phase and is reviewing a matrix of potential projects submitted by the
team for 2013-2014 within the framework of the five-year Government programme,
the Joint Transition Plan, the Millennium Development Goals and the peacebuilding
and State-building goals of the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. The
mission considered that it was important for that national-driven consultative
process to be completed, in which UNMIT and the United Nations country team are
also engaged.
16. Challenges commonly cited by interlocutors include human resources capacity
constraints; further strengthening of State institutions (particularly in the security,
justice and socioeconomic sectors); sustained capacity-building support for PNTL
and continued security sector reform; enhancement of national judicial capacities
and access to justice; reduction and prevention of domestic- and sexual-based
violence; ensuring accountability for past crimes as well as current crimes, and
recourse for victims; increasing employment opportunities for young people and
rural communities; and promotion of equitable and inclusive growth and
development so that benefits are reaped by all segments of the population, including
through enhanced social services (for example, quality education, health care,
improved sustainable livelihoods). Given the focus of the mission’s discussions,
some of the challenges raised and assistance sought in respect of PNTL and the
justice sector are also summarized below.
PNTL
17. The mission arrived in Timor-Leste three days after the 31 October ceremony
at the Presidential Palace celebrating the decision by the Prime Minister and the

12-61376

7

S/2012/889

Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General to certify, through an
exchange of letters, the full reconstitution of PNTL as capable of conducting all
aspects of police functions throughout Timor-Leste, whereby it would no longer
receive operational support from the UNMIT police. At this juncture marking the
pinnacle of “PNTL policing ownership”, the mission discussed the evolution of the
PNTL-UNMIT police relationship and the prevailing security situation with
Secretary of State for Security Francisco da Costa Guterres, PNTL General
Commander Longuinhos Monteiro, Deputy General Commander Afonso de Jesus,
the Commander of the Police Training Centre, Carlos Jeronimo, and the PNTL
Manufahi District Commander in Same (with his UNMIT counterpart) as well as the
UNMIT Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Security Sector
Support and Rule of Law and the Police Commissioner, among others. Conveying
pride, the Secretary of State for Security and the PNTL General Commander, as well
as all other PNTL and UNMIT police officers with whom the mission met,
emphasized that the certification of PNTL was a transition milestone for the
institution and the culmination of a well-prepared, closely coordinated and joint
process between the PNTL and UNMIT police as “partners”. They highlighted that
the preparatory process was grounded in the phased handover of responsibilities in
districts/units from the UNMIT police to PNTL until its resumption of full policing
responsibilities on 27 March 2011 (with UNMIT police operational support if
required and requested) pursuant to the exchange of letters. Accompanying this
resumption, they explained that the signing of the PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint
Development Plan on 23 February 2011 (which was based on the PNTL Strategic
Development Plan 2011-2012) ensured that UNMIT police capacity-building
support focused on the five priority areas identified by the PNTL (legislation,
training, administration, discipline and operations), which reinforced a sense of
national ownership over a “needs-driven” process and had a discernible positive
effect on PNTL officers’ attitudes towards such capacity-building efforts. In praising
the progress in Joint Development Plan implementation and achievements to date,
they commended the commitment shown by PNTL officers and expressed deep
appreciation for the cooperation and assistance provided by the UNMIT police
under Commissioner Carrilho’s leadership in “accompanying them” through the
process.
18. In elaborating upon the preparatory process for certification, PNTL and
UNMIT police representatives emphasized the transparent assessment of PNTL that
was undertaken through jointly established modalities. In this regard, they
highlighted that the PNTL/UNMIT Police Working Group on Certification
rigorously evaluated the institutional capacities of PNTL on the basis of the three
criteria agreed between UNMIT and the Government, entailing broad consultations
and on-site field inspections, and submitted a detailed report dated 2 October and
recommendations under a transmittal letter of 5 October to the PNTL General
Commander and the UNMIT Police Commissioner (that was later shared with the
Security Council). They also highlighted that, in that letter, the Working Group
stated that it “found that all gaps and weaknesses identified in the joint assessments
(of each district and unit) are being, or have already been addressed, and there is
identifiable progress in all five areas of the Joint Development Plan, most notably in
training and operations, as exemplified respectively by progress towards full
academic accreditation of the Police Training Centre and the policing surrounding
the 2012 election periods”. Further, the representatives explained that the PNTL
General Commander and the UNMIT Police Commissioner undertook a joint

8

12-61376

S/2012/889

evaluation of that Working Group report and, in a joint letter dated 12 October to the
Prime Minister and Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, stated
that they endorse the report’s conclusions and consider that PNTL meets the
mutually agreed criteria for certification, which then led to the ultimate certification
decision.
19. While lauding that the Working Group report provided a generally favourable
assessment of the enhanced institutional capacities of PNTL and the considerable
progress made over the past few years, the PNTL and UNMIT police representatives
also noted that the report and recommendations conveyed that a number of
remaining gaps and weaknesses in various areas are still being addressed and will
require continued support, after the closure of UNMIT, from the United Nations
country team and other partners. In the powerpoint briefing presented at the fully
packed Police Training Centre auditorium, the PNTL Deputy Commander provided
a frank overview of the Working Group report’s findings as well as the main
recommendations on action needed in each of the five areas of the Joint
Development Plan to address these gaps and weaknesses. He pointed out that some
of these challenges include logistical and infrastructure deficiencies which require
increased budgetary allocations; improvement in asset and facilities management
and in communications between PNTL subdistrict, district and headquarters
locations (including internet access); continued provision of training for PNTL
officers based in the districts and headquarters (including on legal frameworks and
community policing doctrine) and the regularization of training focal points
throughout the PNTL structures; further development and standardization of
secondary legislation; improvement of the PNTL disciplinary regime and reporting
mechanisms; and adequate support for implementation of the PNTL-related aspects
of the National Action Plan on Gender-Based Violence and for efforts to improve
the numbers of female police officers.
20. In conjunction with these recommendations, the PNTL Deputy Commander
presented the vision and future support required for “moving forward”, with the aim
to ensure continued capacity-building of PNTL post-UNMIT for sustainability of
institutional development achievements. In explaining that PNTL is leading the
process of planning, organizing and coordinating projects and activities supported
by donors, including through “Friends of PNTL” meetings, he presented a
breakdown of areas for which further support is being sought from the United
Nations country team and bilateral partners as essential for continued PNTL
capacity-building as well an overview of current bilateral support programmes. He
also extended appreciation to UNMIT for the transfer of certain critical equipment
and vehicles for PNTL, explaining that discussions were ongoing between the
Government and the Mission on arrangements for additional transfers of assets that
were much-needed.
21. The mission was encouraged that, throughout all of their discussions, the
Secretary of State for Security, the PNTL General Commander and Deputy General
Commander as well as the UNMIT Police Commissioner and the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General each conveyed that they felt that PNTL was prepared and ready
to conduct full policing functions throughout the country and to maintain safety and
security for the population. In asserting its readiness, they particularly referred to:
(a) the substantially enhanced operational and institutional capacities of PNTL
following the extensive training and support provided by the UNMIT police and

12-61376

9

S/2012/889

19 civilian advisers (with targeted capacity-building since February 2011), bilateral
partners (including Portuguese police trainers at the Training Centre), and the
PNTL/UNMIT Police/United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Joint
Programme on Strengthening National Police Capacity in Timor-Leste; (b) the fact
that, over the 18 months since PNTL has exercised command and control of all
policing operations, the security situation in the country has remained stable and the
reported low crime rate has continued to decrease; (c) the performance of PNTL
contributed to a peaceful environment for the smooth conduct of the 2012 elections
and the formation of a new Government, with PNTL officers effectively handling
the public order incidents that arose; and (d) the existing political will among the
Timorese leadership to ensure that all remaining PNTL gaps and weaknesses will be
addressed. As another example of PNTL’s capacities, the PNTL command proudly
pointed out that a number of officers have served, and are currently serving, abroad
in United Nations missions in order to contribute to peace and security in other parts
of the world (for example, in Guinea-Bissau, Kosovo and Lebanon). At the Training
Centre, the mission was introduced to the additional 17 PNTL officers (two women)
recently cleared for potential deployment to United Nations missions, who movingly
shared their keen interest to be given the honour to wear the blue beret and help
others while serving under the United Nations banner.
22. In remarks presented by the mission head at the Police Training Centre
ceremony, and in all interactions with PNTL and Government interlocutors, the
mission commended the commitment and progress made by PNTL since 2006 in
getting to the transition’s certification “milestone”, as well as its close partnership
with the UNMIT police who had accompanied it on this journey while respecting its
national ownership of the process, which it considered an important aspect of
Timor-Leste’s “success story”. Through its dedicated work in helping to maintain a
secure and peaceful environment during the 2012 electoral process, PNTL had not
only played a key role in ensuring the success of the elections but in strengthening
democracy in the country. The mission conveyed the Security Council’s trust that, in
moving forward after the UNMIT police drawdown, PNTL will continue to
strengthen as an institution and serve as a professional and respected police service
to its citizens, abiding by the laws that govern it and promoting the principles and
standards that it has established. The mission also regarded the participation of
PNTL officers in United Nations peace missions as another important element of
Timor-Leste’s forward-looking approach to contributing to global peace and
security, and applauded PNTL for also serving as a model to other countries in terms
of its relatively high percentage of women police officers (18 per cent).
Emphasizing that it was vital for women to be part of peace and security efforts
everywhere and to also help deal with gender-based and domestic violence
incidents, the mission encouraged even more women to become members of PNTL
in the future and to serve in United Nations missions abroad.
Justice sector
23. The mission had a combined meeting with Government and State officials
leading six of Timor-Leste’s justice, human rights and anti-corruption institutions,
including Minister of Justice Dionisio Babo Soares, President of the Court of
Appeal Claudio Ximenes, Prosecutor-General Ana Pessoa Pinto, Public Defender
General Sergio Hornai, Anti-Corruption Commissioner Aderito de Jesus Soares and
Deputy Provedor for Human Rights and Justice Silverio Pinto Baptista (the

10

12-61376

S/2012/889

Provedor was out of the country). In addressing whether Timor-Leste could handle
outstanding tasks in the sector after UNMIT’s closure, including serious crimes
cases, Minister Babo and all other interlocutors underscored that the progress
achieved, current capacities and outstanding challenges in the sector need to be
considered in the context of inroads made since the 2002 restoration of
independence following the tragedy of 1999 and the 24-year Indonesian occupation.
Stressing that the justice system was then virtually non-existent, they provided an
overview of the evolution and strengthening of a completely new system over the
past decade in terms of the establishment and expansion of respective institutions,
infrastructure, legal frameworks and national human resources capacities, with the
support of United Nations missions, the United Nations country team (particularly
UNDP) and other bilateral and multilateral partners.
24. It was highlighted by these interlocutors that the State is committed to rule of
law principles as enshrined in Timor-Leste’s Constitution and has functioning
democratic institutions, strategic plans and qualified personnel in the sector to
promote the rule of law, human rights and anti-corruption efforts, though these
young institutions still need further strengthening and increased development of
specialized human resources skills and capacities as well as continued assistance of
United Nations and other partners. While emphasizing that there is still a long way
to go in developing the sector’s institutions and structures, all of the interlocutors
had a unified view that, having benefited from the international community’s
presence and assistance for so many years, the justice sector is “able to stand up on
its own feet” in going forth after UNMIT’s closure and has the trust of the
population. At the same time, they indicated that, given the many challenges in the
sector, it is critical to obtain the further support of the United Nations country team
and other partners to assist in addressing them.
25. Interlocutors focused on the two interrelated areas of human resources
constraints and institutional strengthening as particularly needing simultaneous
attention and support, especially to enhance access to justice for the population
throughout all districts, including in rural and isolated areas. In emphasizing the
need to further develop and expand institutions and increase the numbers of trained
and qualified personnel in the sector to ensure their accessibility to all citizens,
interlocutors noted that Timor-Leste currently has four district courts (which
actually function as regional courts in covering more than one district and are
complemented by UNDP-supported mobile courts), one Court of Appeal (with a
Supreme Court expected to be established in two years), a Prosecutor-General’s
office in six districts, and a Public Defender’s office in four districts as well as civil
registration offices in all 13 districts. As regards national personnel, they explained
that there are 17 judges, 17 prosecutors and 16 public defenders in the country who
have graduated from the compulsory two-and-a-half year training programmes at the
Legal Training Centre, which has been supported by UNDP and other partners, with
its first national Director appointed in 2010.
26. In order to further decentralize judicial services to enhance accessibility to the
population, they explained that the current plan is to open courts and ProsecutorGeneral’s offices in all 13 districts as well as additional Public Defender’s offices,
but that it requires additional numbers of qualified judges (including for the Court
of Appeal), prosecutors and other legal practitioners. They highlighted that, due to
the limited number of national judges, prosecutors and public defenders, TimorLeste continues to rely on international judicial personnel, mostly from Portuguese-

12-61376

11

S/2012/889

speaking countries, to perform certain line functions and to provide mentoring to
national counterparts. The President of the Court of Appeal recalled that the country
had no legal practitioners when the United Nations Transitional Administration in
Timor-Leste (UNTAET) began and that experience had shown that it was not easy to
quickly increase the number of national judicial personnel as approximately three to
five additional judges and prosecutors had graduated from the Legal Training Centre
every two-and-a-half years, which was established in 2004 to provide training in
situ instead of abroad. He indicated that it was therefore planned to increase the
programmes at the Legal Training Centre so that more qualified legal practitioners
become available to serve in the justice system, including private lawyers, which is
essential to become self-sufficient in the future. Both he and the Prosecutor-General
emphasized that the main target now is to increase the number of fully qualified
judges, prosecutors and lawyers, which will require obtaining a larger pool of
trainers for the Legal Training Centre, preferably from Portuguese-speaking
countries and those from a civil law background, with the support of specialized
United Nations agencies. It was pointed out that human resources planning has also
been covered in the Justice Sector Strategic Plan for 2011-2030, approved by the
Government in 2010, which sets out short-, medium- and long-term benchmarks.
27. In noting that all interlocutors had underscored the importance of national
ownership in steering forward but that international assistance was still needed in
dealing with remaining challenges, the mission raised the issue that the UNMIT
Serious Crimes Investigation Team (supervised by the Prosecutor-General’s Office
under a memorandum of understanding) would not be able to complete
investigations of all serious crimes cases by December. In stressing the need to
consider not only pending serious crimes cases but also ordinary crimes being
investigated by the justice system, the Prosecutor-General recalled that the
UNTAET Serious Crimes Unit had not been able to complete its work by 2002 and
that she recently received a report from the UNMIT Serious Crimes Investigation
Team that it will not be able to complete 61 investigations of cases for various
reasons, including the lengthy time taken to recruit qualified investigators in 20072008 and difficulties in undertaking investigations requiring specialized
instruments, skills and techniques. While noting that most of the 300 case
investigations completed by the Team were sent to archives because of insufficient
evidence, she mentioned that one serious crimes file had recently been sent to the
court and resulted in a conviction. In going forward, she explained that she expects
to retain the international experts currently with her Office, who are mostly from
Community of Portuguese-speaking countries such as Cape Verde and Portugal, as
well as the Deputy Prosecutor-General (supported by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)) and feels they have the
expertise to handle the 61 cases, but will need further bilateral and multilateral
assistance and cannot ensure that all cases will be finished in 2013-2014.
28. The need to ensure access to justice for all Timorese citizens and related
challenges was also underscored by the Public Defender General. In noting that the
Office of the Public Defender had four district offices with 16 national staff, he
explained that it was planned to open additional offices and further build human
resources capacities through increased training of personnel at the Legal Training
Centre, with the aim of ensuring that all citizens could exercise the fundamental
right of defence and gain access to justice. He indicated that the Office was
undertaking efforts to raise awareness among citizens of the formal justice system

12

12-61376

S/2012/889

and how to exercise their rights in court (including in view of ratified conventions
relating to gender equality, domestic violence and children’s rights), as well as to
provide free legal services to the population. At the same time, he stressed that
increased national and international support is needed to strengthen the Office’s
structures and capacities, including through training, for which it will need to
continue to rely on UNDP and other partners such as Brazil, Cape Verde and
Portugal after 2012. As regards the Office of the Provedor for Human Rights and
Justice, the Deputy Provedor indicated that, as most of the human rights-related
violations are perpetrated by PNTL members and second-most by F-FDTL members
(with civil servants third), the Office has been conducting human rights training to
both security institutions in their training centres. He indicated that the Office works
closely with the Prosecutor-General’s Office, the Anti-Corruption Commission and
the Civil Service Commission and also cooperates with the courts to provide
documentation that judges, prosecutors and public defenders may need, and will
continue to rely on support provided by OHCHR and UNDP for the future.
29. The Anti-Corruption Commissioner and other interlocutors highlighted that the
establishment of the Anti-Corruption Commission in 2010 reflected Timor-Leste’s
commitment and political will to tackle corruption issues early to avoid bigger
problems, as well as recognition that it is not a simple crime (often involving
organized crime) and requires special investigators. The Commissioner explained
that, with the support of UNMIT, UNDP and other partners, the Commission began
operating in 2011 (with high expectations) after a year-long process of recruiting
staff and conducted the self-assessment review on the implementation of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption that was published that year. However, he
indicated that the number of cases investigated has been impacted by human
resources constraints and that a major challenge continues to be the limited number
of recruited investigators with the requisite qualifications. At the same time, he
explained that the strong collaboration and working relations developed with the
Prosecutor-General’s Office, which has sole authority for prosecutions, has been
instrumental in building the capacities of Anti-Corruption Commission investigators
and in developing the legal framework to pursue corruption, with a draft
anti-corruption law recently discussed with Parliament’s Committee A. In going
forward to address capacity-building and human resources challenges faced by the
Anti-Corruption Commission, the Commissioner stressed that continued cooperation
with and support from partners will be important, including UNDP and regional and
international anti-corruption agencies.

C.

Government view on innovative working relationship of cooperation
with the United Nations during the post-United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste period
30. On 5 November, the mission met with Prime Minister Gusmão and his
delegation, which included the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
(Mr. José Luis Guterres), Justice (Mr. Dionisio Babo Soares), Finance (Ms. Emilia
Pires), Health (Mr. Sergio Gama da Lobo), and Education (Mr. Bendito dos Santos
Freitas) as well as Secretaries of State for Defence (Mr. Julio Tomas Pinto) and for
the Promotion of Equality (Ms. Idelta Maria Rodrigues). In welcoming the
delegation, the Prime Minister conveyed that the United Nations had made an
outstanding contribution to Timor-Leste and that successive United Nations

12-61376

13

S/2012/889

missions had supported its people in peacebuilding and State-building in many
areas, including in restoring stability, improving institutions and strengthening
democratic governance and socioeconomic development. He stated that the
Government considered Timor-Leste to be “a success story for the United Nations”
and, though there were setbacks over the past decade since independence, they had
now set out a longer-term plan for the country through the Strategic Development
Plan for 2011-2030. He explained that the Government looks forward to continuing
its relationship with the United Nations after the closure of UNMIT and had been
asked by the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General to provide
more information on its request for an innovative working relationship of
cooperation.
31. In elaborating on a “new model” for that relationship, the Prime Minister
indicated that the Government favours a model focusing on strengthening of
institutions and development that supports implementation of the Strategic
Development Plan and the Government’s five-year plan within the framework of the
Millennium Development Goals and the new framework of the Group of Seven Plus
fragile States. He suggested that the model could involve the appointment of a
non-resident Special Adviser who would report to the Secretary-General and not to
the Security Council and would travel to Timor-Leste at least once a year (or more
often if needed) to be present at the Development Partners Meeting. He indicated
that the Special Adviser could support implementation of the Strategic Development
Plan and efforts to strengthen institutions within the framework of the Millennium
Development Goals and the New Deal principles; support the work on the New Deal
between donors and recipients; and also assist Timor-Leste in its leadership efforts
to strengthen the Group of Seven Plus (as Co-Chair). He further explained that the
Adviser could be supported locally by the United Nations country team and the
United Nations development framework.
32. In presenting this model within the context of the Group of Seven Plus
initiative, the Prime Minister explained that Timor-Leste, as part of the Group of
Seven Plus, understands very well the needs of other fragile countries and would
like to show how it can work with the United Nations and others in a successful way
as, otherwise, it will remain in a “kind of dependency”. Under the Group of Seven
Plus framework, Timor-Leste first has to take responsibility for its own needs and to
assume responsibility for addressing its problems itself, underlining that national
ownership means taking responsibility, and can then actively contribute to broader
initiatives of the international community. He explained that this is why the
Government foresees a role for the United Nations in the context of the Group of
Seven Plus, which entails developing trust in the situation of a country and its
ability to further develop. He pointed out that Timor-Leste had gone through the
initial peacebuilding phase and was now focusing on State-building, with efforts
concentrated on addressing major development needs such as education and
infrastructure. Considering that Timor-Leste is “in the crossroads”, he indicated that
it wants to converge with the process of the post-2015 development framework and
make a difference through its participation in the process, with both fragile and
emerging economies making contributions. He appreciated that the SecretaryGeneral supported the New Deal and Group of Seven Plus approach and was
confident that the initiative would make a difference in enhancing aid effectiveness.
33. Addressing the mission’s query, the Prime Minister considered that the new
model for partnership with the United Nations would need to be agreed upon by the

14

12-61376

S/2012/889

Secretary-General and would not entail reporting to the Council. He believed that
this “new model of national ownership” could result in a better coordination
mechanism between the United Nations and the Government to support its
development priorities, emphasizing that the Special Adviser would work within the
Government system — and “with us” — to coordinate with United Nations agencies
so that their programmes are integrated with the Government’s five-year programme
and the Strategic Development Plan. He considered that this new Group of Seven
Plus-linked coordination mechanism would achieve better results for everyone
(including Timor-Leste, the United Nations and donors) and that all would benefit
from the new model of partnership. Finance Minister Pires (on the SecretaryGeneral’s High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development
Agenda) further explained that the Prime Minister had set up a task force within the
Government on the new model, but that it had not yet completed an in-depth review
and would have further discussions with the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. She indicated that the new model was in line with the New Deal
principles towards reaching the Millennium Development Goals and would serve as
an “interim arrangement” after UNMIT’s closure, with the Special Adviser expected
to have a broad knowledge of the region and development issues (including
investment opportunities) and to help inform the Secretary-General of lessons
learned from the Timorese experience as well as to reach out to other Group of
Seven Plus countries regarding those lessons. She further mentioned that there
would be two Government posts to focus on this new partnership for development
and that the Special Adviser could help the national team.
34. In noting that this suggested new model of the relationship would be within the
purview of the Secretary-General for further discussion with the Government, and
not within that of the Security Council, the mission asked whether there were any
residual issues that UNMIT was dealing with that required attention, such as the
investigations of serious crimes cases that would not be completed. The mission
indicated that it had also raised the issue with justice sector representatives and
wished to know how the Government intended to proceed. The Prime Minister
confirmed that, while Timor-Leste continued to face challenges, UNMIT could
proceed with closure as there were no residual issues to give rise for concern. He
recalled the background and rationale for how Timor-Leste had dealt with Indonesia
on the serious crimes issue, including the establishment of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and Friendship.
On the outstanding serious crimes investigations, he indicated that they will deal
with the process and “will close this chapter”.
Views of other stakeholders
35. The mission also sought the perspectives of other Timorese interlocutors with
whom they met on the desired future United Nations engagement, with some
diverging from the Government position. During the meeting with Fretilin
Secretary-General Alkatiri (with his three Deputy Secretary-Generals and four
Parliament members), he expressed the party’s concern about the “appearance” of
advances when the reality revealed that Timor-Leste still had a far way to go in
terms of democracy, justice and good governance. He mentioned, for example, that
everything happens in accordance with the will of one person in power, there is
growing impunity and political influence on the courts, corruption is endemic and
millions of dollars are spent without results, and inequalities are growing between

12-61376

15

S/2012/889

Dili and the districts. Maintaining that there is no social, formal or economic justice,
which is like a “time bomb”, he indicated that there should be a national consensus
to decide on whether the United Nations is to leave the country. He noted that,
before the elections, there had been a consensus between the Government and
opposition that there should be a small political mission to succeed UNMIT, but that
the Government later changed its position and made a decision without consultation.
36. On the future United Nations presence, Mr. Alkatiri explained that, while
Fretilin agreed that armed forces were no longer needed, it felt that Timor-Leste
“still needs the eyes of the United Nations to pay attention to us”, and not just a
need for the development agencies but also a need for a political relationship
between Timor-Leste and the United Nations. In explaining that the party wants the
United Nations relationship to be different and does not want “dependency”, he
stressed that the transition should have been done over the past five years and not
only done with one person, as that cannot lead to a “proper transition”. They
consider that the creative way of the Government will not work as the Special
Envoy will just be sent to Timor-Leste periodically and “the Prime Minister will not
listen to him”. At the same time, Mr. Alkatiri assured that Fretilin will do everything
to continue strengthening peace and stability as it wants a viable and sustainable
State, and has been trying to have a constructive relationship with the Government
though their ideas are ignored in Parliament. While stating that he hoped that the
country will not fail again like in 2006, he warned that this may happen, noting, for
instance, that the police are not yet ready to take charge of security in terms of
command and control, administration and logistics and that there had been no
preparation for the next generation of F-FDTL leaders and institution-building to
ensure a sustainable transition.
37. At the mission’s combined meeting with political parties, representatives of
seven parties attended — the Associação Social-Democrata Timorense (ASDT), the
Conselho Nacional de Reconstrução do Timor (CNRT), Fretilin, the Partido
Democrático (PD), the Partido Social Democrata (PSD), the Partido do
Desenvolvimento Nacional (PDN) and the União Nacional Democrática de
Resistência Timorense (UNDERTIM) — out of the 11 invited (which met 1 per cent
of the parliamentary election vote); Frente Mudança, KHUNTO, the Partido
Socialista de Timor (PST) and the União Democrática Timorense (UDT) did not
participate. Five of the seven parties expressed the view that, after the closure of
UNMIT, Timor-Leste would need continued United Nations support through its
agencies, funds and programmes — with which they had excellent cooperation in
their work — in order to address remaining challenges, including in the areas of
socioeconomic
development,
institution-building
and
human
resources
development, infrastructure, security sector reform (including PNTL strengthening),
and aid effectiveness. On the other hand, the PSD representative expressed the view
that, though it was time for Timor-Leste to stand on its own in moving forward, his
party wanted “a small but significant mission” to follow UNMIT to be able to
mobilize resources and coordinate the assistance of United Nations agencies and
other development partners so that support would be more efficient. He expressed
the hope that such a United Nations mission would also provide this type of support
for decentralization efforts and future municipal elections. In addition, the Fretilin
representative reiterated (like Mr. Alkatiri earlier) that, given the vulnerability of the
country and the unresolved issues (including serious crimes cases), the party would
like a small political mission for a finite period after the UNMIT drawdown so that

16

12-61376

S/2012/889

it could monitor the situation. A number of representatives also indicated that, with
the departure of UNMIT (which organized regular meetings with all registered
political parties), the Government should establish a mechanism for regular
consultation with parties that are not represented in Parliament on issues of national
importance so that they can express their views.
38. In the mission’s meeting with 9 civil society organizations and women’s
groups (out of 15 invited), representatives consistently indicated that continued
support of United Nations country team entities should be provided to Timor-Leste
after UNMIT’s closure to address certain unfinished tasks and remaining challenges.
In addition, one non-governmental organization was of the view that a small
political mission should be established to provide support to the justice sector, and
another expressed a preference for the country to remain on the Security Council
agenda (as conveyed in a letter to the mission). Strikingly, most representatives
expressed particular concerns relating to impunity for past serious human rights
violations and serious crimes as well as current crimes, emphasizing that the
discontent of victims and their families could also contribute to instability, and
appealed for the United Nations to seek ways to ensure accountability and justice
(with two appealing for the establishment of an international tribunal). Various
representatives also highlighted that United Nations support was needed for
programmes and activities relating to women’s empowerment and political
participation as well as prevention of gender-based and domestic violence and for
recourse for victims; improvement of health care, education and social services (for
example, to reduce malnutrition, stunting and child and maternal mortality rates);
the promotion of inclusive and sustainable economic growth and development (for
example, to reduce poverty and increase employment opportunities); the
strengthening of PNTL, F-FDTL and justice institutions; conflict prevention; and
the distribution of some United Nations facilities to civil society organizations to
enable them to better carry out their work.

III. Observations
39. As elaborated above (see paras. 12 and 13), the mission noted that there was a
consensus of views among all Timorese interlocutors with whom it met — including
those within the Government, State institutions, Parliament, political parties, civil
society organizations and women’s groups — that UNMIT should proceed with its
drawdown and close at the end of its mandate on 31 December 2012, as they
consider that Timor-Leste no longer needs the assistance of a United Nations
peacekeeping presence at this stage of its development in view of the remarkable
progress achieved since the restoration of independence and the remaining
challenges. In addition, this position was shared by the UNMIT leadership and
senior management team and by representatives of the United Nations country team
with whom the mission had extensive discussions on the issue, including regarding
their assessment that the Joint Transition Plan’s objectives will be met within the
remaining mandate period. As regards the remaining PNTL weaknesses and gaps
cited in the report of the PNTL/UNMIT Police Working Group on Certification, the
mission was heartened by the fact that the PNTL command and Timorese authorities
openly acknowledged these challenges and committed to take the necessary action
and make appropriate arrangements to address them, including with continued
United Nations country team and bilateral and multilateral support. Therefore, given

12-61376

17

S/2012/889

the clear position set out by the Government in the letter dated 20 September from
the Prime Minister to the Secretary-General and the above-mentioned unanimity of
views, and based on its discussions and observations on the ground, the mission
concurs with the Secretary-General’s recommendation that the UNMIT drawdown
should proceed until mandate completion on 31 December.
40. The mission appreciated that, further to the position presented in the letter
dated 20 September from the Prime Minister to the Secretary-General, the
Government elaborated on its vision and possible “model” of an innovative working
relationship of cooperation between Timor-Leste and the United Nations for going
forward following UNMIT, which was anchored in the principle of national
ownership. The vision expressed clearly reflected the Government’s collective
desire for Timor-Leste to no longer be on the Security Council agenda and to focus
on its socioeconomic needs to meet the Millennium Development Goals, the
strengthening of institutions and supporting its engagement in and leadership of the
Group of Seven Plus initiative. At the same time, the Government indicated that the
continued support of the United Nations country team and bilateral and multilateral
partners would be needed to tackle remaining challenges in various sectors during
the post-UNMIT period. Given that the Government has established a working
group which is still engaging in discussions with the Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on the type of programmes to be undertaken by United
Nations country team entities in the post-2012 phase and on a possible new model
involving a non-resident Special Adviser (see paras. 15 and 31 to 34 above), the
mission conveyed to the Prime Minister that such a model would be within the
purview of the Secretary-General for further discussion with the Government. On
the issue of the estimated 61 cases for which investigations will not be completed by
UNMIT’s Serious Crimes Investigation Team, the mission noted the Prime
Minister’s position that they would deal with the process and close the chapter, as
was also expressed by the Prosecutor-General to the mission. More generally, as
noted above, all of the justice interlocutors were unified in the view that the justice
sector has the necessary will and capacity to continue to carry out its functions,
following UNMIT’s closure, in coordination with bilateral and multilateral partners
as requested by the Timorese authorities (see paras. 23 to 29 above). The mission
also noted that there were some diverging views expressed by those outside the
Government on the future United Nations engagement, which have been outlined
above (see paras. 35 to 38 above).
41. As amplified in the present report (see paras. 9 and 10 above), and as
conveyed to the Government and all other Timorese interlocutors, the mission
commends the remarkable achievements made by the country over the past decade
in the aftermath of such tragic events in 1999 as well as its political maturity and
forward-looking attitude in contributing to important regional and global initiatives,
which reflects the resilience, tenacity and commitment of the leadership and people
to promote sustainable peace and security and inclusive and equitable development
for the population and, in addition, to reach out and help others in the world.
Further, the mission applauds the Government and all Timorese for their steadfast
collaboration and partnership with UNMIT and the United Nations country team
since the Mission’s establishment, including during the jointly owned transition
process which reinforced the principle of national ownership to the benefit of all.
The mission further underscores the continuing commitment and support of the
international community to Timor-Leste as it embarks on the critical next stage of

18

12-61376

S/2012/889

its development, in a new form of relationship of cooperation and partnership with
the United Nations. Finally, the mission expresses its deepest gratitude to the
Government of Timor-Leste, as well as to all interlocutors, for their cooperation and
support during the visit. The mission also expresses its appreciation to the UNMIT
leadership and staff, under Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Reske-Nielsen, as well as to the United Nations country team entities who tirelessly
worked together in such an integrated manner to assist and accompany Timor-Leste
through its journey, one that is truly an inspiring lesson.

12-61376

19

S/2012/889

Annex I
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Timor-Leste
1.
To reaffirm the commitment of the Security Council to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Timor-Leste and the
promotion of long-term stability in the country;
2.
To commend the people of Timor-Leste for their successful presidential and
legislative elections and efforts aimed at consolidating peace and democracy in their
country;
3.
To encourage the Government, the Parliament, the political parties and the
people of Timor-Leste to continue to work together and engage in inclusive dialogue
to promote the further consolidation of peace, democracy, the rule of law, security
sector reform, sustainable social and economic development and national
reconciliation in the country, including fostering the role of women in the process;
4.
To express the support of the Security Council to Timorese leadership and
ownership of the next phase of development;
5.
To acknowledge and express gratitude to the Government and people of TimorLeste for their continued cooperation and collaboration throughout the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT);
6.
To commend and express the full support of the Security Council for the work
of UNMIT and for the United Nations country team in Timor-Leste, and to assess
the progress in the phased drawdown of UNMIT operations;
7.
To discuss with the Government of Timor-Leste its vision of an innovative
working relationship of cooperation with the United Nations;
8.
To underscore the long-term commitment of the international community to
sustainable peace and development in Timor-Leste and the continuing support of
bilateral and international partners to those Timorese efforts as needed.

20

12-61376

S/2012/889

Annex II
Security Council mission to Timor-Leste
3 to 6 November 2012
Programme of work
Saturday, 3 November
1445-1515

Meeting with the Secretary of State for Security and the General
Commander of the Poícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL)

1700-1745

Meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation

1800-2000

Reception hosted by the Ambassador of Portugal

Sunday, 4 November
0830-0915

Meeting with the Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) senior management team

0915-1015

Meeting with the United Nations country team and UNMIT section
chiefs

1030-1230

Meeting with the Acting PNTL General Commander and UNMIT
Police and PNTL officers

1245-1415

Lunch with the Commander of the international security forces,
Ambassador of Australia and Ambassador of New Zealand followed
by a briefing on activities and withdrawal plans of international
security forces

1800-1930

Reception hosted by the Ambassador of the United States of
America

Monday, 5 November
Same, Manufahi District
0830-0930

Meeting with the President of the Republic, accompanied by the
Minister of Social Solidarity, the Vice-Minister of Basic/Primary
Education and the Vice-Minister of Secondary Education

0945-1045

Visit to Same police station and meeting with the PNTL District
Commander for Manufahi District and UNMIT Police and PNTL
officers
Dili

1200-1400

12-61376

Working lunch with justice sector representatives, including the
Minister of Justice, Vice-Minister of Justice, Public Defender
General, Prosecutor-General, President of the Court of Appeal,
Deputy Provedor for Human Rights and Justice, Anti-Corruption
Commissioner and Head of the Legal Training Centre

21

S/2012/889

1415-1515

Meeting with the President of the National Parliament,
accompanied by the First Vice-President of the National Parliament
and the Secretary of the National Parliament

1530-1700

Meeting with the Prime Minister, accompanied by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Minister of Justice, Minister of
Finance, Minister of Health, Minister of Education, Secretary of
State for Defence and Secretary of State for the Promotion of
Equality

1715-1800

Meeting with the Secretary of State for Defence and the Acting
Commander of the Falintil-Forças Armadas de Defesa de TimorLeste (F-FDTL), accompanied by the F-FDTL Chief of Staff

1815-1915

Meeting with the Secretary-General of Fretilin

1920-2100

Cocktail reception hosted by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation

Tuesday, 6 November

22

0730

Meeting with the Bishop of the Diocese of Dili

0830-1015

Meeting with political parties

1030-1215

Meeting with civil society organizations and women’s groups

1230-1330

Debriefing lunch with UNMIT senior management hosted by the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General

1345

Press conference

12-61376
