S/PV.7484

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7484th meeting

Tuesday, 14 July 2015, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Bohemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mrs. Alingue
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2015/486)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-21826 (E)
*1521826*

S/PV.7484

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2015/486)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/486, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Martin Kobler and Her Excellency
Mrs. Dina Kawar, Permanent Representative of Jordan,
in her capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: At the outset, I would like to extend
my most heartfelt congratulations to New Zealand for
its current leadership of the Security Council.
(spoke in French)
Since it is the Fourteenth of July, I would like to
pay due tribute to France on its National Day.

2/10

14/07/2015

(spoke in Arabic)
Also allow me to express my best wishes to all
Muslims during this month of Ramadan and on the
upcoming festival of Eid Al-Fitr.
(spoke in English)
I wish to thank the Security Council for renewing
our robust mandate. I have no doubt that its fulfilment
will pave the way to a more stable, more secure and more
peaceful Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
the success of our mandate depends upon a continued
constructive partnership with the Government. Today,
I would like to update the Council on three issues that
deserve our persistent engagement: first, the security
situation in the east; secondly, the electoral process;
and, thirdly, the strategic dialogue between the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the
United Nations and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
The protection of civilians is at the core of the
MONUSCO mandate and at the forefront of all our
military activities. Allow me to begin by telling the
Council about a ray of hope that I have just seen on one
of our front lines. As we speak, the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) military
cordon and search operations, supported by MONUSCO
forces against the Forces de résistance patriotiques en
Ituri (FRPI), are ongoing. Those operations have been
the most effective since the fall of the Mouvement du
23 mars. They are a testament to what our collective
efforts can achieve.
Let me be clear: not to use force is always our
preferred option. Our priority was to ensure that the
FRPI disarmed voluntarily. We actively participated
and supported the negotiations that would have allowed
the combatants to reintegrate into civilian life. However,
the use of force proved to be inevitable this time. After
missing three consecutive deadlines to surrender,
MONUSCO forces, in support of the Congolese army,
engaged the FRPI in a jointly planned and coordinated
response. The Congolese army’s ground offensive,
aided by our attack helicopters and unmanned aerial
vehicles, proved to be effective. In that regard, I wish
to thank the Deputy Force Commander and my Deputy,
Mr. David Gressly, for their active engagement in the
negotiations.

15-21826

14/07/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Since 3 June, our joint efforts have neutralized
about one fourth of the total FRPI strength. Beyond
purely military successes, peace consolidation will also
necessitate the restitution of State authority and the
creation of job opportunities, especially for the youth,
and solutions for ex-combatants who would otherwise
see better opportunities with the armed group. The
operations demonstrate that, by joining forces, we can
more effectively protect defenceless populations. By
unifying our stance, we can consolidate peace. And by
working together, we can restore hope.
(spoke in French)
The operations against the FRPI clearly
demonstrate what we can achieve when the forces
of MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo work together. Allow me to commend the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the cooperation between MONUSCO forces and the
FARDC in the operations against the FRPI. The results
of the partnership clearly strengthen our commitment
and determination to combat the threat represented by
the armed groups.
(spoke in English)
While success in neutralizing the FRPI is possible,
joint operations against the FDLR in North Kivu, South
Kivu and Katanga have been at a standstill now for five
months. However, we need to overcome the current
impasse that has stalled our joint efforts against the
FDLR. I have repeatedly highlighted an undeniable
fact, that is, the Congolese Government has made great
strides over the past 10 years in restoring security.
However, in many parts of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the population remains at the
mercy of a number of armed groups.
In early February, our support to joint operations
against the FDLR were put on hold. Since then, the
Congolese Government has elected to pursue those
operations unilaterally. The suspension of joint
cooperation by the FARDC goes beyond the original
question on human rights. We have revised the human
rights due diligence policy and are looking for ways to
resume cooperation within the framework of our — and
the Government’s — commitment to human rights.
Despite the FARDC’s progress in dislodging the
FDLR from some of its strongholds, the Congolese
army is finding it difficult to consolidate its hold on
liberated areas. Today, the FDLR is returning to some
of its previous strongholds. As a result, the population

S/PV.7484

has been dragged into another cycle of violence. In
Rutshuru and Nyiragongo territory — the theatre of
anti-FDLR operations — insecurity is again on the rise.
Incidents of targeted killings, rapes, armed robberies
and abductions for ransom are becoming more common.
United Nations staff and humanitarian relief workers
have also been targeted.
Regrettably, the paralysis of anti-FDLR operations
has cascaded into other fields of operation. The
repercussions on the ground of that paralysis are tangible.
In Beni, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) continues
to instil fear in the hearts of a defenceless population.
I continue to stress that we must not underestimate the
Islamist nature of the ADF. Since October 2014, 327
civilians have lost their lives in terrorist attacks, and
two of our Tanzanian peacekeepers paid the ultimate
price in the course of their duties.
However, in the past week, MONUSCO’s robust
patrolling by 156 personnel and the United Nations
police engagement in monitoring and advising nearly
900 Congolese policemen has probably prevented even
more carnage. Nevertheless, I call on the Government
to join forces, to work hand in hand and to provide
the Congolese population its basic right to security
and safety. Waiting is simply not an option. Every day
we wait, more Congolese women cannot tend to their
fields out of fear of being raped. Every day we wait,
more Congolese villagers are forced to pay illegal
taxes. Every day we wait, more Congolese children are
recruited into armed groups, exploited and abused. We
are united in purpose; let us also reunite in action.
The electoral process is at the core of the political
discussions in Kinshasa. Peaceful and credible elections
are the most reliable litmus test for any democracy.
Elections alone are not a guarantee for stability, but
the absence of credible elections is increasing the risk
for instability. In November 2016, the Congo will hold
presidential and legislative elections. The imperatives
of resolution 2211 (2015) are crystal clear. A transparent
and credible electoral process must be ensured, while
respecting the Constitution and the electoral calendar.
However, the responsibility for credible elections
ultimately lies with the Government.
I see four significant difficulties that must be
overcome to ensure a credible and transparent electoral
process that meets the expectations of the Congolese
population. First, a budget is urgently needed. Secondly,
the electoral calendar has to be realistic. Thirdly, the
voters’ registry needs to be updated to include, for

15-218263/10

S/PV.7484

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

example, young adults who have reached voting age
since the last elections in order not to disenfranchise
the young population. Fourthly, as in any elections,
political space must be given to the opposition and civil
society.
I welcome President Kabila’s initiative to reach
out to a wide range of stakeholders to find a way to
ensure consensus on the electoral process. These
consultations, however, should not delay the presidential
and legislative elections that are to be held in November
2016, as foreseen by the Constitution and resolution
2211 (2015).
The strategic dialogue between MONUSCO and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
began in March. Since then, we have met at the highest
levels with a common purpose in mind — setting in
motion a gradual, mutually agreeable exit strategy and
reinvigorating our sincere collaboration on issues of
security, elections, human rights and communications,
which are areas lying at the very heart of our mandate.
I wish to thank the Government, and especially His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond
Tshibanda, for engaging with us so actively on the
dialogue and for working tirelessly on this process. I
am very pleased that the talks are progressing in a spirit
of mutual confidence and trust.
In May, teams composed of MONUSCO staff and
Government officials conducted joint missions in 29
territories across the 4 conflict-affected provinces.
Armed with detailed questionnaires and following
jointly agreed methodology, the teams travelled
through most of the remote areas to obtain a first-hand
understanding of the security situation prevailing in the
east. They did not look for hearsay, academic analyses
or reported facts. They wanted and reported on the
reality on the ground as they saw it. Their findings
are now being discussed with the Government and
will serve as a basis for drawing joint conclusions on
how and when we will eventually leave the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There are still differences on
that issue. While the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Congo would like to immediately suggest
a further reduction, we would rather have a phased and
structured approach along the lines of the provisions of
resolution 2211 (2015).
We all agree that MONUSCO must progressively
leave the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have, in
fact, already begun the drawdown. Of the 2,000 troops
earmarked to be reduced under the current mandate,
4/10

14/07/2015

1,420 have already been repatriated, and other units
will follow very soon. It is our common understanding
that once we depart, peacekeeping forces do not have to
return. The timeline for our departure should depend on
the progress on the ground. The sooner the Government
and MONUSCO join forces, the sooner armed groups
will be eradicated. The sooner armed groups are
eradicated and State authority is restored, the sooner
more troops can be reduced.
In conclusion, allow me to touch briefly on a
number of other important issues facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As I mentioned earlier, economic
opportunities are vital for peacebuilding. When it
comes to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there
is one often-repeated truth — its natural riches could
easily provide the Congolese population with what they
want. Yet, despite abundant resources, a considerable
growth rate and the availability of untapped resources,
such as agriculture and human capital, the Congolese
remain one of the poorest people in the world.
The fall of commodity prices and investors’
concerns about the stability of the country ahead of the
elections are worrying signs. I welcome the efforts of
Special Envoy Said Djinnit to organize an investors’
conference in Kinshasa in February 2016. I invite
national and international partners to invest in the
young people, whose future should be not be hindered
by high unemployment rates and a lack of opportunities.
The fight against armed groups will not be
sustainably successful if questions of economic
development and employment are not addressed. In
this context, I want to highlight the visit of the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ambassador Dina Kawar, and her delegation
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May
2015. That visit underlined the importance of good
governance in the mining sector, focusing further on
the arms embargo and fostering cooperation between
MONUSCO, the sanctions Committee and the Group
of Experts.
Lastly, I have been monitoring the situation in
Burundi very closely as the country has descended into
violence over the past two months. As of today, over
140,000 people have fled into neighbouring countries,
including 12,800 to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I highlight those events to remind us again of
the importance of respecting the Constitution and of

15-21826

14/07/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

creating the necessary political space for a national
consensus around elections.
The implementation of the national, regional
and international commitments of the Addis Ababa
agreement requires the joint efforts of the international
community. In this context, it is a pleasure to
congratulate Mr. Ibrahima Fall on his appointment as
the African Union Special Representative for the Great
Lakes Region and Mr. Thomas Perriello as the new
United States Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region
of Africa. This strong team of envoys for the Great
Lakes can indeed accompany the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the times ahead.
By tradition, I always conclude by thanking the
national and international staff of the United Nations
for their commitment to securing a better future for the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today,
I wish to commend the performance of the troops of
the Ituri brigade for their achievement in its protection
mandate. They have truly demonstrated tremendous
courage in actively engaging and pursuing the Forces
de résistance patriotiques de l’Ituri over the past weeks.
This is precisely this type of peacekeeping that the
Force Commander and I have always advocated for.
But even more importantly, this engagement is what the
population and the Government expects from us.
I thank the Council for its continued and unrelenting
support. We are all witnesses to a momentous moment
in the history of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The seeds of a stable, secure and resilient Congo have
already been planted. It is my hope that we will see
them flourish in the coming years.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kawar.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan): I have the honour to brief
the members of the Council in my capacity as the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In my statement, I intend to provide an
overview of my visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda from 24 to 29 May. I
will also briefly highlight the work of the Committee
since 22 January, the most recent occasion on which
I delivered a statement to the Council concerning
the Democratic Republic of the Congo sanctions (see
S/PV.7367).

S/PV.7484

In my briefing on 22 January, I noted that the
date of 12 March would mark 11 years since the
Council established the sanctions Committee to
monitor the implementation of the arms embargo. I
had expressed the hope that, during the course of 2015,
we would collectively acquire a better appreciation
of the commitment to the implementation of the
sanctions regime and what actions could be taken to
address any gaps or deficiencies. I noted that I was
aware of the challenges before us, particularly the
differences of views in the region as to who bears
the most responsibility for violating the sanctions. I
also underlined the importance of the Committee’s
engaging with interlocutors by hearing their views and
providing assistance, as necessary, so as to strengthen
the implementation of the sanctions regime.
Several months later, I spent a week in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda, which was the first occasion on which a
Chair of the sanctions Committee had travelled to the
Great Lakes region to assess the implementation of the
arms embargo, assets freeze and travel ban. On behalf
of the Committee, I would like to extend my utmost
appreciation to the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda for having
facilitated the visit. I would also like to take this
opportunity to convey my personal thanks to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler and his
team in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), which provided invaluable support,
particularly logistical support, during my stay in all
three countries.
During the course of my visit, I explained to
interlocutors that, in accordance with the terms
of reference agreed upon by the Committee, the
purpose of my visit was to learn how to improve the
effectiveness of sanctions provisions under the relevant
Council resolutions; to collect first-hand information
about the situation in Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring States, including names for
listing; to strengthen the dialogue between relevant
stakeholders and the Committee; and to receive any
concrete proposals that States might have with a view
to strengthening the implementation of the sanctions
regime, including requests for capacity-building. The
terms of reference also noted that the visit was expected
to feed into the Council’s future review of the sanctions
measures.

15-218265/10

S/PV.7484

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

During my meetings in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, several themes resonated, namely, the
upcoming elections; the recent interruption of joint
operations between the Forces armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO;
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities’
call for a reduction of 7,000 MONUSCO troops by the
end of this year. In meetings with Government officials,
civil society representatives and United Nations
representatives, I touched upon the paradox between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s extensive
natural resources and its difficult path towards
governance, leaving the State unable to capitalize
on its resources to generate wealth and further the
development of the country and opportunities for its
population. On a number of occasions, I was reminded
of the Government’s assertions that neighbouring
States were complicit in smuggling networks linked to
destabilizing activities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through the illicit trade in natural resources,
and of allegations that members of the Government and
FARDC elements were themselves complicit in such
networks.
In a climate where serious efforts are needed to
investigate and prosecute smuggling networks, and in
the knowledge that no individuals have been sanctioned
by the Committee since December 2012, I informed
interlocutors that as the Chair of the Committee, I
was interested in determining whether several wellplaced sanction designations, substantiated of course
by sufficient evidence, could target malefactors as a
deterrent and strengthen the authority of the State. I
encouraged interlocutors to put forward names of key
spoilers in order to set an example for those operating at
the mid-level and lower levels. The Minister of Interior
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo voiced the
readiness of his Government to work with the Group of
Experts to provide suggested names for designations.
However, when the Group of Experts held a up meeting
in the Ministry on 12 June with a view to following up
on my request, no such names were provided. We are
still hoping to make progress on that point.
I wish to confirm that since the adoption of
resolution 1807 (2008) in March of that year, the
embargo no longer applies to the Government, and
that the procedure of notifications to the Committee
regarding the transfer of military equipment from
supplier States to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been simply for informational purposes. The
Committee is willing to further engage on this matter
6/10

14/07/2015

with the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo if they so desire, with a view of providing any
further clarifications.
On weapons stockpile management, I reiterated
the Council’s call on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to enhance stockpile security and implement a
national weapons-marking programme, and I echoed
the findings of the Group of Experts from a previous
report that the FARDC remained the main source of
weapons and ammunition for non-governmental armed
groups. Stockpile security and weapons-marking need
to be prioritized, as repeatedly called for by the Group
of Experts and the Council itself, but there does not
seem to be any movement on that issue.
In that connection, I wish to note that the United
Nations Mine Action Service briefed the Committee
on 6 March, and noted that financial constraints have
limited the weapons and ammunition management
assistance to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In my written report of the
visit to the region, which was discussed on Friday in
the Committee, I called upon Committee members to
earmark funds to the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Assistance in Mine Action, with particular
emphasis on the construction of new weapons depots
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is
a tangible way that Council members can help move
forward an issue that has seen little if any progress, and
build the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s capacity
in weapons management and storage.
Another outcome of the visit was to pave the way
for improved communication and collaboration between
the Group of Experts and Governments, the United
Nations and civil society members. As a Committee, we
must follow up with the Group to ensure that the access
promised to the members during my visit is granted.
In Rwanda, the general tenor of the meetings
was positive, although the Rwandan side echoed the
counter-argument to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s complaints that it was responsible for the
problems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
was made clear that the authorities felt the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was using Rwanda unfairly as
a scapegoat for problems that arose from governance
issues. Rwandan officials felt that the responsibility
rested with the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for achieving progress in areas such as
the governance of the natural resource trade and the

15-21826

14/07/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

neutralization of the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda.
In Uganda, allegations emerged during meetings
with the Minister of Defence and the Acting Director of
Multilateral Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
that the armed group the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), sanctioned by the Committee in June 2014, has
links with terrorist groups, such as Al-Shabaab. To
date, the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has not found any such links. In that
context, I wish to express gratitude to the Government
of the United Republic of Tanzania for having arrested
the sanctioned ADF leader Jamil Mukulu and agreed
to Kampala’s request to extradite him to Uganda. I
also wish to thank the Ugandan authorities for having
conveyed to me their intention to allow the Group of
Experts to interview Mukulu and any of his associates
arrested with him.
In Kampala, my delegation also held a breakfast
meeting with representatives of the five permanent
members of the Security Council, and spoke via videoteleconference with representatives of the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, in Nairobi. We also met with
two representatives of a Kampala-based business that
was sanctioned by the Committee in March 2007 for
having purchased gold through a regular commercial
deal with traders in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo who are tightly linked to militias. The business
is under investigation by the Ugandan authorities.
Since my briefing to the Council on 22 January,
the Committee convened a formal meeting on 6 March
with the States of the region and held three sessions
of informal consultations on 31 March, 28 April and
10 July. At the 6 March meeting, the Committee
invited the representatives of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania to share their views on the 2014
final report of the Group of Experts (see S/2015/19),
together with our fellow Committee members Angola,
on behalf of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR), and South Africa, on behalf of
the Southern African Development Community.
Following the 6 March meeting, the Committee
took the unprecedented step of sending letters in
May encouraging a number of the invited States to
undertake investigations pursuant to recommendations
of the Group of Experts. I handed copies of the letters
addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the

S/PV.7484

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda to interlocutors during the visit. The Committee
intends to follow up these letters, as well as those that
were sent to Burundi, South Africa and Tanzania. At
the consultations on 31 March, the Committee heard
a briefing by Mr. Alphonse Ntumba Luaba, Executive
Secretary of the ICGLR, concerning its activities.
During the consultations on 28 April, the Group of
Experts provided an overview of its workplan on its
current mandate.
Finally, during the Committee’s consultations on
Friday 10 July, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts
provided an overview of the Group’s progress update
to the Committee, which was circulated on 2 July. I
also conveyed a number of personal reflections on my
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda
and Uganda, some of which I intend to echo during the
Council’s consultations following this meeting.
The President: I thank Mrs. Kawar for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir, I
should like to welcome the accession of your country,
New Zealand, to the presidency of the Security Council
and to congratulate you personally on the very able
way in which you have conducted the discussions and
the work of the Council since the beginning of the
month. Allow me also to express the appreciation of
my delegation to Mr. Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent
Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations, for
the way in which he presided over the deliberations
of the Security Council in June. Finally, I would like
to pay due tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his ongoing and unfailing concern for my country,
as well as his personal involvement in strengthening
peace in my country.
Today’s meeting is an important and timely
opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved in
the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo since
the Security Council adopted resolution 2211 (2015)
on 26 March. We have taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/486) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We have taken careful note of the briefing provided
by Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the

15-218267/10

S/PV.7484

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congo, whose presence among us today I welcome.
We have also taken note of the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Jordan in her capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
My delegation requests the Council’s understanding
in revisiting a number of the points highlighted in the
report that is the subject of our debate, particularly
with regard to the implementation of the commitments
made by my country under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed in Addis Ababa,
relations with MONUSCO, the progress of the electoral
process, and the security situation in the eastern part of
my country.
As Council members are aware, my country’s
commitments under the Framework Agreement can
be summarized by the following general points: the
pursuit of security sector reform with regard to the
army and the police, the consolidation of State authority
in the east of my country, and the fight against armed
groups. My country is also responsible for promoting
the structural reform of State institutions, including
finance reform, and for promoting the objectives of
national reconciliation, tolerance and democracy. Three
years after the signing of the Agreement, there is reason
to claim that the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
met most of its commitments. Since the Government
put in place a legal and regulatory framework for the
reforms to be undertaken in the implementation of the
Framework Agreement, significant progress has been
made, as acknowledged in the report of the SecretaryGeneral.
In terms of relations with MONUSCO, the dialogue
launched with the United Nations in the context of the
strategic review continues. We are convinced that my
Government will reach common ground with the United
Nations and that an agreement will surely be reached
on the issues that are the subject of the discussion.
Regarding the elections, I can confirm that the
establishment of democracy in my country became
a reality with the organization of the first truly free
and democratic elections in our history in 2006; the
organization of legislative and presidential elections,
with a term expiring in 2011; effective decentralization;
and the planned holding of local, municipal, urban,
provincial, senatorial, parliamentary and presidential
elections in 2015 and 2016. My delegation wishes to
8/10

14/07/2015

reassure the Council and to affirm the resolve of my
Government to anchor itself more than ever in the
democratic culture. Thus, after an open and lively
debate, the National Independent Electoral Commission
published a comprehensive calendar of upcoming
elections and set the budget for the organization of
the entire electoral cycle. This reflects our desire to
organize transparent and credible elections.
But as recalled by His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic and Head
of State, in his address to the nation on the occasion of
the commemoration of the fifty-fifth anniversary of the
accession of our country to international sovereignty,
the road leading to the third cycle of elections in our
country is littered with a number of obstacles that must
be removed so as to enable the conduct of elections in a
peaceful climate.
Those obstacles are related to the comprehensive
electoral calendar that was vociferously demanded by
the opposition, yet immediately challenged after its
publication, and to the financing of the electoral process
which was assessed well after the adoption of the 2015
budget. The total requirement for the organization of the
elections amounted to over $1 billion, while the actual
budget for all Government requirements was limited to
$9 billion. Another obstacle was the participation in the
2015 election of minors who came of age during the
electoral cycle and were excluded by the electoral law.
The law provides, in effect, that this important segment
of the Congolese population can take part only in the
upcoming elections after the renewal of the electoral
register.
One last obstacle was the imperative of securing
the electoral process. We had regrettable experience
of political intolerance and rejection of the election
results by the losers leading to deadly violence during
and after the 2006 and 2011 elections. To address that
situation, the President of the Republic has engaged
the nation in consultations and dialogue with a view
to uniting the majority, the opposition and civil society
in an agreement on ways and means to overcome these
obstacles. It is important to note here that the appeal
for political dialogue on the part of the Head of State,
is a matter for the Congolese, who must learn to talk
to each other without foreign interference, as occurs
everywhere else.
With regard to our partners and friends, we are
confident that they will peacefully accompany the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in this learning
15-21826

14/07/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

exercise and strengthening of democracy by avoiding
inappropriate interference, as I have already noted.
My Government has undertaken considerable
efforts in security sector reform; these are well known
to the Council and I shall therefore not dwell on
them. With respect to the security situation, it is true
that some parts of our country remain the subject of
security concerns. That is particularly true regarding a
few pockets of insecurity controlled by foreign armed
groups in the provinces of North and South Kivu. The
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), with the support of MONUSCO, are doing
their best to secure Beni and its surrounding area, which
remain under the threat of the Ugandan terrorists of
the Allied Democratic Forces. In the same context, the
FARDC continues to fight alone against the Rwandan
rebels of the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda. and its results have been encouraging.
Furthermore, the Government is determined to close
the file on the former rebellion of the Mouvement du 23
mars (M-23), in the context of which the Government
granted amnesty to many of its members for acts of
war. As to their repatriation, the ninth Extraordinary
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, held in Luanda on 18 May, recommended
that the implementation of the Nairobi declarations be
completed within three months and signed between the
Congolese Government and the former rebels of M-23,
particularly with regard to the repatriation of the former
rebels cantonned in Rwanda and Uganda.
To that end, a Nairobi declarations assessment
meeting was held on 7 July in Kinshasa to accelerate
the repatriation of the former M-23 combatants. The
coordinator of the national monitoring mechanisms
observed that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
should put all issues on the table with a view to finally
closing the file, as indicated in the Nairobi report, by
August, at the latest. A Congolese delegation, led by
the Vice-Minister of National Defence, visited Kigali
in early February, where he signed a statement with the
Rwandan authorities on the repatriation of former M-23
rebels. A total of 453 former M-23 combatants, who had
crossed the Rwandan border after their defeat by the
FARDC in November 2013, were identified. It is our
belief that the cases registered in Rwanda have been
closed.
In Uganda, on the other hand, the Embassy of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Kampala

S/PV.7484

had received 1,763 individual commitments, while
the amnesty committee received 1,678. The gap of 85
commitments represents the category of persons who
had subscribed by mail and who, for the most part, were
already on Congolese soil. To date, 1,670 files have
been dealt with.
In the context of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of the former M-23 combatants,
Mr. Gressly, Deputy Special Representative of
Secretary-General, has disbursed the first tranche as
follows: $1.5 million on the part of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, $15 million on
the part of the World Bank, $7 million on the part of
Sweden and $6 million on the part of MONUSCO. The
latter will provide an additional $7 million on 1 August.
It should be pointed out that 2,985 ex-combatants
entered training programmes with a viewed towards
their socioeconomic reintegration. Some 1,692 excombatants were trained at the Kamina military base
and 1,293 were trained at the Kitona base; all of them
received a demobilization card. In contrast, the 819
ex-combatants who were trained at Kotakoli were all
transferred to Kamina.
My Government takes careful note of the
Secretary-General’s comments and is determined to
move forward in fulfilling its commitments under
the Framework Agreement. It appreciates the true
value of the assistance provided by the United Nations
and hopes for, as stressed by the Secretary-General,
greater and more active mobilization by the signatory
States and guarantors of the Framework Agreement
in implementing the commitments they have also
undertaken so that the Great Lakes region may be a
haven of peace, which is imperative if there is to be
cooperation and development.
I would conclude by saying a word about the
briefing made by the Chair of the Sanctions Committee.
Our position on this issue is well known. The ongoing
transfer of weapons to armed groups, or between armed
groups, in violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions justifies the need for continued close
monitoring of the implementation of the arms embargo
and other measures imposed by the resolutions related
to the Democratic Republic of Congo. But we should be
wary of confusion: the Government, which is subject
to the demands of reforming its armed forces and its
security and police services, should not be put on the
same footing as illegal armed groups, which freely
obtain weapons to maintain insecurity. Basically, it

15-218269/10

S/PV.7484

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

must be clear that the arms embargo applies only to
armed groups.
Finally, my delegation wishes to express to all
members of the Council the gratitude of the people
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for their dedication to the cause of their country.

10/10

14/07/2015

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

15-21826
