S/2012/42

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 January 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 17 January 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
It will be recalled that during the Security Council luncheon that took place on
23 November 2011, I stated my intention to dispatch a mission to the Sahel region to
assess the scope of the threat of the Libyan crisis in the region and the national,
regional and wider international capacities to respond to those challenges. I also
advised that when I received the report of the mission, I would arrange to present it
to the Council. In this regard, I have the honour to transmit the report that the
mission submitted to me upon completion of its work.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and the attached
report to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-20863 (E) 240112

*1220863*

S/2012/42

Report of the assessment mission on the impact of the
Libyan crisis on the Sahel region
7 to 23 December 2011

I. Introduction
1.
Libya is located in the north-eastern part of the African continent and is
considered both an Arab and an African country. Through the years, and as a result
of its oil wealth and infrastructure development and the deliberate policies of
Libya’s late leader, Muammar al-Qadhafi, Libya became a magnet for many
impoverished sub-Saharan Africans who fled their countries either as a result of
conflict or difficult living conditions and migrated to Libya seeking “greener
pastures”. Others were absorbed into the Libyan army as regular officers and,
reportedly, as mercenaries, and were allegedly given Libyan citizenship. It is
reported that some of those individuals were used by the security apparatus of the
regime to brutally and violently suppress the population during the crisis and were
thus much hated by the population.
2.
The crisis in Libya started out with peaceful demonstrations on 15 February
2011 but quickly turned into an internal conflict after street protests were violently
suppressed by the Government. The international community, including the United
Nations, the African Union, the European Union and the League of Arab States
launched several diplomatic initiatives in a bid to bring the crisis to a quick end.
Those efforts were unsuccessful in preventing an escalation of the crisis, bringing
Libya to the verge of a major humanitarian catastrophe, especially in the eastern
parts of the country.
3.
Against this backdrop, the Security Council adopted resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011) which, inter alia, authorized the use of “all necessary measures” to
protect the civilian population. Following months of intense clashes, the regime of
Muammar al-Qadhafi came to a violent end with his killing in Sirte on 20 October
2011.
4.
While the impact of the crisis reverberated across the world, such
neighbouring countries as Algeria, Chad, Egypt, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and
Tunisia bore the brunt of the challenges that emerged as a result of the crisis. In a
relatively short period of time, the Governments of these countries, especially those
in the Sahel region, had to contend with the influx of hundreds of thousands of
traumatized and impoverished returnees as well as the inflow of unspecified and
unquantifiable numbers of arms and ammunition from the Libyan arsenal. Although
the volume and the impact of the returnee population differs from one country to the
other, the influx clearly has the potential to further exacerbate an already precarious
and tenuous situation. In addition, these countries are directly threatened by an
impending food security and nutrition crisis that could further exacerbate and
negatively affect the political, social and economic situation in the region.

2

12-20863

S/2012/42

II. Context
5.
It should be recalled that, at the peak of the Libyan crisis, the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, the African Union, human rights organizations and
others raised concerns about the welfare and treatment of foreigners, especially
sub-Saharan African migrant workers in Libya. It should also be recalled that,
throughout the crisis, the Security Council and the African Union had diverging
views on how to resolve the conflict.
6.
The Secretary-General’s decision to deploy the first assessment mission to the
region, with the participation of the African Union, was intended to convey the
message that solidarity should be extended to those suffering the negative
consequences of the Libyan crisis; and to send a signal to the region that the United
Nations, the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) stand together with the affected populations in the Sahel and that,
despite past differences, the nature and the complexity of the challenges before the
Sahel region demand the cooperative efforts of all partners. These messages
resonated well in the region, as all the leaders welcomed the mission and heralded it
as a new dawn and hope for a more collaborative and regional approach to tackling
the problems facing the region.

III. Mandate
7.
The mission was mandated to collect information on (a) the influx of
unemployed returnees, including migrant workers, former combatants from Libya
and armed Tuareg and Toubou elements into these countries, as well as the impact
that their return is having on the socio-economic and political stability in the host
communities; (b) the inflow of weapons into the region and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, surface-to-air missiles and explosives; (c) the nature
and the extent of criminal and terrorist activities in these countries and ongoing
regional initiatives to address them; (d) the impact on the security sector; (e) the
national operational capacity of the security sector; (f) judicial reform;
(g) additional efforts needed to address the root causes of recurrent food insecurity
and malnutrition, as well as other humanitarian issues; (h) youth unemployment;
and (i) disaster risk evaluation. The mission was also mandated to assess national
capacities in those areas and to recommend country-specific and regional immediate
and long-term measures that the United Nations and the African Union could
undertake to support ongoing national, subregional and regional efforts and efforts
of the wider international community in addressing those challenges in an integrated
and comprehensive manner.

IV. Composition
8.
The United Nations inter-agency assessment mission to the Sahel region was
deployed under the overall guidance of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa, Saïd Djinnit. It was led by Sam Bassey Ibok, Deputy
Director, Africa II Division, Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations
Secretariat, who was assisted by the African Union representative in N’Djamena,

12-20863

3

S/2012/42

Ambassador Ki-Doulaye Corentin. The mission comprised representatives of the
Department of Political Affairs, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
Office, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Peacebuilding Support Office, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA), the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the
African Union’s African Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism.
9.
A full list of all the participants appears in annex I to the present report.
Regrettably, the original decision to have representatives of ECOWAS participate in
the mission did not materialize, largely owing to logistical scheduling difficulties.
However, the mission benefited from an extensive session held under the leadership
of ECOWAS in Abuja.

V. Organization of work
10. The mission conducted its work as a group most of the time. Given the limited
time available to the team and the logistical challenges, consultations were
essentially limited to the capitals of the five countries visited.
11. Prior to travelling to the region, mission participants benefited from an
extensive briefing on developments in the Sahel by Special Representative Djinnit.
In each of the capitals visited, the mission members and representatives of the
United Nations country teams (except in Abuja) met with a broad range of national
political and military leaders, including the President of Mali, Prime Ministers,
ministers, parliamentarians and civil society groups, and consulted with thematic
and sectoral inter-ministerial technical working groups. In addition, the mission
members participated in a two-day meeting of civil society organizations,
parliamentarians and Government representatives in Bamako, organized by the Parti
pour la renaissance nationale on 10 and 11 December 2011, to discuss the impact of
the Libyan crisis on the Sahelo-Sahara regions. Representatives from Algeria,
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritania, the Niger and Senegal participated in the
discussions, which focused on regional concerns regarding all aspects of the crisis in
the Sahel.
12. At the end of the visits, the mission representatives debriefed Special
Representative Djinnit and Special Representative Abou Moussa of the United
Nations Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). The mission’s itinerary and list of
interlocutors are set out in annex II to the present report.

VI. Impact of the Libyan crisis on the political, security,
humanitarian and development situation in the
affected countries
13. Although Libya’s relations with its neighbours have not always been peaceful,
during the 1990s the Qadhafi regime invested considerable amounts of money in the
Sahel region. Libya became one of Chad’s most important economic partners and
provided substantial direct support to the economies of Mali and the Niger, which

4

12-20863

S/2012/42

partially contributed to the welfare of the region. Also, the strong Libyan economy
attracted workers from the subregion, mainly from Chad, Mali and the Niger, and to
a lesser extent, Mauritania and Nigeria.
14. An overview of the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region in 2011
revealed that the extent and the degree of the impact differed depending on the
geographic location and on political and economic agreements with the Qadhafi
regime. It also revealed that the response of the United Nations system and its
partners varied depending on the number of returnees, its capacity on the ground
and ongoing programmatic interventions in the areas affected by the crisis.
However, it should be noted that many of the challenges facing the Sahel region
pre-dated the Libyan conflict.
15. While the events in Libya have affected countries in the region differently,
some factors remain uniform and consistent across the region. All of the countries
sharing a border with Libya have seen an influx of returnees that has strained
existing social structures. Also, some countries that do not share a border with
Libya, particularly Mali and Mauritania, have registered influxes of returnees.
Although the majority of the returnees are predominantly male, women and children
living in the host communities are especially vulnerable but often overlooked.
Women face many constraints in securing employment, accessing food or making a
living from agricultural activities.
16. The crisis has also negatively affected these countries from a humanitarian
perspective, particularly in the light of the looming food security and nutrition
crisis. The compounded effects of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition, the
prevalence of such natural disasters as droughts and floods, demographic growth,
epidemics (malaria, cholera, meningitis, measles and polio) and violent conflict,
coupled with limited access to basic social services and weak State institutions, have
already exacerbated the vulnerability of communities in the Sahel and increased
dependence on humanitarian assistance. The chronic cycles of food and nutrition
crises have weakened household resilience and coping mechanisms. Owing to the
scarcity of rainfall mainly across the Sahel strip, the 2012 harvest is highly likely to
be worse than in previous years. This will aggravate the prevailing food insecurity
and malnutrition levels. Households will thus have to cope with the burden of
increasing food insecurity and a decrease in remittances as a source of income.
17. Even in the absence of a declared food security and nutrition crisis,
humanitarian needs in the region are enormous. According to the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), approximately 2.3 million children under the age of
five die every year in West and Central Africa. More than one third of these deaths
are caused by malnutrition. In 2010, nearly 10 million people faced a serious food
crisis in the Sahel and 859,000 children under the age of 5 required treatment for
severe acute malnutrition. In response, the regional inter-agency standing committee
in Dakar developed a regional strategy that aims to reinforce the link between
humanitarian assistance, recovery and long-term development and thereby break the
cycle of recurrent crises and build sustainable solutions for affected populations.

12-20863

5

S/2012/42

A.

Humanitarian and development concerns
Impact on returnees
18. As at 15 December 2011, IOM registered 209,030 returnees from Libya,
including 95,760 in the Niger, 82,433 in Chad, 11,230 in Mali and 780 in
Mauritania. However, these figures do not include returnees who crossed the borders
without the assistance of IOM. According to Government estimates, the total
number of returnees, including unregistered cases, is approximately 420,000,
200,000 of which are in the Niger, 150,000 in Chad, 30,000 in Mali and 40,000 in
Mauritania.
19. Independent profiling exercises conducted by IOM in Chad, Mali and the
Niger indicated that more than 95 per cent of the returnees from Libya were male,
the majority of whom were between the ages of 20 and 40 years, with very low
levels of education. They provided low-skilled manual labour in the agricultural,
construction, oil and service sectors.
20. It should be noted that prior to the conflict, a significant number of the
returnees had been residing in Libya for over 10 years, while some were born and
raised there and had never been to their home countries. Most of the returnees lost
their savings and possessions and left Libya under extremely difficult
circumstances. In some cases, they were victims of extortion and human rights
violations during their journey. In addition to psychosocial trauma, feelings of
shame and embarrassment relating to loss of their ability to earn and provide for
their families further impeded their reintegration and socio-economic stabilization.
Impact on the host communities
21. The majority of the returnees originate from the most impoverished and
underdeveloped communities in the region. Their return has placed an additional
strain on impoverished host communities that face such constant challenges as
frequent crop and agricultural failures, food insecurity, malnutrition, lack of
economic opportunities, insufficient health infrastructure and educational services,
and social exclusion. In some regions, host communities face the risk of conflict, the
prevalence of criminal acts and violence.
22. In the past, labour migration to Libya was one of the main coping strategies of
the host communities. The remittances that these returnees used to send back home
contributed greatly to the development of the communities and constituted a means
of subsistence at moments of crisis. IOM estimates that, on average, each returnee
supported over seven individuals in their home country. The loss of remittances has
been particularly hard-hitting in the light of the looming food security and nutrition
crisis. Meanwhile, their return represents an additional burden to the host families,
particularly in countries such as Chad, where the host communities are already
sharing resources with refugees and/or internally displaced persons.
Impact on humanitarian access
23. The Sahelo-Saharan region stretches over 8,000,000 km², representng one
quarter of the African continent. This vast territory represents a significant
environmental and geographical challenge in terms of humanitarian access.

6

12-20863

S/2012/42

Furthermore, the nomadic lifestyle of its inhabitants requires a tailored response for
humanitarian action.
24. The deteriorating security situation in the Sahel has negatively impacted the
capacity of the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to access the affected
populations and carry out their operations. As a result, they have suspended their
immunization, nutrition and other support programmes for the most vulnerable
communities. While the authorities provide armed escorts for humanitarian
operations in Mali and the Niger, the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service is
heavily relied on to access communities in Chad and the Niger. The mission was
informed that funding for the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service operations is
running out, which will jeopardize planned humanitarian operations. The mission
was also told that in some areas, the humanitarian vacuum is being filled by
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and/or criminal elements who are reportedly
providing services and humanitarian assistance in remote areas where State presence
is reduced or non-existent. This situation may enable Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb to develop recruitment and local support networks for gathering
information, supplying arms and ammunition, and other logistics.
Impact on the local economy and budget/fiscal implications
25. The Libyan crisis has had a negative impact on the tourism industry in the
region. The fear of abduction and other security concerns have kept tourists from
visiting certain countries. This situation has negatively affected the local economies,
particularly small enterprises. The suspension of investment in countries such as
Mali has caused additional unemployment. Furthermore, the crisis has led to an
increase in the prices of basic commodities as a result of high transportation costs of
goods that had to be transported from more distant ports.
26. In the Niger, defence spending has increased by 65 per cent, while the budget
for social services (education, health, etc.) has been significantly reduced. In
Mauritania, the mission was informed that most of the returnees had been
reintegrated into their families of origin or absorbed through social solidarity.
Although groups of returnees organized frequent protests (demanding jobs, more
assistance) in the first few months of their return, the tension appears to have
subsided as a result of the Government’s promises regarding reintegration.
Disaster risks and climate change
27. The countries in the Sahel region face endemic fragility owing to their
susceptibility to multiple political, socio-economic and natural hazard
vulnerabilities. Lately, the processes associated with climate variability and climate
change (inducing short- to long-term impacts) have increased the frequency, the
magnitude and the spread of natural disasters, especially droughts and floods, with
more pronounced impacts. In addition to overexploitation of natural resources by
humans, models suggest that climate change is triggering drought cycles, which
leads to food insecurity and, consequently, social instability.
National responses
28. With respect to the returnees, most of the humanitarian focus has been on the
provision of safe, dignified evacuation and transport assistance, including temporary
shelter, food and health care. The Governments in the region, in cooperation with

12-20863

7

S/2012/42

IOM and other humanitarian partners, have taken adequate measures to facilitate the
return of their citizens and have cooperated in protecting and assisting third country
nationals passing through their territory. Some of the Governments and international
organizations are in the process of planning or implementing reinsertion and
reintegration programmes aimed at facilitating the early stages of integration of the
returnees. However, the need for more comprehensive planning, resourcing and
action was highlighted in various meetings of the mission.
29. With regard to the food security and nutrition crisis, the Governments of Chad,
Mali, Mauritania and the Niger have already declared a national crisis and have
appealed for international assistance to respond to the worsening situation. At the
same time, the Governments have developed response plans and have begun to
implement related activities.
Regional responses
30. In March 2011, ECOWAS deployed a fact-finding mission to Egypt and
Tunisia to evaluate the situation of West African citizens who had fled the crisis in
Libya. Subsequently, ECOWAS developed a project, yet to be implemented, for a
total cost of $4 million to assist migrants from the region to return to their homes.
ECOWAS is also in the process of adopting its new humanitarian policy and has
developed a related humanitarian action plan, which it intends to adopt in March
2012. This should allow regional organizations to assist Member States in their
efforts to respond to food insecurity and malnutrition and to mitigate the impact of
the Libyan crisis.

Recommendations
31.

Following are recommendations for immediate and long-term action.

Immediate
(a)

National level
• The international community should continue to support the efforts of the
Governments in the region and IOM to ensure the safe and dignified return of
migrants, facilitate the immediate reinsertion of the returnees and assist
affected host communities;
• The international community, including ECOWAS, should enhance its support
to humanitarian partners in strengthening preparedness in anticipation of the
deteriorating food security and nutrition crisis. It is imperative that adequate
humanitarian capacity and resources be available to support a large-scale
response within the framework of the regional strategy on preparedness for a
food crisis in the Sahel and affected neighbouring countries, developed by the
regional inter-agency standing committee for coordination of humanitarian
assistance based in Dakar;
• The United Nations and associated security systems in the region should be
strengthened. Moreover, Governments need to facilitate continued access for
humanitarian actors in the affected areas. Strengthened engagement with
donors is also required to ensure sustained and extended support for United
Nations Humanitarian Air Service flights, which remain the only means of

8

12-20863

S/2012/42

mitigating access challenges in most of the affected countries. Based on
regional assessments, flights of the Service should be extended in the region to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches the most vulnerable communities;
• The United Nations system, development partners and relevant international
organizations should support the multisectoral reintegration initiatives of
Governments. Their strategies should include a strong focus on conflict
prevention, social cohesion and protection, as well as livelihood support for
returnees from Libya and host families, beyond traditional agropastoral and
income-generating activities. Assistance should also target the competencies of
the non-agropastoralist returnees. Existing assistance, including protection
activities, should be complemented by conflict prevention initiatives that focus
on sources of tension between host communities and migrants at transit centres
and arrival centres and in returnee communities. Crisis prevention and
recovery interventions targeting the communities of origin of the returnees will
be instrumental in the short to medium term. It is also essential to promote and
strengthen the role of women in community development;
• A fast and effective way to contribute to economic recovery and youth
employment in the Sahel region is to focus on employment-intensive
infrastructure programmes that integrate conflict-sensitive development and
peacebuilding. These programmes should take into account the specific profile
of the returnees and the skills they acquired during their stay in Libya;
(b)

Regional level
• The creation of a subregional platform that addresses the security, transborder
criminal, humanitarian, socio-economic and development issues should be
envisaged. Inter-State dialogue to settle the Tuareg situation and support for
transborder reconciliation initiatives should be fostered;

(c)

International level
• Advocate for the protection of the human rights of migrants in Libya,
including the right to physical security, well-being, work, access to justice and
personal property.
Long term
• Ensure a regional approach in addressing the root causes of recurrent food
insecurity and malnutrition in the Sahel that effectively links humanitarian and
development initiatives with a view to ensuring sustainable solutions.
Livelihood analysis should be undertaken and attention should be focused on
stabilization and recovery dividends;
• Strengthen the institutional, policy and governance landscape of countries in
the region to ensure that their development plans, policies and programmes
factor in the impact of climate change in order to promote sustainable
development; undertake climate/disaster risk assessments to develop country
and regional risk profiles for both the short term and the long term and
formulate regional and comprehensive multi-agency risk reduction with the
active and effective involvement of women;

12-20863

9

S/2012/42

• Programmes should increasingly focus on the peace, security and development
nexus, with a view to strengthening democracy, promoting peace and fostering
inclusive economic growth and sustainable development. Over the longer term,
conflict prevention and social cohesion interventions should also address
community security and access to justice, especially given the weak rule of
law structures in areas of return;
• The African Union, Governments in the region and relevant international
organizations should facilitate the establishment of labour migration
mechanisms between countries within and outside the region to promote
temporary migration, development and resettlement programmes. This effort
should be based on a voluntary principle and should aim at ensuring the
continued protection of people who choose this option.

B.

Security concerns
Proliferation of arms and weapons
32. The Libyan crisis further exacerbated an already precarious security situation
in the Sahel region. The Governments of the countries visited indicated that, in spite
of efforts to control their borders, large quantities of weapons and ammunition from
Libyan stockpiles were smuggled into the Sahel region. According to national
officials and international experts, these included rocket-propelled grenades,
machine guns with anti-aircraft visors, automatic rifles, ammunition, grenades,
explosives (Semtex), and light anti-aircraft artillery (light calibre bi-tubes) mounted
on vehicles. They indicated the possibility of more advanced weapons, such as
surface-to-air-missiles and man-portable air defence systems, being transferred into
the region, but did not provide evidence of their existence or recovery.
33. Certain authorities indicated that some of these weapons had been smuggled
into the Sahel by returnees, in particular former fighters who had been either
members of the Libyan regular army or mercenaries during the conflict. Some of the
weapons may be hidden in the desert and could be sold to terrorist groups like
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram or other criminal organizations.
They also indicated an increase in arms trade in some West African countries.
34. Officials in some of the countries visited, in particular Chad, Mauritania and
the Niger, stated that they had achieved relative success in limiting the inflow of
weapons into their territories as a result of stringent security measures implemented
since the beginning of the Libyan crisis, including through the deployment of
additional troops in strategic locations along their borders. For example, during
clashes with some returning fighters, arms traffickers and Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb terrorists, the army and security forces of the Niger managed to seize
weapons, ammunition and explosives (Semtex) suspected to have originated from
Libyan stockpiles.
35. In the case of Mali, Government representatives informed the mission that
they were engaging in dialogue with armed returnees, mainly Malian Tuareg, to
encourage them to surrender their weapons voluntarily.
36. All national and international interlocutors stressed the need to develop better
coordinated, regional approaches to address the illegal transfer of weapons across

10

12-20863

S/2012/42

borders and prevent them from being used to instigate armed violence in the Sahel
or bolster old rebellions in the Niger and Mali.
Terrorist threats
37. Recently there has been an increase in terrorist and criminal activities in the
Sahel region. These have included abductions of Westerners for ransom and armed
clashes with security forces. The potential recruitment by terrorist or criminal
groups of unemployed youth and returnees in particular and the growing risk of
radicalization are sources of growing concern.
38. Since 2003, 53 persons have been taken hostage by terrorist groups in the
Sahel, such as the former Groupe salafiste pour la prédication et le combat and now
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. The latter has traditionally operated mostly in the
northern Sahelian areas, but lately it has expanded its operations to other parts of the
region, as illustrated by the kidnapping of two French citizens in Niamey in early
2011 and the recent kidnappings in the Hombori and Timbuktu regions in Mali.
Some officials informed the mission representatives that there may be a certain level
of cooperation in some areas between drug traffickers and members of Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, particularly with regard to illegal taxation in certain parts of
Mali.
39. Notwithstanding the apparent collaboration among the various groups,
officials highlighted the tension between Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and some
Tuareg groups in certain areas. They referred to the announcement made by the
spokesperson for the National Movement for the Liberation of the Azaouad on
19 December 2011, in which he indicated his group’s intention to expel Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb members from its territory. According to the spokesperson, any
association with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb would tarnish his group’s
reputation and impede the development of its territory. He stated his group’s
readiness to fight Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb if it were provided political and
financial support.
40. Recently there has been a proliferation of terrorist groups in the region. This
included the announcement by Iyad Ag Ghali, a leader of the 1991 Tuareg rebellion,
of the establishment of the jihadist movement Ansar Eddin on 10 December and, on
12 December, of the establishment of the new jihadist group Mouvement unicité et
jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest. The latter claimed responsibility for the kidnapping of
three European aid workers in a Sahraoui refugee camp in Tindouf, Algeria, in
October 2011. All national and international interlocutors stressed the need for a
holistic and regional approach to combat terrorism in the face of the extreme
mobility of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb across the region.
41. During a convoy interception operation in the Niger, important quantities of
Semtex explosives (645 kg) and 445 detonators were seized, and the authorities of
the Niger alleged that the explosives were meant for Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb camps in northern Mali. This seizure may indicate that terrorist groups
have been acquiring arms, weapons and explosives from Libyan military stockpiles.
42. The mission representatives were informed that Boko Haram, which claimed
responsibility for the terrorist attack, inter alia, against United Nations House in
Abuja on 26 August 2011, was also mentioned as a threat to the region. Its presence
was mentioned as a source of concern by most countries in the region. In the Niger,

12-20863

11

S/2012/42

for example, the radicalization of youth was a particular concern in the south, where
interlocutors said that Boko Haram was already active in spreading its ideology and
propaganda and, in some cases, had succeeded in closing down public schools. The
mission representatives were also informed that Boko Haram had established links
with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and that some of its members from Nigeria
and Chad had received training in Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb camps in Mali
during the summer of 2011. Although Boko Haram has concentrated its terrorist acts
inside Nigeria, seven of its members were arrested while transiting through the
Niger to Mali, in possession of documentation on manufacturing of explosives,
propaganda leaflets and names and contact details of members of Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb they were allegedly planning to meet. Whereas Nigerian
authorities viewed the group as a national threat without any links to Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, it has become a growing source of concern for the countries of the
region.
Transnational organized crime, including illicit drug trafficking
43. The Sahara-Sahel strip has long been an area where illicit trafficking has
thrived, with Mali, Mauritania and the Niger at the centre of its major routes. The
recent appearance of drugs among the items smuggled and trafficked has become a
reason for increased concern, in view of its destabilizing effects on the region. The
increased flow of weapons in the region is also believed to further fuel the activities
of organized crime and terrorist groups. According to some interlocutors in Mali,
crimes such as car theft and armed attacks have increased in the northern part of the
country as a consequence of the availability of arms.
Border management and cooperation
44. The level of protection and control of the borders varies widely in the region.
The mission was informed by Chadian and Mauritanian authorities that their borders
had been reinforced even before the beginning of the Libyan crisis and that special
military units were dispatched to track the movements of suspect persons and
groups. In Mali and the Niger, the authorities appealed to the international
community for assistance in protecting and securing their borders. Many officials
stated that they did not possess the means to trace weapons in circulation, whether
destined for their country or in transit. They expressed concern that important
quantities of weapons could be hidden in their territory, and requested assistance for
their identification and collection. They also expressed concern at the lack of
protection of their borders by the Libyan authorities.
45. Some border areas, particularly between Chad and Libya, were laden with
mines, in particular the Tibesti area in Chad, and many of their tracks are not well
known, which represents a substantial danger. The Government of Chad has
requested assistance for their removal.
46. While issues relating to border security are not specifically integrated into
national strategies, the mission was informed that the border authorities of most
countries lacked human capacity and modern logistical capabilities. Appropriate
infrastructures, such as detection equipment and scanners, do not exist, and
intelligence techniques for combating fraud are not used. The customs
administrations of the region are not equipped with national databases of offences
and seizures. In that regard, the mission was informed that a large number of

12

12-20863

S/2012/42

returnees came without proper identification. There are also difficulties with the
control of the massive and frequent movement of cross-border workers, who often
do not possess identification documents.
47. Coordinated patrols with neighbouring counterparts constitute a good practice,
and the participants were informed of a degree of practical cooperation in this
regard. However, such initiatives are limited. The principle of “hot pursuit”, which
allows the security forces of a country to cross international borders in pursuit of
suspected terrorists, was mentioned by several interlocutors, but its application
varies and it is not always based on bilateral agreements. It also remains essential to
address the sense of abandonment felt by the population closer to border areas, who
often regard themselves as forgotten outcasts. The authorities requested support in
establishing border posts and promoting development programmes in those regions,
including for the construction of schools and medical facilities. Furthermore, State
institutions, including local community policing programmes, are absent from
border areas.
Police and judicial cooperation
48. During discussions with police and security services of the countries visited,
participants noted the lack of national coordination and liaison mechanisms for
combating transnational organized crime and terrorism. Without such mechanisms,
it will be particularly challenging for the countries of the region to adequately
address the impact of the Libyan crisis, including the increase of armed violence.
Further, the mission visited a specialized judicial police unit in the Niger, which
aims to prevent and combat terrorism and reports to the General Director of the
National Police. This service is a very good example for implementing regional and
international police and judicial cooperation. Similar judicial police departments are
also to be established in Mali and Mauritania. Such judicial police units work under
the authority of specialized counter-terrorism prosecutors and can fully cooperate at
the regional and international levels, including with INTERPOL, under the
mechanism of judicial cooperation and the rule of law.
49. The judicial approach to counter-terrorism is an essential element of regional
and international cooperation. During its talks with officials, the mission recalled
the positions of the United Nations and the African Union on the prevention and the
combating of terrorism and the necessity to uphold the highest standards of respect
for the principles of human rights and the rule of law. Moreover, West Africa has
established two mechanisms for cooperation on policing matters: the West African
Police Chiefs Committee and the ECOWAS Committee of Chiefs of Security
Services. However, membership in these mechanisms is limited to ECOWAS States
and it is not extended to some States of the Sahel region, including Algeria, Chad
and Mauritania. Certain States have also signed bilateral agreements on police
cooperation in order to fight transnational organized crime.
50. Officials from the Ministries of Justice in Mali stressed the need to strengthen
regional judicial cooperation. This could be achieved through the framework of the
regional judicial platform for Sahel countries, which is being developed between
Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger, with the support of UNODC. Since
the legal framework for international cooperation on criminal matters is already in
place, technical assistance should focus on capacity-building. In that regard, the
mission noted that most of the problems are structural and profoundly interrelated,

12-20863

13

S/2012/42

and need to be addressed through a comprehensive approach, while respecting the
balance between actions aimed at reinforcing security and those directed at
promoting socio-economic development.
51. As the countries of the region do not extradite their nationals, the mission
noted that States should ratify and incorporate the relevant international counterterrorism instruments into their respective national laws. Moreover the principle aut
dedere aut judicare (extradite or prosecute) should be applied, especially in relation
to terrorist and other serious crimes, in accordance with the relevant international
instruments, in particular Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), which requires
States to ensure that all persons charged with terrorist offences are brought to
justice. In that regard, some counter-terrorism and counter-transnational organized
crime instruments could also serve as a basis of judicial cooperation.
Current responses and existing mechanisms
52. The countries of the Sahel region have established a number of national and
regional programmes and mechanisms to address security concerns in the region.
National responses
53. In Mali, the presidency developed in 2011 an emergency programme to
specifically address the situation in its northern regions. The Programme spécial
pour la paix, la sécurité et le développement au nord is comprised of security and
development pillars. It aims to provide concrete assistance in terms of improving
infrastructure and public services in the northern impoverished and isolated areas. It
also aims to establish a permanent military and security presence. The initiative is
being implemented with financial support from international partners. Some
concerns have been expressed, however, regarding the lack of involvement and
dialogue with local communities in its implementation and management-related
problems. Concerns were also expressed about the programme’s emphasis on
security.
54. The Ministry of Internal Security and Civilian Protection, in cooperation with
UNDP, has also launched an initiative on democratic governance of security and
peace, the Programme pour une gouvernance partagée de la sécurité et de la paix au
Mali, which seeks to address the relationship between security, development and
governance in Mali by encouraging dialogue with local communities. The initiative
is being implemented as part of the national security policy, which was adopted in
October 2010. Criticism has been expressed that the two programmes have not been
coordinated.
55. Further, reinforcement of the dialogue and engagement between the
Government of Mali and the Tuareg communities in northern Mali, as well as
among different Tuareg communities, has been considered as critical to ensure
effective implementation of the national programmes and effective restoration of
State authority in the north.
56. Several countries in the Sahel region, including Mali and Mauritania, have
developed national integrated programmes to address transnational organized crimes
and combat money-laundering and the financing of terror groups. In this regard, the
Government of the Niger has strengthened several institutions, such as the High
Authority for Peace Consolidation, the National Commission for the Control and

14

12-20863

S/2012/42

Collection of Illicit Arms and the Counter-Terrorist Judicial Police Unit of the
Ministry of the Interior. In addition, it established an ad hoc committee in the office
of the Prime Minister.
Regional responses
57. At the regional level, the countries of the Sahel established a regional judicial
platform, which institutionalized judicial cooperation in the region. The platform
currently includes Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger, with the
possibility of other Sahel countries joining the initiative. At the subregional level,
counter-terrorism efforts are being addressed through a joint strategy developed by
Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger. Burkina Faso, Chad and Nigeria will be
invited to attend the next meetings and could possibly join the four countries in the
near future. The strategy sets out arrangements and principles of subregional
cooperation for security and development at four levels: regular political
consultations, military cooperation (Committee of Joint Chiefs); intelligence
cooperation (Unité de fusion et liaison); and economic cooperation. Counterterrorism actions cannot be limited to military action alone; police action is also
necessary. The possibility of setting up a trans-Saharan office for regional
cooperation on policing matters, within the framework of the Committee of Joint
Chiefs, was mentioned by the national interlocutors of the countries visited.
58. In 2008, the African Ministers of Justice adopted, in Rabat, the Convention on
Exploitation and Mutual Legal Assistance in Counter-terrorism, which has yet to be
ratified. The African Union is also considering the possibility of introducing a
continental-wide arrest warrant and the adoption of an African convention on mutual
legal assistance and extradition.
59. ECOWAS developed the ECOWAS small arms programme to tackle small
arms and light weapons proliferation across its member States. However, it was
criticized and deemed ineffective and is expected to phase out by the end of 2011.
Meanwhile, the ECOWAS regional plan of action to address illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse (2008-2011) constitutes a relevant tool, but its
implementation has been limited to West Africa.
60. Moreover, the African Union has adopted some instruments for the prevention
and the combating of terrorism. Some of these instruments, ratified by the
concerned countries, such as the Anti-Terrorism Model Law, provide a proper legal
framework on which existing cooperation could be enhanced. In addition, the
African Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism provides a forum for
interaction, cooperation and information exchange among Member States and the
regional mechanisms. This is accomplished through its network of national and
regional focal points (Continental Counter-Terrorism Early Warning System), which
all countries visited by the mission belong to. It has also taken steps to provide
technical assistance to Member States by developing technical expertise in a number
of counter-terrorism areas, through technical training courses and seminars.
Furthermore, the African Union was reportedly studying the possibility of
introducing an African arrest warrant. The mission was also informed that the
African Union is considering the possibility of adopting an African convention on
mutual legal assistance and extradition.
61. The Détachement intégré de sécurité in Chad is a security body composed of a
mix of military and police personnel, which was created initially under the United

12-20863

15

S/2012/42

Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad in order to help ensure
security in the areas of humanitarian operations deprived of State structures. This
instrument is still operating through a joint UNDP/United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees programme and needs sustained donor support.
62. The international community has established the Global Counterterrorism
Forum on the Sahel (Sahel working group), co-chaired by Algeria and Canada, and
will develop technical assistance programmes for the countries of the region.

Recommendations
63.
(a)

Following are recommendations for immediate action.

National level
(i) National actors, with the support of the United Nations and the wider
international community, when necessary, should:
• Establish adequate mechanisms to control and secure national borders across
the Sahel zone, including the transfer of small arms and light weapons, and
implement national programmes to collect and destroy illegal small arms and
light weapons;
• Implement all legal and administrative measures to combat terrorism and
organized crime in accordance with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
and relevant regional, continental and international instruments; these
measures should also comply with existing international human rights and
refugee and humanitarian law;
(ii)

The International Community should:

• Support the efforts of Governments against transnational organized crime and
terrorism syndicates through capacity-building and financial assistance
(bilateral or multilateral) to relevant institutions. The United Nations and the
African Union should identify areas of cooperation and deploy their experts as
soon as possible;
(iii) National actors, with the support of the United Nations and the wider
international community, when necessary, should:
• Encourage the development of comprehensive national strategies, including
the establishment of fusion centres, based on their established national focal
points, with a view to facilitating exchange of information, coordination and
joint operations;
• Encourage the development and the implementation of holistic national
strategies to combat terrorism, including addressing the grievances of the
populations and supporting the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-terrorism Strategy (2006);
(iv) All States:
• Should ensure the protection of migrants and third country nationals residing
in or passing through their territory;

16

12-20863

S/2012/42

(b)

Regional level
(i)

Regional and subregional mechanisms should:

• Encourage cooperation, implementation and strengthening of existing regional
security strategies and mechanisms, including with Libyan authorities;
enhance the management of the impact of the Libyan crisis by expanding
regional cooperation to include all affected countries throughout the region;
• Ensure that the application of the hot pursuit principle is based on bilateral
agreements;
• Encourage operational efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the fight against
terrorism; strengthen border control, including capacity-building and logistical
upgrades;
• Encourage the exchange of security information, in particular in relation to the
seizures of weapons, through existing information exchange systems such as
the African Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism (African Union),
Unité de fusion et liaison, the INTERPOL National Central Bureau, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the United Nations
Panel of Experts on Libya;
(ii)

The African Union Commission should:

• Continue to follow up and assist Member States in the implementation of the
decisions of the African Union Council and other organs and relevant United
Nations resolutions; and encourage collaborative efforts with relevant United
Nations bodies and agencies, in particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and UNODC;
(c)

International level
(i)

The United Nations and bilateral and multilateral partners should:

• Support efforts for inter-community and inter-religious dialogue and
understanding, in accordance with the United Nations Global Counterterrorism Strategy (2006) and more specifically Security Council resolution
1624 (2005);
• Support initiatives aimed at strengthening dialogue and increasing the
resilience of local communities to resist and counter the appeal of terrorism
and the recruitment of youth by terrorist and other criminal groups, including
through support for youth employment and educational training;
• Continue to support and strengthen the capacity of States to protect their
borders and for the removal of landmines;
(ii)

The United Nations should, on an urgent basis:

• Strengthen its security capacity and presence on the ground;
• Support and strengthen the initiative of the Global Counter-terrorism Forum
Sahel working group;

12-20863

17

S/2012/42

• Encourage the exchange of relevant information and analysis between the
United Nations and the African Union, with a view to enhancing early-warning
capacity;
• Encourage States to incorporate into domestic law the provisions of the
relevant counter-terrorism instruments and the principle of aut dedere aut
judicare (extradite or prosecute), especially in relation to terrorist and other
serious crimes, in accordance with the relevant international instruments and
in particular Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), which requires States to
ensure that all persons charged with terrorist offences are brought to justice;
(iii) The United Nations and the African Union Commission:
• Should pursue efforts for resource mobilization for the socio-economic
reintegration of the African migrant workers into their communities, including
the organization of a pledging conference; and urge the Libyan authorities to
ensure the safety and the security of the African migrant workers.

VII. Concluding observations
64. As a result of the crisis, millions of economic migrants, especially from Chad,
Mali, Mauritania and the Niger and other African countries, were forced to flee
Libya and return to the communities that they had left in search of better living
conditions. Over night, the Governments of the region had to contend with the
impact of the crisis on an already challenging humanitarian, development and
security situation. This included the influx of returnees, the smuggling of weapons
from the Libyan stockpiles, terrorist activities, youth unemployment, drug and
human trafficking and a surge in criminality. The region also faces an impending
food and nutrition crisis.
65. The leaders in the region welcomed and commended as timely the initiative of
the Secretary-General to deploy the mission. The symbolism of the United Nations
acting with the African Union was widely appreciated and encouraged. The mission
found, particularly among the civil and political leaders in the region, a remarkable
openness to engage on the challenges confronting them. Some countries have
demonstrated political will at the highest level to address the situation and have
committed significant resources towards that end.
66. The mission noted that there was great appreciation for the sustained
multilateral efforts by the United Nations country teams in all of the countries
visited. Similarly, several initiatives were undertaken by the Governments of the
affected countries, as well as by the United Nations system, the African Union, the
European Union, ECOWAS, IOM and other bilateral and multilateral stakeholders
to address these issues. Further, there were strong calls for the United Nations to
support such ongoing initiatives, and to consider practical and concrete ways of
strengthening these efforts, with greater coherence and coordination at all levels.
This would ensure that the fallout of the Libyan conflict would not exacerbate preexisting tensions and thereby further degrade the security and socio-economic
problems in the region.
67. The mission noted the determination of the respective Governments to address
these challenges, in particular the transnational threat posed by Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and other criminal groups and the proliferation of

18

12-20863

S/2012/42

weapons. It was clear, however, that their national and regional capacities varied
and were limited overall. As such, the mission concluded that most countries could
not address these threats in isolation. Although regional mechanisms had been
established to address these problems, they lacked the means to adequately
implement their tasks. Nevertheless, the leaders of the region stressed the need for
homegrown and regional solutions to the problems with the support of the
international community.
68. The mission concluded that any immediate or long-term strategy to mitigate
the impact of the Libyan crisis should take into account the root causes of the
problems in the region. As such, the main recommendations of the mission fall into
four categories:
(a) At the national level, support capacity-building for ongoing initiatives by
Governments to address the immediate crises in the Sahel region; and support for
efforts of the United Nations country teams, especially in building better coherence
for the implementation of humanitarian and development programmes;
(b) At the regional level, ensure that support is given to the strengthening of
existing regional mechanisms, through a process of capacity-building and enhanced
coordination arrangements. Issues such as the control of borders and informationsharing on cross-border activities, such as the smuggling of weapons and substances
and human trafficking, should be pursued as a matter of priority;
(c) At the international level, the United Nations should spearhead a
programme for the mobilization of greater international support for the Sahel region
to address the challenges of human insecurity and underdevelopment. These were
identified as areas where a comprehensive programme of engagement by the
international community, including quick-impact projects, would help in addressing
issues such as youth unemployment and short- and long-term issues pertaining to
food insecurity, nutrition and other sources of vulnerability;
(d) In addition, an overarching mechanism or framework that would bring
together all the affected countries together in a coordinated manner to discuss and
proffer solutions was recommended. In spite of the different regional memberships
(Nigeria and the Niger belong to ECOWAS, Chad is a member of ECCAS,
Mauritania is not a member of ECOWAS and Algeria is in the Arab-Maghreb zone),
all the countries are willing to work in a more coordinated manner. Moreover, none
of the existing United Nations presences in the region, UNOWA, UNOCA and
UNSMIL, have an overarching mandate that covers the vast region of the Sahel. It
is, however, important that they to be part of any future initiative on the Sahel.
69. The mission would like to express its profound appreciation to all the
Governments and leaders of the region, who gave of their time and provided
insights into the implementation of its mandate. The members were also grateful for
the support extended to all participants by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Saïd Djinnit and UNOWA colleagues, as well as United Nations resident
coordinators and the respective United Nations country teams in Chad, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger and Nigeria. Their generous and collegial assistance,
especially in the four Sahelian States, contributed immensely to the smooth conduct
of the work of the mission. The mission participants extend their gratitude to the
ECOWAS Commission.

12-20863

19

S/2012/42

70. Finally, the members of the inter-agency assessment mission are grateful to the
Secretary-General and to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
affording them the opportunity to participate in the mission. They strongly appeal to
the leaders of the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS to move
urgently to lead the efforts to mobilize international support for the implementation
of the recommendations in this report.

20

12-20863

S/2012/42

Annex I
List of participants
Sam Bassey Ibok, Deputy Director, Africa II Division, Department of Political
Affairs, Head of delegation
Ambassador Ki Doulaye Corentin, Head of the African Union Liaison Office in
N’Djamena, Chad
Danilson Lopes da Rosa, Political Affairs Officer, Africa II Division, Department of
Political Affairs
Kasper Ege, Associate Political Affairs Officer, Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force
Jean-Philippe Morange, Legal Officer, Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate
Eugenijus Usinskas, Border Management Expert, Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, Brindisi, Italy
Ely Dieng, Senior Policy Adviser, Security Sector Reform Unit, Peacebuilding
Support Office
Alfred Nabeta, Humanitarian Affairs Officer, Africa II Division, Coordination and
Response Section, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Rudolfo Jocondo Kazimiro, Head of Regional Office, Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Dakar
Max Schott, Humanitarian Affairs Officer, Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Regional Office, Dakar
Jahal Rabesahala de Meritens, Global Coordinator, Cluster Working Group on Early
Recovery, Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery, United Nations Development
Programme, Geneva
Alexandre Schmidt, Regional Representative for West and Central Africa, United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Dakar
Damine Rey, Terrorism Prevention Expert, United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Dakar
Dah Khattar, Programme Coordinator, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Nouakchott
Nicolas Guinard, Security Sector Reform Adviser, Head of Security Sector Reform
Section, United Nations Office for West Africa, Dakar
Francesc Revuelto-Lanao, Political Affairs Officer, United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
Igor Cvetkovski, Transition and Recovery Expert, Department of Operations and
Emergencies, International Organization for Migration, Geneva
Lakhdar Idriss Mounir Lallali, Head of the Alert and Prevention Unit, African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism, Algiers

12-20863

21

S/2012/42

Annex II
Itinerary and list of interlocutors
Mali (8-11 December 2011)
National interlocutors
President of the Republic of Mali
Prime Minister
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Finance Minister
Budget Minister
Minister of Land and Local Administration
Minister of Internal Security and Civil Protection
International interlocutors
Representatives of Brazil, China, India, Russia, South Africa
Representatives of Belgium, Denmark, European Union, France, Luxemburg,
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden
Representatives of Japan, Norway, Switzerland
Representatives of the United States of America
Representatives of Algeria, Burkina Faso, Chad, Guinea, Libya, Mauritania, the
Niger, Senegal, Tunisia
United Nations country team
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), IOM, Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), UNDP, Department of Safety and
Security of the United Nations Secretariat, United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), UNICEF,
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, World Food Programme
(WFP), World Health Organization (WHO)
Civil society
Civil society organizations and representatives of communities in the north of Mali

Niger (12-14 December 2011)
National interlocutors
Minister of Justice
Minister of the Interior
Secretary-General of the Ministry of Planning

22

12-20863

S/2012/42

Under-Secretary-General of the Defence Ministry
General Director of Documentation and National Security
Deputy to the Chief of Cabinet of the Prime Minister
Representatives of technical ministries
High Authority for Peace Consolidation
National Commission for the Control and Collection of Illicit Arms
International interlocutors
Representatives of Algeria, Chad, China, France, Mali, Mauritania, the United
States of America, United States Agency for International Development, European
Union
Representatives of Oxfam International, International Committee of the Red Cross,
Médecins Sans Frontières
United Nations country team
FAO, IOM, UNAIDS, UNDP, Department of Safety and Security of the United
Nations Secretariat, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, WFP, WHO

Chad (15-17 December 2011)
National interlocutors
Prime Minister
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Minister for Human Rights
Minister of Territorial Administration
Minister of Security
Inter-Ministerial Committee
International interlocutors
Representatives of Germany, France, Russian Federation and the United States of
America
United Nations country team
FAO, IOM, UNAIDS, UNDP, Department of Safety and Security of the United
Nations Secretariat, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, WFP, WHO

12-20863

23

S/2012/42

Mauritania (18-19 December 2011)
National interlocutors
Prime Minister
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Minister of the Interior
Minister of Economy and Development
Minister and Commissioner for Human Rights
President of the Senate
President of the National Assembly
Chief of Staff of the Army
International interlocutors
Representatives of Germany, European Union, France, the Gambia, Japan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Spain, United States of America
United Nations country team
FAO, UNDP, Department of Safety and Security of the United Nations Secretariat,
UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
WFP, WHO

Nigeria (20 December 2011)
National interlocutors
Minister of Defence
Regional interlocutors
Commissioner for Human Development and Gender, ECOWAS
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security, ECOWAS

24

12-20863
