124

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the New Hebrides;
4. Notes with satisfaction the establishment of the
Representative Assembly of the New Hebrides and the
declared intention of the administering Powers to increase progressively the responsibilities enjoyed by that
Assembly, in accordance with the wishes of the people
of the Territory;
5. Reiterates its request that the two administering
Powers should continue to take measures to expedite
the process of decolonization in the New Hebrides;
6. Requests the administering Powers to take all
appropriate steps to strengthen the economy of the
New Hebrides and to work out concrete programmes
of assistance and economic development for the Territory;
7. Requests the administering Powers to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of the Territory;
8. Requests the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to co-operate with the Special Committee and to consider permitting access by a United Nations visiting
mission to the New Hebrides, and to report on this
aspect to the Special Committee when it next considers
the question of the New Hebrides;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the New Hebrides,
including the possible dispatch of a visiting mission in
consultation with the administering Powers, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976

31/52.

Question of Bermuda, Cayman Islands,
Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, Cayman
Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples, 39
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nat~ons relating to the Territories listed above, in particular General Assembly resolutions 3425 (XXX)
and 3427 (XXX) of 8 December 1975,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listed above, 40
so Ibid., chaps. III, XXVII and XXIX.
Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, I Ith meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee Sessional Fas4 0 Ibid.,

cicle, corrigendum.

'

Noting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration on the basis of their
express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and its
declared policy of fostering the growth of free and
democratic political institutions in those Territories,
Cons~ious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a _co_nsequence of the 1975 United Nations Visiting
Mission to Montserrat41 and reiterating its conviction
that the dispatch of such missions to colonial Terri!ories is essential for securing adequate and first-hand
mf~rmation in regard to the political, economic and
social conditions in those Territories and to the views
wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein,
'
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achi_evei:ient by their peoples of the objectives embodied m the Charter of the United Nations and in
the Declaration,
. Aware _of the special circumstances of the geographical locat10n and economic conditions of the Territ?ri~s concerned, and stressing the necessity of divers1fymg and strengthening further their economies as
a n:~tter of priority in order to promote economic
stability_ and _to_ ~educe their dependence on fluctuating
economic achv1ties,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the
Special Com!11ittee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementat10n of the Declaration on the Granting of
~ndepcndence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relatmg to Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and
Turks and Caicos Islands; 42
2. Rea{fi,rff!S the inalienable right of the peoples of
those _Terntones to self-determination and independence m accordance with the Declaration·
'
~- ]!eafjirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the
administering Pow~r, in consultation with the freely
elected representatives of the peoples, to continue to
take all the necessary steps to ensure the full and
speedy_ attainment of the goals set forth in the Declarat10n with respect to the Territories;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to expand its
programme o_f budgetal")'. and development aid and to
take a~l- possible steps, m consultation with the local
authontJes as appr~priatc, to diversify and strengthen
further the economics of the Territories listed above
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance
and economic development for those Territories·

'

6. . Urges the administering Power, with the cooperat10n of the Governments of the Territories concerned, to saf~gu~rd the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to the enjoyment of their natural
41
lbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.I), chap. XXVIII, annex.
42 lbid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev. I), chaps. XXVII ::ind XXIX.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

resources by taking effective measures which guarantee
the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
7. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United
Nations visiting missions in the Territories under its
administration and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee to continue his consultations with a view
to the dispatch of such missions, as appropriate;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of those Territories;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, Cayman
Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands, including the possible dispatch of visiting missions in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976

31/53.

Question of Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolution 3485 (XXX) of 12 December 1975 and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975)
of 22 December 1975 and 389 ( 1976) of 22 April
1976,

Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory, 43
Bearing in mind that part of the Political Declaration adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to the
question of East Timor, 44
Having heard the statement of the representative of
Portugal, 45
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of the Frente Revolucionaria de Timar Leste Independente,46
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
.Nations, refrain in their international relations from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
43 /bid., chap. XII.
44A/31/197, annex I, para. 36.
45 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 13th meeting, paras. 1-5.
46 Ibid., paras. 7-23.

125

or national independence of any State, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations,
Deeply concerned at the critical situation resulting
from the military intervention of the armed forces of
Indonesia in East Timor,
I. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timar to self-determination and independence and
the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that right;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 3485 (XXX) and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976);
3. Affirms the principles stated in that part of the
Political Declaration adopted by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries relating to the question of East Timor;
4. Strongly deplores the persistent refusal of the
Government of Indonesia to comply with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX) and
Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) and 389
(1976);
5. Rejects the claim that East Timor has been integrated into Indonesia, inasmuch as the people of the
Territory have not been able to exercise freely their
right to self-determination and independence;
6. Calls upon the Government of Indonesia to withdraw all its forces from the Territory;
7. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to the critical situation in the
Territory of East Timor and recommends that it should
take all effective steps for the immediate implementation of its resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976)
with a view to securing the full exercise by the people
of East Timor of their right to self-determination and
independence;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory under
active consideration, to follow the implementation of
the present resolution, to dispatch to the Territory as
soon as possible a visiting mission with a view to the
full and speedy implementation of the Declaration and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session.
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session an item entitled "Question of
East Tim or".
85 th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/54.

Question of the British Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the British Virgin
Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
