UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

C UNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2565). . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/16858andAdd.l) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SfPV.2565

a,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been apjplied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2565th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Ahmed Tawfik KHALIL

14 December

(Egypt).

procedure. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take
it that the Council decides to invite Mr. Denktag in
accordance with rule 39. At the appropriate moment,
I shall invite Mr. Denktas to take a place at the Council
table to make his statement.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

1984, at 3.30 p.m.

3. The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. Members of the Council have before them the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus for
the period 1 June to 12 December 1984 [S/16858 and
AddJ]. Members also have before them a draft resolution contained in document S/16862, which has been
prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations.

agenda (SIAgenda12565)

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/16858 and
Add. 1)

4. I should like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the facts contained in his report
on the situation prevailing between the two parties
concerned. On behalf of the Council I express the hope
that the forthcoming high-level meeting will be useful
and that we are at a crossroads in the development of
the question of Cyprus.

The meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

5. I should also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General
for his, exemplary efforts and perseverance which have brought us to this crossroads and
captured the imagination of the members of the Security Council and the international community, giving
them the hope of achieving what has eluded us in the
past. It is to be hoped that, thanks to the participation of
us all, this objective will soon be achieved.

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/16858 and Add.11
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Arabic]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Canada, Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure,

6. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
lution 559 (1984)].

was adopted unanimously[reso-

7. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ
(Pakistan): The Security
Council has just extended the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) at
a time when developments
of great significance are
taking place in the search for an honourable and
peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem, which is now
more than 20 years old. The negotiations carried out
through the good offices of the Secretary-General have
entered a final critical phase, and a solution acceptable
to both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot
communities is in sight.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey) took places at the Council table; Mr. Lee
(Canada) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Arabic]:
I should like to recall that in the course of the Council’s
consultations members of the Council agreed that an
invitation should be extended to Mr, Rauf Denktas in
accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
1

8. I should like to quote here from the Secretary-General’s report [S/16858] on the final round of negotiations
through his good offices, held in New York during the
past few weeks. His assessment of the outcome of the
negotiations in paragraph 61 of the report projects the
optimism that a successful conclusion of the protracted
negotiations on the Cyprus question may be at hand. He
said:

convey its “favourable reaction to all elements of my
presentation” [ibid., para. 501. The Secretary-General
also mentioned in his report that at the last stage of
discussions, after the Greek Cypriot delegation had
given its responses to his package proposals, he sought
and received from Turkish Cypriots understandings
which were helpful in further narrowing the gap in the
positions of the two sides. We are also gratified at the
positive attitude maintained by the Greek Cypriot side
during the negotiations and the fact that both interlocutors ate now in a position to move forward towards
a high-level meeting for the conclusion of an agreement
which, according to the Secretary-General, contained
“the necessary elements for a comprehensive solution
of the problem, aimed at establishing a Federal Republic of Cyprus” [ibid.].

“During the final round of negotiations major political decisions were taken, and I have to report that
the Turkish Cypriot side conveyed to me a position
which was, both with regard to the constitutional
as
well as the territorial aspects, substantially improved
from the one which it had maintained in previous
years. I have been conscious throughout the last
round of discussions of the crucial nature of the decisions confronting the Greek Cypriot community
and of the constructive efforts they have made to
reach the present stage. I am confident that both
sides will prove at thejoint high-level meeting that we
have reached a turning point in the development of
the question of Cyprus, and that their determination
to work together in a Federal Republic . , . will prove
strong enough to overcome the remaining diffticulties
and to dispel existing suspicions.”

12. As the solution of the Cyprus question appears to
be within reach, we wish to pay our tribute to its principal architect, the Secretary-General.
We deepiy
admire the dedication, commitment, patience and perseverance with which he has pursued the search for a
just and peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem. His
efforts have been crowned with success, which is as
much a personal triumph for him as it is indeed for the
United Nations.
13. In his report on the work of the Organization,
submitted to the General Assembly in 1982 as document A/37/1, the Secretary-General pointed to thecrisis
in multilateralism
and the erosion of the role of the
United Nations as a negotiating forum. There has been
little change in this situation since the Secretary-General presented his analysis more than two years ago.
His success in promoting a solution of the Cyprus issue,
however, brightens the hope for strengthening the
United Nations as an effective instrument for the maintenance of international peace and security and for
bringing the Organization back to prominence on the
world stage as it approaches its fortieth anniversary,
This accomplishment also creates new possibilities for
an active and promising role for the Secretary-General
in circumstances where other international initiatives
reach a deadlock. We hope that the success of the
Cyprus negotiations will have a positive impact on the
Secretary-General’s
initiatives concerning other international issues.

9. Pakistan draws special satisfaction from the fact
that all along it unreservedly emphasized the paramount importance of continuing the negotiations between the two sides through the good offices of the
Secretary-General, even at times when the utility of this
dialogue was seen to be in doubt. We went to the extent
of voicing our opposition to Council resolution 541
(1983), on the ground that its contents prejudiced the
continuation of the negotiations by virtue of the categorical censure of the position of the Turkish Cypriot
community, whose co-operation, in our view, was an
indispensable condition for the solution of the problem,
10. The successful outcome. of the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts also validates our consistent stand
that a solution of the Cyprus question, preserving the
unity and territorial integrity of the island, was always
possible, provided the solution satisfied the aspirations
of the Turkish Cypriot community, which felt deprived
of its rights guaranteed under the 1960 Constitution as a
co-founder of the State. We gave credence to the declarations made by the Turkish Cypriot leaders that the
object of their political actions, which often became a
target of international criticism, was to secure the legitimate rights of the Turkish Cypriot community within
the framework of a united, independent and sovereign
Cyprus. This position became evident once again in
their responses to the Secretary-General’s
package
proposals made during the final round of the talks, as
reflected in section V of the Secretary-General’s
report.

14. Finally, our greetings go to the people of Cyprus,
who, despite their two distinctive identities, are ordained to live as one nation and to share the bounties of
the island they inhabit. There is no alternative for the
two Cypriot communities other than to coexist peacefully within the framework of a united federal Cyprus.
We are happy at the progress that their leaders have
been able to make towards reaching an agreement, and
we hope that the high-level meeting envisaged in the
Secretary-General’s
report will usher in a new era of
conciliation,
progress and prosperity for all citizens of
Cyprus.

11. While tracing the evolution of the draft for a joint
high-level agreement, the Secretary-General
acknowledged that the Turkish Cypriot side was the first to

15. As regards resolution 559 (1984), just adopted by
the Security Council, Pakistan’s position on its text has
2

L‘

been expressed on previous occasionswhen the question of extension of the mandate of UNFICYP has
come up before the Council. The text of the resolution
leaves considerable room for improvement but, in deference to the fact that it concerns extension of the
mandate of UNFICYP, which Pakistanfully supports,
my delegation has cast an affirmative vote on it.

its hope that these steps, taken with the political will
and co-operation of the parties concerned, may lead to
ajust and definitive solution of the problem of Cyprus.
21. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Arabic]:
The next speaker is the representative of Canada,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

16. Mr. LUNA MENDOZA (Peru) [interpretation
Spanish]: Mr. President, first of all allow me to
congratulate you on having assumedthe delicate task of
guiding the work of the Security Council during this
month. We are convinced that your efficiency and cordiality will make its mark on the Council’s work. We
also thank the representative of China for his sure and
proper management of the work of the Council last
month.

22. Mr. LEE (Canada): Mr. President, I should like to
take this occasion to offer you our congratulations on
your assumption of your important and high office.
I would also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation and admiration of the way in which your
predecessor carried out his term. I wish to thank you,
Sir, and through you the other members of the Council
for agreeing to Canadian participation in the debate
today on the renewal on the mandate for UNFICYP.

from

17. My delegation unreservedly supports the continuation of the work of UNFICYP. The extension of its
mandate for a further period of six months is indispensable in the light of the contents of paragraph 63 of the
report of the Secretary-General, since the Force in
itself effectively contributes to preserving stability on
the island.

23. Over the years Canada has had and retains a close
relationship with Cyprus. It stems not only from our
Commonwealth membership but also from our direct
ties with the two Cypriot communities, and from our
links with our close shies and friends, Greeceand Turkey. Very importantly, however, Canada’s interest in
this subject grows out of the Canadian commitment to,
and links with, the United Nations, this Council and the
office and person of the Secretary-General. Since 1964
more than 22,000 Canadian soldiers have worn the
United Nations blue beret while on peace-keeping duties in Cyprus, at a direct cost to Canada of many
millions of dollars. Twenty-five Canadian soldiers have
made the ultimate sacrifice to keep the peace on that
troubled island.

18. I should like to stress that the renewal of the
mandate of UNFICYP is taking place today in a particularly important context, as was just pointed out
by the representative of Pakistan. The announcement
made a few days ago by the Secretary-General in connection with the convening in January next year of
a meeting at the highest level between the parties
involved in the Cyprus problem has naturally aroused
reasonable expectations on the part of those who hope
for an early political settlement of the question of
Cyprus.

24. Canada’s proven commitment to peace-keepingis
only half of the equation; it must, in more than equal
measure, be met by our collective efforts at peacemaking. Here the record has not been crowned with
successas it must ultimately be if peace, security and a
richer quality of life are to be returned to Cyprus.
Canada, along with other like-minded States and the
United Nations as a whole, must continue to seekthose
as yet elusive goals.

19. With regard to this latest positive development,
my delegation would like to recall that, in the context of
the most recent consideration by the Security Council
of the problem of Cyprus, the representative of Peru on
4 May 1984made a statement in which, referring to the
substantive aspectsthat should be given priority at the
present stage of consideration of the problem of Cyprus, he said:

25. For the last 20 years, as peace-keepers, we have
followed closely and assisted where and whenever we
could in the efforts of the United Nations to achieve a
negotiated settlement. Despite some success,all these
efforts have eventually become mired in controversy.
Against this formidable background, the current
Secretary-General, first as Special Representative and
now as Secretary-General, has sought with persistence,
skill and innovation to bring the parties together. His
announcement that he hasjust succeededin taking the
first steptowards a negotiated settlement by obtaining a
coinmitment from the leaders of the two communities
to meet in January within agreed parameters is most
welcome. While by no means the end of the road, it
does open the way towards further progress in the
pursuit of that negotiated settlement. Thus today, in
reaffirming the peace-keeping mandate of UNFICYP,

“to ensure a decisive step forward, there must be a
compromise that will make possible the immediate
resumption of communication between the parties. It
is obvious that without intercommunal dialogue there
can be no progress. The Secretary-General has been
sufficiently clear on this score in his report. These
conversations should be held in the same spirit of
cordiality and calm that prevailed on previous occasions. Only that spirit will makeit possible to adopt a
constructive approach to the crucial elements of the
controversy.” [See 2534th meeting, para. 138.1
20. In view of the progress achievedin that regard, the
Peruvian delegation reaffirms its support for the personal steps being taken by the Secretary-General and
3

I

ship demonstrated by him in tackling the difficult tasks
of the Council during the month of November.

we believe the Council is also implicitly supporting the
peacemaking mandate and endorsing the efforts of the
Secretary-General.

3 1. The decision to renew the mandate of UNFICYP
until 1.5June 1985, to which my Government has given
its consent, is fully warranted by the situation prevailing on the island and by the ongoing initiative ofthe
Secretary-General. This important initiative, aiming at
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the Cy’prus problem based on United Nations resolutions and
the high-level agreements of 1977 [see S/12323, para. 51
and 1979 [see S/13369, para. 511, is fully and wholeheartedly supported by my Government.

26. I cannot let this meeting go by without also saluting the readiness of the parties directly concerned to
participate actively and seriously in the discussions
under the auspices of the Secretary-General.
These
have not been easy discussions, and the negotiations
to come will not be easy. Difficult compromises and
mutually acceptable understandings will have to be
struck that, while doubtless not perfect, will nevertheless lead to an acceptable settletient that will be to the
benefit of all Cypriots, We are gratified that the leaders
of the two communities so far have resisted the all-tooeasy temptation of rejection and demands that the other
party must move first. We trust that they will pursue
this statesmanlike course.

32. In this regard we express our deepest appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts to pursue the cause of peace and justice in Cyprus in accordance with his mandate and the Charter of the United
Nations. We reassure him of our continued fullest cooperation and support, exerting at the same time every
effort for the fruition of his endeavours, We commend
also the valuable work of the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Brian Urquhart, and of the Secretary-General’s able collaborators, Mr. Sherry, Mr. Holger and
Mr. Picco.

27, In welcoming
the Secretary-General’s
report
on this subject, may I reiterate our support for the
concern, as expressed in paragraph 65 of the report,
about the worsening financial situation confronting UNFICYP.
We share the earnest hope of the
Secretary-General
that Governments will respond to
his continuing appeal by making generous contributions to this important peace-keeping endeavour.

33. In pursuing his initiative the Secretary-General
has a number of positive elements in his favour which
strengthen his hand in this undertaking.
First and
foremost is his personal affinity with Cyprus, having
devoted many years in the cause of the United Nations
efforts towards peace-keeping and peacemaking in our
island. His statesmanship and vision and his dedication to his mission, as well as the vast moral power of
his office, render him a unique personality capable of
leading the United Nations efforts to achieve a final
comprehensive
solution of the Cyprus crisis for the
benefit of all its people.

28. On behalf of my Government, I wish to confirm
once again Canada’s willingness to participate in
UNFICYP during its next mandate, just: agreed to. We
do so in support of the Secretary-General’s
valiant
peace-keeping efforts. Governments such as my own
want success, but it is up to the two Cypriot communities to achieve it. We urge them and the SecretaryGeneral to persevere. The impartiality,
credibility and
determination
of Secretary-General
Perez de Cutfllar
are undeniable. He has now provided the two communities with a critical opportunity-perhaps
the last-to
make the peace. Let it not be squandered.

34. What is more, in this lofty mission the SecretaryGeneral enjoys, apart from the wholehearted co-operation and support of my Government, the total support
of the Security Council and of the membership of the
United Nations. The participation by the Greek Cypriot
side in the proximity talks and its positive and constructive approach on substantive and procedural matters,
as evidenced by proposals, suggestions and comments
in search of a solution, are examples of good faith and
positive elements that greatly contributed to the fruition of the Secretary-General’s
efforts which began
in Vienna on 6 August 1984 and ended with his announcement on Wednesday, 12 December, of a highlevel meeting.

29. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Arabic]:
The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus, upon
whom I now call.
30. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): I wish at the outset to express to you, Sir, warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the high office of presidency of the
Security Council and to commend ybu sincerely for the
skilful and effective manner in which you have conducted the consultations
on the draft resolution
just adopted renewing the mandate of UNFICYP
for
another period of six months. It is a source of great
satisfaction to my Government that the presidency of
this most important organ of the United Nations is in
the able hands of a distinguished diplomat of Egypt, a
neighbouring country with which historically we enjoy
very close and friendly relations and share the affinity
of being founding members of the great family of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I should also like
to pay due tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing
of China, for his valuable contribution and the leader-

35. Equally important, however, is the yearning and
determination
of the people of Cyprus as a whole to
achieve the reunification of our country and our people,
and their unanimous and unreserved support of the
Secretary-General
in this respect. The people of CY
prus, Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots alike, who
are undergoing hardshibs and sufferings and the agony
of watching their homes and lands from afar as refugees
4

in their own country, long for return to normality and
peaceful coexistence in a reunited homeland where
there will be no foreign armies, barbed wire and barricades of confrontation, but brotherly coexistence.
Water runs to water and man to man, and no power in
the world can stop this natural force for unity. The
historic ties which bind the people of Cyprus, the centuries of amicable symbiosis, the affinity of belonging
to the same country, the common destiny, the common hopes and aspirations, are valuable assets in the
dexterous hands of the Secretary-General.

peace-keeping, have proved beyond doubt their dedication to the United Nations and to the lofty provisions of
its Charter.
40. To the Commander of UNFICYP,
Major-General
Greindl, and to his dedicated officers and men we
express special appreciation for the effective discharge
of their peace-keeping duties.
41. Next year we shall be commemorating the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations. It is the fervent
hope of my Government and of all our people that the
coming year will also be marked by the achievement of
the long-awaited comprehensive and just solution to
our problem. The United Nations, in commemorating
such an anniversary,, needs not verbal commitments
alone, which aim at making an impression, but the
concrete tackling of the substance of the issues, which
alone can bring tangible results towards the solutions
of the many, interrelated and crucial problems confronting the international community. It has been repeatedly stated, and very rightly so, that the credibility of
the United Nations is at.stake. It is high time for the
Organization, while upholding the Charter and the lofty
principles embodied in it, to mark a new era of effectiveness and result-oriented action, in justice. With
these hopes and expectations in mind, Cyprus recommits itself to contributing constructively to the commemoration of the Organization’s fortieth anniversary.

36. However, notwithstanding
these realities and
strong trends in support of the Secretary-General’s
efforts, experience has taught us that solutions to such
international problems as the question of Cyprus are
not easily attainable. As my President, Mr. Spyros
Kyprianou, stated on 12 December,
“It is a fact that progress has been made during
the proximity talks to the point that the SecretaryGeneral has concluded that he should convene a
high-level meeting, to which I have agreed.“.
And the President of the Republic added:
“Although it is too early to predict the outcome of the
high-level meeting, I must say that, in the light of
discussions in the third round of the proximity talks,
cautious optimism is now justified, perhaps for the
first time since 1974.”

42. As to the question of Cyprus, the President of the
Republic stressed that we “will continue to strive for a
just and viable solution to the problem of our longsuffering country” and that we “will continue to cooperate in absolute good faith with the Secretary-General of the United Nations”.

37. In welcoming progress that has been made in the
proximity talks we feel compelled, in view of bitter
disappointments
of the recent past, to warn against
easing or lessening the impetus and vigilance of the
international community at a time which is ripe, perhaps more than ever before, for representations by
those who can and must act in order to facilitate an
agreement, at the joint, high-level meeting on 17 January 198.5, for a comprehensive, just and workable
solution.

43. May I, in conclusion, pay a tribute to the memory
of Mr. Claude Pilloud, the representative of the International Committee of the Red Cross in the Committee
on Missing Persons in Cyprus. We value his contribution very much.

38. The mission of the United Nations in Cyprus remains twofold: peace-keeping through the precious
efforts of UNFICYP;
and peacemaking, through the
initiatives
of the Secretary-General.
Peace-keeping
alone, especially when protracted and not accompanied
by parallel progress towards the solution of a problem,
lacks the very essence of its purpose and may lead to a
completely opposite result, that of consolidating the
fruits of injustice. Such a development would be contrary to the principles and the purposes of the United
Nations.

44. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Greece.

I now call on the represen-

44. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): Allow me at the very
outset to extend to you, Sir, my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of December. It gives me
particular pleasure that the representative of a country
with which Greece maintains traditional friendship is
the President of the Council. We are confident that,
with your experience and statesmanship, you will ably
preside over the deliberations of the Security Council.
I should like also to congratulate the representative of
China, Mr. Ling Qing, on the able manner in which he
conducLed the Council’s work last month.

39. On the important subject of peace-keeping operations in Cyprus, we should like to express special and
warm feelings, of appreciation to the friendly Governments which, through voluntary contributions of personneI and funds, make possible the continuation of the
most valuable mission of UNFICYP. These Governments, through their participation in and support for

46. As in the past, the Government
of Greece has
concurred in the proposal of the Secretary-General for
the renewal of UNFICYP for another six months. This
5

concurrence follows the consent of the Government
of Cyprus, which expresses the sovereignty of the
Republic of Cyprus over all its territory.

meeting which the Secretary-General
has striven so
hard and so persistently, and now so successfully, to
convene in January next is not a meeting between the
President of the Republic of Cyprus and Mr. Denktas,
but a meeting between the two leaders of the two communities. I have to make that abundantly clear,

47. During the past four months, the SecretaryGeneral has made strenuous efforts to promote a fair
and viable settlement of the Cyprus problem. My Government has from the outset consistently and sincerely
supported this most recent initiative by the SecretaryGeneral, as it had supported his previous efforts,
which, unfortunately, did not come to fruition.

55. I am not meeting with the President of the Republic of Cyprus, because my community has not recog
nized and does not recognize him as such; it looks upon
the Greek Cypriot Administration as an Administration
which has flouted the Constitution of Cyprus, which
has gone against international requirements
and the
international rule of law and which has taken away my
community’s
rights. That is why the Cyprus problem
has existed for 20 years. Twenty years ago there was
no republic in the north. No trouble was created by
the Turkish Cypriots. Our rights were taken away; we
were thrown out of the Government. We have been
defending our rights; that is why UNFICYP
has been in
Cyprus for 20 years.

48. It is therefore a source of satisfaction to us that the
Secretary-General states in his report that he has been
able to convene a high-level meeting in January. In
view of the fact that this high-level meeting between
the President of Cyprus and Mr. Denktas has been
convened, I shall, for obvious reasons, refrain from
touching upon the substance of the matter. I shall confine myself to joining, with satisfaction, in the cautious
optimism voiced by President Kyprianou in his statement of 12 December.

56. This mistake about the parties who are going to
talk should not be made. If it is made, it becomes my
duty to correct it. I am sorry to have started my taIk in
this way.

49. I should like, however, in this context, to extend
to the Secretary-General my Government’s
deepest
appreciation and sincerest thanks for his dedication and
efforts, which have been untiring indeed.

57. Our consent is required for the extension of the
mandate of UNFICYP for another six months, Today
we expressed personally to you, Mr. President, our
inability to give that consent; I must now explain it to
the Security Council. The reasons are well known;
I have just stated what they are. In the resolution just
adopted, mention is made of the Cyprus Government.
We do not accept that it exists. It is we who live in
Cyprus, and our opinion must be taken into account.
Since we are confronted with this unacceptable resolution, it is unavoidable that we should not give our
consent. But under the same rules and in the same way
we have tried to accommodate UNFICYP-the
value
of which we know better than anyone else-in Cyprus,
we shall continue to accommodate it on the territory of
the Northern Republic as we have done since 1983.
I must thank the Commander of UNFICYP
and all his
forces, who are co-operating fully with the authorities
of my Government in the north. We have no problems
at all between us. They can and will stay in the north,
with the consent and agreement of my Government and
under the procedure we followed during the past six
months.

50. My Government most earnestly wishes the crucial
round of negotiations to be conducted between President Kyprianou of Cyprus and Mr. Denktav in the
course of their meeting in January, under the auspices
of the Secretary-General, to lead to a fair and viable
solution of the Cyprus problem, on the basis of the
provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
so that the people of Cyprus, free from outside interference, may seek a future that will compensate them
for the tragic circumstances in which they have laboured in the past years.
51. I should like also to express my Government’s
deep appreciation for the way in which UNFICYP
is
carrying out its difficult and delicate task. Particular
thanks in this respect go to Major-General
Greindl.
Finally, I express my Government’s gratitude to all the
troop-contributing
countries which have offered contingents of their nationals or otherwise made their contribution, thus allowing the United Nations to carry out
its peace-keeping task in Cyprus.
52. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Rauf
Denktas, to whom the Council has extended an invitation in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a place at the CounciI
table and to make his statement.

58. I have little to say about the report of the Secretary-General, except to point out two minor mistakes
which crept into the report, for which I am sure the
Secretary-General
bears no responsibility.
I mention
them because the report has to be right. The second
sentence of paragraph 49 reads in part, “The purpose of
these talks was to address with both sides a number of
substantive elements”. I merely point out the mistake;
1 am sure that is not what the Secretary-General meant
to say. It can be corrected. Similarly, there is a mistake
in paragraph 50, where reference is made to “President

53. Mr. DENKTAS:
I thank you whole-heartedly,
Mr. President, for allowing me to speak at this crucial
stage of the Cyprus problem.
54. Because of certain statements that have been
made here today, I must make it clear that the summit
6

Kyprianou”.
In the context of the talks we had with the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Kyprianou was not the President; he was Mr. Kyprianou, the leader of the Greek
Cypriot community, and I was the leader of the Turkish
Cypriot community.
If titles are to be given, they
should be given to both sides. I understand that this was
a mistake, and I mention it only for the record.

prus, the mandate to listen to you, to put the minimum
requirements on the table for you to agree upon, and
then to conclude them at a summit meeting?” It was to
those questions that we said, “Yes.”
64. We attended all three stages with good will and
with an ardent desire to see the end of the artificially
created Cyprus problem, which has threatened my people for two decades and which continues to threaten
them. We helped the Secretary-General
at all stages
and accepted his draft agreement for a comprehensive
settlement of the problem,

59, Before I go on to state in detail the views of my
people about the exercise which the Secretary-General
has carried out so carefully and diligently and brought
to a successful end, I should like to thank Mr. Javier
Perez de Cuellar for his untiring efforts and for the
diplomatic skill he has displayed in the course of his
current initiative, which resulted in the convening of a
joint high-level meeting between the two sides. His
first-hand knowledge of the Cyprus problem, his total
dedication to a negotiated peaceful solution of the conflict and the trust he has evoked in all Cypriots will, I am
sure, contribute to further progress and ensure that his
initiative will be crowned with success.

65. The stage of negotiations has ended with this third
round of proximity talks, and the draft agreement prepared and presented by the Secretary-General must
be submitted as it is, for conclusion, for the official
approval of the two leaders at the next summit meeting.
No rewriting, no modification, no addition can be made
on the text of this draft agreement. The only point, as
far as we are concerned, that remains to be discussed
pertains to certaindates that it was agreed to fill in at the
high-level meeting. As the Secretary-General
underlined on many occasions and as has also been explicitly
and clearly specified and stipulated in the text itself, the
draft agreement constitutes, with all its components, an
integrated whole. By its nature, this draft agreement is
not open and does not allow for the introduction of
reservations of any kind. With good will, I am sure
the draft agreement can be concluded and sent to the
working groups and can work for the peace of Cyprus.

60. I must also thank Mr. Hugo Gobbi, who, while
serving his native country in another important post,
continues to be the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative. Mr. Gobbi’s past long and valuable service, his dealings with us and his sincerity in the search
for a diplomatic settlement have undoubtedly contributed to the present favourable developments.
61. Our sincere thanks go also to the Acting Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus,
Mr. James Holger, for the skilful and patient way in
which he has been carrying out his duties in Cyprus. He
has the appreciation of my people. Our thanks go also to
the Commander of UNFICYP,
Major-General
Guenther Greindl, and to the men under his command for the
way in which they have been carrying out their duties,
for their full co-operation and for their sincere dealings
with the authorities of the north. Finally, I should like to
convey our warm appreciation and sincere thanks to
Mr. Brian Urquhart, Mr. Virendra Dayal, Mr. George
Sherry and Mr. Giandomenico Picco for their long and
tireless efforts and hard work in the Secretariat, all of
which has contributed to the present constructive and
hopeful developments.

66. I am sure that the Secretary-General will conduct
the high-level meeting of 17 January 1985 fully mindful
of the juridical requirements stemming inevitably from
the very nature of the draft agreement which he himself
has introduced. I repeat that throughout these talks
we gave the Secretary-General
our full support in his
efforts to bring about a just and permanent peace, provided the basic principles of a bi-communal, bi-zonal
federal solution were adhered to. We shall continue this
most constructive attitude as long as the draft agreement which we have made here continues to be honoured by the Greek Cypriot side.
67. I must, before concluding, thank the representative of Pakistan, who has very lucidly put forward to
the Council the position of the Turkish community and
the efforts we have made for peace, and who has also
evaluated the effect of our Declaration of Independence on the ensuing course of events. We have not let
down our friends in the search for peace. We shallnot
let the Council down in our search for peace. We need
it. We have needed it for 20 years, and, I am sure, with
the help of the Secretary-General and with good will,
we shall achieve it very soon and the Cyprus problem
will no longer be on the Council’s agenda.

62. My sympathy goes to the family of Mr. Claude
Pilloud, who was a gentleman of upright character and
impartiality
who had begun to make headway on the
question of missing persons on both sides of the line and
whose untimely death truly grieves us.
63. The Secretary-General’s
final efforts towards a
peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem began in
Vienna in August 1984. He posed certain questions to
us, and it was as a result of our affirmative answers to
those questions that the proximity talks began. He
aimed at achieving a draft agreement for the summit
meeting between two leaders. His questions, in fact,
can be summarized as these: “Do you trust me? Do you
give me, as a person who knows everything about Cy-

68. With those words, I thank you, Mr. President, and
I hope that I shall not have another occasion to address
the Council, but, if necessary, I am sure you will give
me the opportunity to reply to anything else said about
7

tion of the two Cypriot communities. This had always
been a fundamental principle vigorously supported by
the Turkish Government.

the Cyprus problem. I thank you all and may God bless
you.
69. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I now call.

75. Secondly, the Secretary-General reiterated that
the good offices mission which was entrusted to him by
the Council stemmed from paragraph 6 of resolution
367,( 1975). That was a reaffirmation of essential importance.

70. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
[interpretation
from
French]: Mr. President, may I at the outset congratulate you on your acceding to the presidency of the
Security Council. I would like to assure you of our
conviction that you will discharge these important
responsibilities with much elegance, tact and wisdom.
It is also my brotherly duty to take this opportunity, a
solemn one indeed, to emphasize the age-old ties of
friendship existing between Egypt and Turkey, as well
as the particular ties which, rooted as they are in our
common heritage, will unite for ever our respective
nations across the Mediterranean.
May I also thank
you, Mr. President, for the exemplary impartiality
which you have displayed during the consuhations
which you held with the parties directly concerned in
connection with the resolution renewing the mandate of
UNFICYP.
Our congratulations are likewise due to the
representative of China, Mr. Ling Qing, who was so
diligent in his direction of the work of the Council
during the past month, when the mandate of another
United Nations force was renewed.

76. Thirdly, the Secretary-General
also reaffirmed
that the mutually acceptable basis for negotiations between the two parties in Cyprus remained unchanged.
The four components of that basis are the two highlevel agreements of 12 February 1977 [see S/12323,
para. 51 and’ 19 May 1979 [see S/13369, para. 511,
the opening statement of the Secretary-General of
9 August 1980 [S/14100, annex] and the United Nations
“evaluation”
paper of 18 November 198 1, which, asa
single indivisible whole, constitute the only valid foundation for a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
problem.
77. It was also on 15 June 1984 that theGovernmentof
the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus submitted to
the Secretary-General
a series of proposals of paramount importance which had the firm and total support
of my Government. At that time I made it clear that
these proposals should be studied with all the care they
deserved.

71. Before giving the view of my Government on the
resolution which the Council has just adopted, I should
like to make very clear our position on the efforts which
have been made to promote a reconciliation
between
the two Cypriot peoples, since this purpose can have
meaning only if it is accompanied by realistic diplomatic efforts designed to reach a final settlement to the
problem.

78. We would like to thank the Secretary-Genera1 for
his most recent report on the United Nations operations
in Cyprus, dated 12 December 1984, which gives a dear
summary of the important diplomatic activity in which
he had engaged since presenting the set of working
points to the representatives of both sides in Vienna on
6 and 7 August.

72. First and foremost, we are profoundly grateful to
the Secretary-General for the vital and extremely constructive part he played in the context of the mission of
good offices entrusted to him in paragraph 6 of Security
Council resolution 367 (1975). I refer to his formulation
and skilful presentation of a draft agreement on the
basis of previous mutually agreed formulations
for a
final, comprehensive settlement of all the problems of
Cyprus, through the establishment of a bi-communal
and bi-zonal republic based on the political equality of
the two associated peoples. The Government of Turkey
and I personally indeed admire his wisdom, his patience, his endurance and his distinguished qualities as
a seasoned diplomat, particularly his essential, deeprooted honesty.

it will be recalled that the Turkish
79. Undoubtedly
Cypriot side gave an affirmative response on 3 1 August
to the questions put by the Secretary-General
in
Vienna, once again indicating its political will and its
desire to get down to the important exercise indicated
in the working points.
80. ‘The Vienna working points represent the cornerstone of this important effort, the idea of which is to
give a new impetus to the search for a peaceful settlement to the problem of Cyprus. Consequently, it
would be appropriate for us to expatiate on certain
essential aspects of those points.

73. In this chamber six months ago (2547th meetinal.
I had occasion to state that in the oI%on of the TurkLh
Government the Secretary-Genera1 had, with his report
of 1 June 1984, made a signal contribution
to efforts to
bring about a negotiated settlement. In my statement
I singled out the three essential points made in that
report.

81. In Vienna, the Secretary-General
once again
spelled out the main documents which indicate the
principles outlining a possible settlement and stated
that it would be possible on this basis to proceed as soon
as possible to the establishment of a federal republic
which would be both independent and non-aligned, bicommunal as far as the federal constitutional
aspect
was concerned, and bi-zonal from the territorial aspect.
He also suggested that the constitutional
pro+

74. First, the Secretary-General had indicated that a
final settlement should involve the creation of a federa8

sions agreed on during the intercommunal
and 1982 be reaffirmed.

talks in I981

single whole, with a view to bringing about a comprehensive settlement of the Cypriot problem. Mr. Denkta9 did not stoop to delaying tactics or making declarations of intent which were deliberately vague and
misleading, He remained faithful to his solemn promise
that the talks would be kept confidential. He did not in
any way try to divert or undermine the efforts of the
Secretary-General.
He negotiated with a spirit of constructive compromise, and in all good faith, with honesty, generosity, and magnanimity. It is he, and I think
I may be bold enough to say he alone, who essentially
contributed to the present outcome of the extremely
laudable efforts of the Secretary-General.

82, This point of departure was entirely in keeping
with the Turkish Cypriot and Turkish position on what
would be a valid basis for the realization of the final
goal, which could only be a federal, bi-communal and
bi-zonal settlement, based on the equality of political
status of the two communities. We are, therefore, very
gratified at the fact that these fundamental principles
were duly underlined.
83. The working points which in the eyes of the
Secretary-General
represented an indivisible
whole
comprised: first, measures of political confidencebuilding which would be irreversible and reciprocal;
secondly, the establishment,
starting with the formation of a transitional government possessing both
executive and legislative powers, of a federal governmental structure which would take into account the
equal political status of both communities, the unity of
the country and functional requirements; and thirdly,
the question of territorial arrangements between the
two parties making up the federation. Certain other
specific issues relating to articles in the two highlevel agreements were also referred to by the Secretary-,
General.

87. Now the entire Turkish people of Cyprus quite
naturally are awaiting the unequivocal acceptance by
its opposite numberof the draft agreement initiated and
prepared by the Secretary-General,
as it appears after
the third round of proximity negotiations.
88. Let us hope that a new Federal Republic will
shortly be founded and will continue to exist imbued
with a mutual spirit of reconciliation and’co-operation
between the two peoples of the island, who will finally
coalesce in order to form the legitimate Government of
their country.
89. Let us hope that we are equal to the task of rapidly
advancing towards a comprehensive
political settlement in Cyprus. Since the destruction of the bi-communal State and of the legitimate and legal Government
of the Republic in December 1963-almost
exactly
21 years ago-this
is now the long-awaited moment
when the Turkish and Greek peoples of Cyprus can, if
they so wish, take this opportunity to reach a final and
comprehensive settlement.

84. The proximity talks, which were conducted in
three stages, starting on 10 September 1984 in New
York, by the Secretary-General with the leaders of both
Cypriot sides, were intended to corroborate these
working points as constituting an indivisible whole, in
order to pave the way for a draft agreement to be
submitted for conclusion as soon as possible at a highlevel meeting which would be held under the auspices
of the Secretary-General at an appropriate time. There
can be no doubt that these talks provided a responsible
and valid framework within which to establish a comprehensive draft agreement which, were it to be finally
concluded, would indeed be likely to lead to a just and
lasting settlement of the Cypriot problem.

90. We are fully aware of the supreme importance of
the stage that lies ahead of us. We are also sufficiently
realistic to recognize that a true reconciliation between
Turkish Cypriots and Greek~Cypriots
will take time,
while they embark upon a new experience of association, and that mutual trust will grow and flourish only if
it is nourished by the good intentions of both sides and if
there is no repetition of the errors of the past.

85. Today, my Government is gratified to be in a
position to state that the Turkish Cypriot side from the
very outset has always done everything it can to work
for the success of these talks. Indeed, no words can
adequately describe the statesmenlike qualities which
were evinced by Mr. Rauf Denktas and his colleagues,
who have made it possible for the high-level meeting to
be held on 17 January 1985, making giant strides in their
efforts to reach a compromise. This is an attitude which
undoubtedly required bold and flexible decisions on a
number of issues of vital importance.

91, A just and lasting settlement in Cyprus is one of
the main purposes of Turkish foreign policy and has
been so for the past three decades. If the draft agreement were concluded at a high-level meeting between
the leaders ofboth sides under the auspices of the
Secretary-General, it would be a compromise to which
my Government
would not fail to give its firmest
support.

86, World public opinion will always remember the
Turkish Cypriot leaders, particularly Mr. Denktag,
and will have occasion to pay them tribute for having
been the first to have had sufficient courage, at the
beginning of the third stage of the proximity talks, to
indicate their total political desire to accept all the
elements contained in the draft agreement prepared and
presented by the Secretary-General, which constitute a

92. We await the concludina of an agreement at the
high-level meeting shortly to be held under the auspices
of the Secretary-General and at the direct negotiations
which will take place thereafter in working groups
so that the text of a final settlement can be drawn up
and acted upon. My Government will support and give
sincere encouragement to all efforts designed to con9

tribute to the achievement of the goal, which is the
establishment of a federal, bi-communal, bi-zonal and
non-aligned republic. We are and will continue to be
convificed that all the other parties concerned should
act likewise. It is also our expectation that all other
States wilt respect the agreement to be concluded between the two parties in Cyprus and adjust their own
positions accordingly.

these was represented by persons claiming any State
authority. The same will be true of the high-level
meeting of 17 January next year. However, despite this
fact, which has been so frequently repeated by the
Secretary-General and is reiterated in his report, it is,
to say the least, surprising to see-and,
moreover,
in the section dealing with these contacts-that
the
leader of the Greek Cypriot community is referred to
as “President”.
The Security Council is sufficiently
familiar with the Turkish Cypriot and Turkish position
regarding the imputing of this title to the leader of the
Greek Cypriot community. Furthermore,
that leader
did not participate in that process while using that false
title. My Government has tried to swallow this very
regrettable error which crept into the report since we
are quite convinced of the true position of the Secretary-General in this connection. Nevertheless, my
Government believes that such errors should not be
repeated in the future.

93. Having said that, I feel it is incumbent upon me to
set forth a few thoughts that my Government regards as
essential concerning the nature of the draft agreement
to be submitted for conclusion at the high-level meeting
to be held on 17 January.
94, Speaking before me, Mr. DenktaS made it abundantly clear that the negotiation stage terminated with
the conclusion of the third round of the proximity talks
and that the draft agreement prepared and presented by
the Secretary-General should be submitted as it now
stands for the official approval of the two leaders. No
modification or addition to that text of the draft agreement is possible. The only point in abeyance concerns
certain dates which the two leaders agreed could be
filled in during the high-level meeting.

99. To revert to the resolution on UNFICYP just
adopted by the Security Council, I am forced to note
once again, unfortunately, that it is far from heeding the
report of the Secretary-General or reflecting the decisive stage reached in the process of seeking a final
solution to the problem of Cyprus. Like the previous
resolution [resofulion 553 (1984)], this one not only
refers-in
the fourth preambular paragraph-to
provisions which the Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus and Turkey have never accepted but prolongs a
mandate which has been made almost archaic by radical changes that have occurred in the mean time+

95. Secondly, the draft agreement, as has been repeatedly stated by the Secretary-General
and as is
expressly specified and stipulated in the text itself, is,
together with all its components, a single whole. By its
very nature, this draft agreement completely rules out
the entering of any reservations of any kind. Furthermore, the text makes no provision for the introduction
of reservations.

100. Furthermore, we have a fundamental objection
to that resolution. It is based on a supposed authorization from a self-styled governmental entity that has had
no genuine or juridical existence since December 1963.
This entity, the so-called Government of Cyprus, has in
the course of the last 21 years never been the bi-communal Government established in 1960 jointly by the
Greek and Turkish Cypriots in accordance with the
Constitution negotiated at that time, which provided for
the participation
of both communities in State bodies
and functions within a bi-communal
State-in
other
words, the State system of the Republic of Cyprus,
based on equal association of the two sovereign communities of the island, which jointly exercised their
right to self-determination
by mutually consenting to
the creation under an international treaty of the Republic of Cyprus on the basis of the unalterable Basic
Articles of its Constitution.

96. It is this draft agreement, with all its elements and
without any exceptions, to which the Turkish Cypriot
community gave its full and unreserved support before
the end of the proximity talks, as is indicated by the
Secretary-General in his report. The Turkish Cypriot
community is even now prepared to convert the text of
this draft into a high-level agreement if the other party is
finally aware of the imperative need to act in this way,
97. On instructions from my Government, I declare
that Turkey fully shares the position of the Turkish
community in Cyprus on this point. There can be no
doubt whatsoever that the Secretary-General will conduct the high-level meeting on 17 January with full
respect for the juridical requirements which are inevitably involved because of the nature of the draft agreement which he himself has put forward.

101. There can be no doubt that the agreement to be
concluded at the high-level meeting and its implemenlation as a result of direct negotiations between the two
communities will require the allocation of new responsibilities to UNFICYP. Those responsibilities will flow
directly from the agreement we hope the two communities will conclude by 17 January of next year.

98, I should be remiss if I did not present here certain
reflections on the report of the Secretary-General.
As
the Secretary-General has pointed out quite aptly in
section V of his report, since the meetings of 6 and
7 August, which led to the proximity talks which began
on 10 September and were concluded on 12 December,
this process that he initiated has taken place between
two negotiating parties: the Turkish Cypriot community and the Greek Cypriot community.
Neither of

102. It was our hope that the present resolution would
reflect the important step taken in that direction rather
10

than create further legal obstacles to the extension of
the UNFICYP mandate. We hope that next time we will
no longer have to confront such an untenable situation
and that a solution will no longer depend on the good
will of the Turkish side alone. In this connection
I should like to draw the Council’s attention to the
fact that since December 1983 the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus and Turkey have not accepted the
resolutions on UNFICYP.
It will be recalled that on
13 December 1974 [181&h meeting], in response to a
question raised by the representative of Turkey, the
Secretary-General described the Turkish Cypriot side
and Turkey as two parties directly concerned with this
problem.

The Turkish Government is in complete agreement
with that position and would itself confirm that the
contacts between the Turkish authorities in Cyprus and
UNFICYP
will continue to take place on the basis of
that Turkish Cypriot declaration.
107. In conclusion I would once again very warmly
thank the Secretary-General
and express to him our
deep gratitude. I would once again express our appreciation to Major-General
Guenther Greindl, Commander of UNFICYP,
and to his staff, as well as to
Mr. James Holger, Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Cyprus, and to his colleagues
-without
overlooking Mr, Hugo Gobbi, Special Representative, who in the recent past has contributed
so effectively and so honestly to bringing about
international understanding of the truth of the Cyprus
situation.

103. Nevertheless, in order to accede to the wishes of
the Secretary-General,
who in his reports considered
that maintenance of the peace-keeping force on the
island remained essential to create the conditions most
favourable for the search for a settlement to the problem, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus continued to go along with the presence ofaforce entrusted
with keeping the peace on the island and continued to
co-operate with it. That co-operation is based solely
on decisions taken by the Government of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus. Turkey quite naturally
supported that position. In other words, two of the
parties directly concerned have for exactly one year
not given their agreement to relevant Security Council
resolutions because of the context in which they were
adopted. However, the two parties in question have so
far demonstrated their good will and have shown sufficient indulgence to permit UNFICYP to continue its
activities.

108. I cannot conclude this statement without paying
a tribute to the memory of the late Mr. Claude Pilloud,
who, as the third member of the Committee on Missing
Persons since its creation, diligently played a part
in efforts to deal with that unfortunate aspect of the
problem.
109. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Cyprus
has asked to make a statement, and I call upon him.
110. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): I shall be very
brief. For obvious reasons, I will not reply to the first
remarks of Mr. Denktaa. The initiative of the Secretary-General is going on, and this is a time to concentrate our efforts on the success of the high-level
meeting, not for acrimony. In any event, the records of
the Security Council on the question of Cyprus contain
in extenso our replies to these much-repeated remarks.

104. Today, they are agreeing to maintain that position for the next six months to contribute to finding a
peaceful solution to the problem of Cyprus. Nevertheless, it must be admitted that if the Secretary-General’s
draft agreement were to take the form of a high-level
agreement it would be absolutely essential to find some
legal foundation acceptable to everyone for the presence and activities of that Force, since its functions
would thereby be considerably increased. We therefore
expect that a resolution taking that new situation into
account will be submitted to this body in June 1985.

111. With regard to the proximity talks, on 13 December a spokesman of my President issued the following
statement:
“A spokesman for the President of the Republic of
Cyprus, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, referring to certain
statements made by Mr. Denktas, stated that as
far as President Kyprianou is concerned his understanding with the Secretary-General
is absolutely
clear, and it coincides with yesterday’s statement
of the Secretary-General
to the press and with his
written report of today’s date to the Security Council”-that
is, document S/16858. “President Kyprianou feels that anything that might tend unnecessarily to complicate matters should be avoided in
order that the difficult task of the Secretary-General
be facilitated. President Kyprianou feels that all concerned should concentrate seriously on the effort to
achieve progress towards a solution of the Cyprus
problem.”

105. The present resolution has been totally rejected
by the Government of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. Turkey therefore rejects it for the same
reasons.
106. As the Government of the Turkish Republic
Northern Cyprus has stated on many occasions,

of

“The principles, scope, modalities and procedures
for co-operation between the authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus can only be
based on decisions taken by the Government of the
Republic of Northern Cyprus alone.”

112. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Greece
has asked to make a statement, and I call upon him.
11

-

118. The PRESIDENT:
Greece.

113. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): I would like to
express a certain degree of surprise at the language and
tone of certain statements with regard to the outcome of
the proximity talks.

119. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): I want to make it
absolutely clear, beyond any doubt whatsoever,
that I never had the intention of speaking for the
President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou.
Nor was what I said any attempt to express his views.
Mr. Moushoutas, the representative of Cyprus, has
expressed the views of his Government
ably and
cIearly . But since I am participating in this debate as an
interested party, in the same capacity in which the
representative of Turkey is participating,
I thought
I had the duty of conveying to the Security Council
certain impressions I had gained from the statements by
the Turkish side.

114. As I stated earlier, my Government earnestly
hopes and wishes that in January the final round of
negotiations will prove fruitful to the benefit of both
communities
in Cyprus. But it seems to me strange
-and I feel obliged to draw the Council’s attention to
this-that President Kyprianou is apparently expected
to come to New York in January and be presented with
a document on a take-it-or-leave-it
basis, and then be
asked to sign it. And if he does not sign it or if he asks
for some clarifications, or if he wishes to make some
amendments within the context of a dialogue, then he
will be considered as a negative element, denying the
agreement. That is the impression conveyed by the
statements.

120. The PRESIDENT:
Mr. DenktaS wishes to
make a further statement. With the consent of the
Council, I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make that statement.

115. To us, the natural outcome of a dialogue must
always be the product of mutual agreement. It is natural
to expect that the proximity talks will conclude in the
spirit of a dialogue which will solve remaining points of
difference, with a view to achieving the much-hopedfor result: a final agreement.
116. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

I call on the repiesentative

I call on the representative of

I want to say only one thing,
121. Mr. DENKTAS:
on the interpretation of the document which has been
presented to us and which we have agreed to take up at
the summit meeting. We are in full agreement with the
thoughts and views of the Secretary-GeneraI and we are
going there to conclude this agreement. The SecretaryGeneral himself has described the third round of the
talks as the final round, prior to the summit, or highlevel, meeting. The negotiating process has therefore
ended, and we are going to conclude this agreement.

of

117. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey) [inteupretalion
from
French]: The Greek Cypriot representative has just
read out a statement that was made on behaIf of
Mr. Spyros Kyprianou. While we feel that there are
serious omissions in that statement, 1 must acknowledge that it does not hinder the continuation of the
Secretary-General’s
efforts or the success of the
high-level talks. But I must add that I hope that the
representative of Greece is not speaking on behalf of
Mr. Spyros Kyprianou.

There are no other names on
122. The PRESIDENT:
the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

12

HOW

TO

United
world.

Natwns
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
ma!, be obrained
l’rom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United
Natrons.
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
mondc
entier.
Inl’ormer-vous
aupres
dcs YC~I~S. New York ou Gcntve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

PURLICATlONS

DES

NATIONS

sonr en vente dons les librairies
de votre lihreire
ou adresser.-vous

PUBLICACIONES

LX publicaciones
de lus Naciones
todas partes
del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICA-ITONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estao en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijasc
a: Naciones

@03oa

UNIES

et tea apences
a : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNlDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Section
de Ventas,

90-61313-January

1993-2,050
