General Assembly--Forty-second Session

254

10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the right of the
people of Guam to the natural resources of the Territory.
including its territorial waters, and to establish and main
tain control over the future development of those n>
sources, and requests the administering Power to take the
necessary steps to protect the property rights of the people
of the Territory;
11. Reaffirms the importance of continued efforts by
the territorial Government, with the support of the admin ·
istering Power, towards promoting the Chamorro language and culture;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Guam at
an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assem
bly at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December /987

42/88.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly.
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 35
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Deccmbc1
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
American Samoa, in particular General Assembly resolution 41 /23 of 31 October 1986,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to American Samoa, 40
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards the
full implementation of the Declaration in respect of
American Samoa,
Noting the continuing process of constitutional reviews.
through consultations with the people and through the
work of a constitutional review committee,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Recalling the dispatch in 1981 of a United Nation~ visiting mission to the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and considering that the possibility of sending
a further visiting mission to American Samoa at an appro·
priate time should be kept under review,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American
Samoa; 28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countrie~ and Peoples:

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographica 1 location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exernse by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to American
Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to take all necessary
steps, taking into account the rights, interests and wishes
of the people of American Samoa as expressed freely in
conditions leading to real self-determination, to expedite
I he process of decolonization of the Territory in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Declaration and reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness among the people of
American Samoa of the possibilities open to them in the
exercise of their right to self-determination and independence:
5. Calls upon the administering Power to consider
favourably the expressed request of the people of American Samoa to appoint the Chief Justice and other memhers of the judiciary of the Territory themselves;
6. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, to promote the economic and
~ocial development of American Samoa and calls upon the
administering Power to intensify its efforts to strengthen
and diversify the economy of the Territory and to make it
more viable in order to reduce its heavy economic and financial dependence on the United States and to create
more employment opportunities for the people of the Terntory:
7. Expresses the hope that the development planning
process initiated under the first five-year development plan
will he strengthened;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of American Samoa to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective measures to ensure their right to own and dispose of those
resources and to establish and maintain control of their future development with a view to creating conditions for a
halanced, diversified and viable economy;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue to promote close relations between the people of the Territory
and the neighbouring island communities and to facilitate
co-operation between the Government of American
Samoa and the regional institutions in order to enhance
the economic and social welfare of the people of the Territory:
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
dispatch of a further visiting mission to American Samoa
at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power. taking into account, in particular, the
wishes of the people oft he Territory, and to report thereon
f() the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987

42/89.

Question of the United States Virgin Islands

The General 4ssembly,
Having considered the question of the United States Virgm Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
, he Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
