A/62/PV.53

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

53

rd plenary meeting
Monday, 19 November 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Cyclone in Bangladesh
The President: Before proceeding to the items on
our agenda, I should like, on behalf of all the members
of the General Assembly, to extend our deepest
sympathies to the Government and the people of
Bangladesh for the tragic loss of life and material
damage that have resulted from the recent cyclone.
May I also express the hope that the international
community will show its solidarity and respond
promptly and generously to any requests for their help.
Agenda items 48 and 116 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/62/L.11/Rev.1)
The President: I would like to call the
Assembly’s
attention
to
draft
resolution
A/62/L.11/Rev.1, in particular that it has also been
issued under agenda item 54, “Sustainable
development”.
Members will recall that, at the second plenary
meeting on 21 September 2007, this item was allocated
to the Second Committee for its consideration. If there

is no objection, the General Assembly will take action
on draft resolution A/62/L.11/Rev.1 also under agenda
item 54.
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/62/L.11/Rev.1, entitled
“Overview of United Nations activities relating to
climate change”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.11/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/62/L.11/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 62/8).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 48 and 116.
Agenda items 71 and 72
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/62/324
and Corr.1)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/62/72,
A/62/83, A/62/87 and A/62/323)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-60309 (E)

*0760309*

A/62/PV.53

(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Report of the Secretary-General (A/62/310)
(c) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/62/82)
(d) Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
Report of the Secretary-General (A/62/467)
Draft resolution (A/62/L.12)

Assembly and be considered in plenary in the future as
part of the humanitarian cluster, with a special focus on
economic assistance.
In a statement, delivered earlier this year, the
President of Ukraine, Victor Yushchenko, stressed that
the Chernobyl issue affected the whole country, and he
insisted that the polluted zone should be developed,
calling it
“not only the area of tragedy but also the land of
vast opportunities ... . This territory must not be
forgotten. We want to see this land alive and
revived”.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine to introduce draft resolution
A/62/L.12

The draft resolution before us today (A/62/L.12)
is a platform for further action to optimize the
international response to the aftermath of the
Chernobyl disaster. This document, based on the
Secretary-General’s biennial report, takes stock of the
progress made so far and seeks to map out further the
plans for immediate assistance. It recognizes the
importance of strengthening international cooperation
on Chernobyl.

Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretariat for the report submitted
under agenda item 71(d), entitled “Strengthening of
international cooperation and coordination of efforts to
study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”.

It is essential to emphasize that Member States
welcome efforts of the international community to
complete construction of the shelter facility and related
nuclear safety projects at Chernobyl, in accordance
with international standards, to transform the site into a
stable and environmentally safe state.

United Nations humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance has been acquiring growing importance in
the light of an increasing number of humanitarian
threats and challenges. We proceed from the necessity
to ensure comprehensive and coordinated responses to
humanitarian situations. It is important to preserve the
fundamental principles of humanitarian assistance —
namely, neutrality, humanity, impartiality, respect for
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States.

We pay special attention to the proposal by the
UNDP “to coordinate the drafting of a United Nations
action plan for Chernobyl recovery to 2016” in order to
implement the Decade of Recovery and Sustainable
Development of the Affected Regions, the aim of
which is to maximize limited resources, avoid
duplication of effort and build on recognized agency
mandates and competencies.

Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of
sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General (A/62/310)

Ukraine attaches utmost importance to the role of
the United Nations, particularly that of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), in the
strengthening of international cooperation in mitigating
and minimizing the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster. It is essential to ensure that the United Nations
strategy for Chernobyl is implemented in an effective
and timely manner. Ukraine strongly believes that,
given the scope and magnitude of the Chernobyl
catastrophe and its severe long-term consequences, this
issue should remain on the agenda of the General

2

While cordially thanking all delegations for their
support in bringing this draft resolution to consensus,
we kindly request that delegations consider sponsoring
it as well.
We appreciate the contributions made by all
Member States and organizations of the United Nations
system, as well as representatives of civil society, the
private sector and the donor community, towards the
development of cooperation to mitigate and minimize
the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

The Government of Ukraine remains fully
committed to cooperating with the other two affected
States, as well as with all international partners, to
mitigate the legacy of the Chernobyl tragedy.
Since the Chernobyl disaster has affected many
parts of the world, it is important that we continue to
study its consequences in order to enable humankind to
never forget the bitter lessons of the past.
Mr. Godinho (Portugal): First of all, I join in the
expression of sympathy expressed by you,
Mr. President, in respect of the recent tragic calamity
in Bangladesh.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Serbia, as well as the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.
The European Union wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for the reports submitted for
consideration under this agenda item. The EU would
also like to express its solidarity with all those affected
by humanitarian emergencies in the last year. We wish
to pay tribute to the courageous humanitarian field
workers who risk their lives to bring assistance to those
in need.

United Nations in promoting a coherent international
response to humanitarian crises.
The issue of access is central to all humanitarian
work. The lack of access and the obstruction of aid,
including bureaucratic obstacles, continue to raise
concern. We all have a collective responsibility to
guarantee that people in need receive assistance. The
European Union wishes to strongly urge all
Governments and parties to conflict to ensure rapid,
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
and protection of affected populations. We also
condemn attacks against humanitarian personnel and
once again call for the need to hold accountable those
responsible for perpetrating illegal acts. Bringing
perpetrators to justice is vital, and stronger action must
be taken to end impunity.
The European Union calls for an immediate end
to violence against civilians, including sexual and
gender-based violence. Effective measures for
prevention, as well as for protection of and support to
victims of gender-based violence, must be put in place
by Member States. In addition, we strongly encourage
the integration of a gender perspective into
humanitarian operations.

Events this year, the most recent being the
humanitarian and security crisis in the Sudan, and in
the Darfur region in particular, as well as the crises in
Chad and the Central African Republic, have again
highlighted the importance of an immediate and
coherent response by the humanitarian community as a
whole, as well as the need for enhanced cooperation
and collaboration with national and local governments.

Regarding refugees and displacement, the EU
notes with great concern that the number of refugees
around the world has increased this year to almost
10 million. Furthermore, the number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) continues to grow at an
alarming rate, totalling almost 24 million worldwide at
the moment. We believe that protection of and
assistance to IDPs should be comprehensively
strengthened. The EU, therefore, welcomes the role of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees as a cluster — lead in this regard and
looks forward to further cooperation with the United
Nations on this issue.

The
principles
of
humanity,
neutrality,
impartiality and independence remain the cornerstones
for the provision of humanitarian assistance, as does
the need to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
Through its future consensus on humanitarian aid,
which we expect to be endorsed by the end of the year,
the EU reaffirms that its humanitarian action should be
needs-based and respect these humanitarian principles.
We also reiterate our commitment to continued support
for the central and overall coordinating role of the

The EU is committed to the advancement of a
humanitarian reform agenda for the promotion of a
more predictable and effective humanitarian response.
The Union strongly supports the cluster approach and
hopes to see further progress in the rollout of clusters,
both at the global and field levels, particularly in
ongoing emergencies. The cluster system can help
bridge gaps in sectoral capacity, avoid duplication and
improve response capacity through the pooling of
efforts and resources. In this context, and while
acknowledging that there is always room for

07-60309

3

A/62/PV.53

improvement, we are pleased with the initial feedback
from the field and call for a joint effort to inform local,
national and regional authorities about the operations
and benefits of the cluster approach. We also call on
States to respond to the final appeal for building global
humanitarian response capacity launched in April of
this year.
On a separate point, the humanitarian/resident
coordinator system is key to a successfully coordinated
humanitarian response at the country level. The
European Union welcomes recent initiatives which
seek
to
strengthen
the
humanitarian/resident
coordinator system such as the establishment of a
humanitarian coordinator pool, as well as better
recruitment and training practices.
Recognizing the benefits of the effective
engagement and coordination of relevant humanitarian
actors, the European Union continues to support and
further encourage the establishment of partnerships
with local actors and non-governmental organizations,
as well as with the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement. While fully taking into account
the specificity of actors and their diversity, we consider
that the interaction and close involvement of NGOs,
for example, is very important. In effect,
non-governmental and community-based organizations
are in many cases the first to respond in crises and play
a key role in humanitarian response.
The European Union believes that the roles and
responsibilities of actors in the United Nations system
working with the transition from relief to development
should be strengthened, both in natural disaster
situations and complex emergencies. In that context,
we believe that the Peacebuilding Commission can
make an important contribution to a coordinated
response by the United Nations to States emerging
from conflict, as we have seen in the cases of Burundi
and Sierra Leone. The European Union remains
committed to the work of the Commission and looks
forward to further work in defining areas of the addedvalue it can provide.
On funding, the EU welcomes the upgraded
Central Emergency Response Fund which has played
an important role in enabling quicker and more
effective responses to humanitarian emergencies. We
are pleased to see that over 75 countries have
contributed to the Fund. The European Union, for its
part, remains committed to the stipulated target of $500

4

million by 2008. Regarding the United Nations
Consolidated Appeal Process — further efforts must be
made in order to provide more inclusive and better
coordinated needs assessments.
Indicators of emerging crises and needs
assessments should be prepared in cooperation with
other humanitarian actors and should be reliable,
accurate and timely. The European Union encourages
further improved priority setting, including in the
consolidated Appeal Process. United Nations
humanitarian agencies should also develop common
mechanisms for compiling and reporting more robust
data on humanitarian needs, on assistance and on the
performance of humanitarian organizations in meeting
demonstrated needs through the use of standards and
indicators. Without accurate data and properly assessed
needs, humanitarian actors will be at risk of not being
able to provide the most suitable and best equipped
response to crises.
In recent years, natural disasters have caused
more victims and devastation than man-made crises.
Just as an example, this year has seen 13 flash appeals
for natural disasters, which is three more than the last
annual record. According to some statistics, the number
of people threatened by natural disasters increased by
three times over the last 30 years, and the number of
people affected by natural disasters has doubled every
10 years. In that respect, we take note of the recent
launch in Geneva of the Global Humanitarian Forum
and the intention. in the initial phase of its work, to
focus efforts on the humanitarian impact of climate
change.
Events this year, especially in Africa, have once
again brought to our attention the potential devastating
effects of natural disasters and highlighted the
importance of an urgent and coherent response by the
humanitarian community as a whole. For these reasons
and others, the European Union attaches great
importance to developing and sustaining disaster risk
reduction, preparedness and response capacity at all
levels. Lessons learned have shown us that, in the
aftermath of a disaster, more lives are saved when
response teams can deploy immediately, particularly at
the local and national levels.
To that end, the European Union urges States to
implement the priorities set out in the Hyogo
Framework for Action, as well as to incorporate
disaster reduction efforts into sustainable development

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

and poverty reduction strategies. Early warning
mechanisms must also be improved and expanded as a
matter of priority. States must invest more in disaster
preparedness and risk reduction.
As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
the impact of heavy flooding in Mozambique in 2007
was significantly less than in 2001 thanks partly to
improved community preparedness, the introduction of
an early warning system and improved national and
international coordination, including through the use of
military assets.
Allow me to take special note of the positive
references made in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/62/310) to the progress achieved in Rwanda, taking
into account the special needs of orphans, widows and
victims of sexual abuse from the Rwandan genocide.
We also wish to underline the importance of a wellsupported solid transition from relief to development.
Finally, and on the issue of the Chernobyl
disaster, the European Union is pleased to note that the
Secretary-General’s report (A/62/467) makes reference
to the many efforts and improvements that have been
achieved in the past couple of years. As such, we feel
that the issue of Chernobyl and the relevant draft
resolution (A/62/L.12) would be more appropriately
pursued in the development sphere as opposed to the
humanitarian cluster where it is currently placed.
The European Union fully accepts the need to
make the international humanitarian response system
more predictable and effective. We also encourage
further efforts to adhere to the principles and best
practices of good humanitarian donorship. The
European Union will continue to play its part, not only
in responding to emergencies as they occur but also in
strengthening the international community’s capacity
to respond.
In that regard, we would like to thank the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their efforts.
The past year has posed many challenges to the
humanitarian community. We have a duty to continue
our collective efforts to improve the effectiveness of
humanitarian response, always to the benefit of the
people in need.
Mr. Tsalko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of the Republic of Belarus, I have the honour of
thanking the Secretary-General and the United Nations

07-60309

for the report prepared for our consideration, entitled
“Optimizing the international effort to study, mitigate
and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster” (A/62/467). The information in the report
fully reflects the activities of the international
community on Chernobyl problems, as well as the
coordinating role of the United Nations Development
Programme.
The report enables us to evaluate the various
elements of the actions taken and the activities
undertaken through international cooperation on
Chernobyl and the great number of events that have
taken place in that sphere over the past two years. Most
importantly, the report describes the development by
Belarus of a new stage of cooperation on Chernobyl.
The basic elements of that stage include not emergency
humanitarian assistance but rather comprehensive
rehabilitation of the polluted territory, including
restoring socio-economic activity and meeting the need
to establish safe living conditions for individuals and
to develop of the regions affected.
The information in the report on the joint
programmes carried out by the Republic of Belarus,
agencies of the United Nations system, other
international organizations and foreign countries very
convincingly
illustrates
the
timeliness
and
effectiveness of the transition to development.
Belarus welcomes the beginning of the
implementation
of
the
initiative
to
assess
environmental and security problems in Eastern
Europe, which includes an international cooperation
project to study the environmental effects of radiation
from the accident by taking advantage of the potentials
of the Polesie State Radiology Preserve and to revive
the International Chernobyl Research and Information
Network.
The Republic of Belarus is very grateful for the
holding, on 28 April 2006, of a special General
Assembly meeting devoted to the twentieth anniversary
of the Chernobyl disaster. That was a further
illustration of the international community’s resolve to
mitigate the consequences of the catastrophe.
Belarus notes with satisfaction that there has been
steady improvement in living conditions in the region
affected by the catastrophe. Nevertheless, 20 per cent
of the area contaminated by radioactivity is home to
more than 1.3 million persons — among whom the
incidence of illness is rising, especially thyroid

5

A/62/PV.53

problems. The Chernobyl catastrophe has had an effect
on all human activity, including in the areas of
production, culture, science and the economy.
Agriculture has been especially affected, with 2,640
square kilometers of cropland removed from
production. There were 123 sites producing minerals
and other raw materials in the contaminated area. More
than 2 million cubic metres of timber production has
been lost. The demographic situation in the Chernobyl
region has been severely damaged. These and other
problems add a heavy burden to our economy.
The environmental and economic rehabilitation
of the most affected areas constitutes our
Government’s main concern. More than 1 million
hectares of agricultural land require constant attention
in order to ensure clean foodstuffs that meet norms. We
are also working to improve specialized medical
assistance for those affected by the disaster. Another
priority in our socio-economic policy is gas supply. We
must also work to supply the affected population with
adequate drinking water and to restore contaminated
settled areas, where we have to build schools, hospitals
and preschools. We also have to improve the legislative
basis for minimizing the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster, so as to ensure targeted financial
support by the Government and the establishment of
favourable economic conditions for the development of
the affected areas.
A planned and systematic approach must be
developed to address those problems. We have
therefore developed a national programme to overcome
the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster to cover
the period 2006-2010. In that regard, the national
budget will include a line item of $1.6 billion. The
national Government is now spending about $1 million
daily to that effort.
The Republic of Belarus takes note of the fact
that the provisions of draft resolution A/62/L.12 to
strengthen
international
cooperation
and
the
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and minimize
the effects of the Chernobyl disaster reflect the
consistent, systematic and constructive approach of the
international community to activities aimed at
overcoming the consequences of the Chernobyl
catastrophe. We welcome the appeal by the General
Assembly to the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Coordinator of International Cooperation on
Chernobyl for continued efforts to enhance the
coordination of international efforts in this area.

6

Our country is especially pleased about the
positive reaction and support of the international
community for the proposal of Belarus to designate the
third decade after Chernobyl as the decade of recovery
and sustainable development of the affected regions
and we welcome UNDP’s initiative to coordinate work
on drafting a plan for the decade. That initiative was
proposed by Belarus to ensure planned cooperation on
the problem of Chernobyl among the Governments of
the three most affected countries, scientific groups,
international organizations and foreign countries. Joint
preparation and implementation of the plan for the
decade will enable us to avoid duplication of effort and
expenditure that is inevitable when so many
participants are working to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.
In addition to the decade initiative, the meeting
held on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the
Chernobyl disaster also featured an appeal by the
General Assembly for Belarus to join the United
Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation. Unfortunately, this matter has not been
decided yet. Given the amount of experience and
scientific information that Belarus has accumulated on
the issue of atomic radiation as a result of Chernobyl,
we believe that the participation of our experts in the
Scientific Committee would be of great use to the
entire international community.
The Republic of Belarus would like to take this
opportunity today to thank all its international partners
for their support for our country’s activities in
overcoming the effects of the Chernobyl disaster. We
express the hope that our joint efforts will serve to
minimize the negative consequences of the disaster on
the lives and health of those in the most affected areas.
It is also very important to prevent the possibility of
similar accidents in the future and to ensure the
environmental safety of the planet as a whole.
Mr. Sallam (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
have the pleasure of thanking the President and the
other members of the Bureau for guiding our work. We
are also grateful to the Secretary-General for the
reports he has provided on the item under discussion
on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
assistance of the United Nations.
Human and property losses caused by natural
disasters and conflicts in recent years, in a number of
developing and developed countries alike, and the

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

international response and solidarity that followed to
help affected States has led us to believe, without a
shadow of a doubt, in the importance of international
solidarity and cooperation in order to cope with such
catastrophes, mitigate their destructive effects and
assist victims to return to normal lives as soon as
possible. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia therefore
reaffirms the central role of the United Nations in
coordinating
and
strengthening
emergency
humanitarian and relief assistance in the long term.
Saudi Arabia appreciates the efforts of the
Organization and all those who work in the area of
humanitarian assistance.
We would like to emphasize the need to
implement the recommendations emanating from
international conferences dealing with this issue. That
should be done through a comprehensive approach that
addresses all stages — beginning with early warning
and
including
the
provision
of
assistance,
reconstruction and development. It should also include
measures to help poorer States to strengthen their
national capacities and cope with natural disasters and
the repercussions of war.
Based on its concern to discharge its
humanitarian responsibilities vis-à-vis victims of
catastrophes and epidemics, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia has always contributed to United Nations funds
and programmes entrusted with this mandate. Saudi
Arabia has also made additional contributions as needs
arose. Direct contributions have been given to the
victims of disasters in coordination with many
specialized international organizations. The Saudi Red
Crescent Society had distributed in timely fashion over
the past three years $361 million for assistance in
providing humanitarian services. The Society has
acquired distinct experience in this area, and we are
very proud of it.
The humanitarian aid provided by Saudi Arabia
has not only been limited to bilateral and direct
channels and means but has been extended to regional
and international efforts through competent funds and
international development institutions. This aid has
totalled about $24 billion. Saudi Arabia has also
contributed to international efforts to eradicate poverty
and hunger, including economic and financial
assistance, through various Saudi Arabian funds and
regional and international organizations in the context
of bilateral agreements with developing countries. All
of this is out of our firm conviction that this kind of

07-60309

emergency and development assistance, which is
beneficial to all humanity, is indispensable to peaceful
coexistence and constructive cooperation and
solidarity. Saudi Arabia has therefore provided
favourable development assistance in cash and kind,
through bilateral channels, totalling over $83.7 billion,
which is about four per cent of our gross national
product. This is the highest percentage of aid in the
entire world.
Eighty-seven developing countries from all
continents have benefited from our assistance. This aid
has strengthened long-term economic and social
development, helped rebuild infrastructure and
provided support for education, health, water,
agriculture, well-drilling, dam-building and other key
sectors. In terms of debt alleviation, Saudi Arabia has
cancelled more than $6 billion worth of debt for the
poorest developing countries.
Addressing with a serious and realistic attitude
the sense of frustration and despair of citizens of the
poorer countries because of poverty, hunger, disease,
illiteracy and indebtedness, requires us to deepen the
principles of humanitarianism, equality, justice and
sustainable development in their health, educational,
economic and social dimensions. This is all to
strengthen international peace, stability and security.
This calls for a genuine partnership and mutual
development pact between the North and the South.
In addition to their dire need for official
development assistance, the indebtedness of the poorest
and medium-income countries should also be
addressed. Foreign direct investment and the transfer of
technology to developing countries must be carried out
in a serious fashion in order to liberate international
trade and ensure international economic growth.
To guarantee the provision of oil, Saudi Arabia
has increased its production capacity which, as
everyone knows, is a very expensive endeavour. Saudi
Arabia has also hosted a forum on energy in Riyadh —
a context for negotiation and cooperation between
producers and consumers in order to stabilize oil
markets, since oil is an important strategic product that
is crucial to international economic stability. Saudi
Arabia, in this context, is participating, as a signatory
of international instruments to protect the environment,
in every international effort to protect the environment,
positively, within the principles of common
international action, including the Kyoto Protocol.

7

A/62/PV.53

Saudi Arabia is working to ensure that the world
takes the required measures to protect the environment,
on the one hand, while protecting global economic
growth on the other. We believe that the continuing to
development of technology and energy is the key to
coping with environmental problems, in particular
climate change. The international community must take
the necessary measures to confront this problem, in
keeping with common, but differentiated responsibility,
between developed and developing countries, as set out
in the Convention on Climate Change.
Ms. Smith (Australia): The international
community is faced today with a formidable level of
disasters and emergencies, both in scale and number.
These humanitarian emergencies wreak havoc on
nations and communities, threatening economic growth
and undermining development, including the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. It
is our duty to seek to prevent and respond to
humanitarian crises. It is also our responsibility to
ensure accountability for the impact of our assistance.
At the same time we are facing new challenges, such as
climate change, that continue to add complexity to the
planning and delivery of humanitarian action.
Australia strongly supports the key role of the
United Nations in providing leadership and
coordination of international humanitarian action,
especially the role of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
reports
on
strengthening the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations and on
the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), both
of which are informing our discussions and
negotiations at this General Assembly.
We have, on a number of occasions, commented
positively on the humanitarian reform agenda and the
steps the humanitarian system, under OCHA’s
leadership, have taken to improve the coordination,
capacity, funding and partnerships that underpin
effective humanitarian action. But we consider it is no
longer correct to point to the cluster approach,
strengthening of humanitarian coordinators, and
mechanisms such as CERF as new approaches or
reforms. These are all now integral and fundamental to
humanitarian action and how the humanitarian
community operates. Lessons are still to be learned and
efforts to improve humanitarian response even further
must continue. To that end, we look forward to the

8

independent review of CERF and external review of
the cluster approach.
All of us who are engaged in humanitarian action
must strive to ensure that what we do is as effective as
possible and is based on needs. This requires resources,
people with the right skills in the right places at the
right time, strong and effective coordination of effort,
appropriate tools, proper accountability and risk
management, and strong and clear leadership.
Supporting this must be the objective of the General
Assembly as well as the Economic and Social Council.
The best response system in the world is useless
if affected communities cannot be reached.
Fundamental to saving lives in any emergency is rapid,
safe and unhindered access by humanitarian personnel
and to goods and services to people in need. Without
access, lives cannot be saved. This is simply
irrefutable. The safety of humanitarian personnel in
emergency response is also critical. Too many
humanitarian workers’ lives are lost in the line of duty
each year. We pay tribute to those who have died while
seeking to protect the lives of others. We urge more
practical measures, such as encouraging recipient
States to work closely with organizations delivering
humanitarian aid, to facilitate access and to protect
humanitarian personnel.
Another critical humanitarian issue that requires
our urgent attention is the protection of civilians.
Australia calls on all Member States and other actors,
especially in armed conflicts, to prevent violence
committed against civilian populations and to
effectively respond if and when such acts occur.
Australia is particularly concerned that gender-based
violence, especially sexual violence, continues to occur
at alarming levels in emergency situations. Such
violence must be prevented and stopped wherever it
occurs or has the potential to occur. Perpetrators of
such violence must be apprehended and brought to
account, and the survivors must be given the care and
support that they need and deserve.
Our doctors tell us that prevention is always
better and easier than cure. This fact is as true in the
humanitarian field as it is in health care. Australia
considers disaster risk reduction, which includes
prevention, mitigation and preparedness for natural
disasters, as an important priority for humanitarian and
development assistance. In this regard, we commend
the Hyogo Framework for Action and its programme of

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

work. Implementation of the Hyogo Framework helps
build the resilience of nations and communities to
disasters and advocates for the integration of disaster
risk reduction into legislation and development
planning. Building on Hyogo, we welcome the
inaugural meeting of the Global Platform for Disaster
Risk Reduction in June of this year. This forum
provided support for the dissemination of disaster risk
reduction best practices and the promotion of
partnerships
among
States,
non-governmental
organizations and the private sector for developing and
supporting strategies to implement the Hyogo
Framework for Action. We encourage further work in
this critical area.
Australia is a strong supporter of humanitarian
action and the role of the United Nations therein. We
are active in supporting prevention, risk reduction and
emergency response, and will continue to work to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
humanitarian action. As I said previously, the
humanitarian challenges facing the international
community are formidable. This reality makes our
efforts to strengthen our ability to respond all the more
critical. We look forward to working with the United
Nations, especially OCHA, and all Member States, as
we continue to do so.
Mr. Al-Ajran (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Today
we are discussing an important item on the agenda of
the General Assembly, namely, “Strengthening of the
coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance”.
During the last year, the United Nations, through
its various specialized agencies, programmes and
offices, has played an outstanding role in facilitating the
transport and delivery of urgent humanitarian assistance.
We share the deep concern expressed by the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/62/87) regarding the increase in the
number and intensity of natural disasters compared with
previous years, where the damages caused by these
disasters have led to a direct effect on the lives of 143
million people and economic losses surpassing
$34 billion. We pay our condolences to the Government
and the people of Bangladesh over the latest disaster, the
hurricane that struck Bangladesh, caused thousands of
deaths and resulted in millions of refugees.
My country wishes to convey its gratitude and
appreciation to all those providing humanitarian

07-60309

assistance for all their sacrifices. It also expresses deep
concern over their targeting and threats aimed at them
in zones of natural disasters and conflict. We call upon
all countries that host humanitarian workers to exert all
necessary efforts to ensure the safety of these
international staff, and also commend the proposal of
the Secretary-General to set forth preventive plans,
exchange information and conduct risk assessments,
since such an approach will guarantee the safety of the
United Nations staff in the field.
The State of Kuwait is at the forefront of nations
providing relief assistance to those ravaged by natural
disasters. This assistance is presented in a direct
bilateral manner with the States or the regions
devastated, out of its firm belief in the necessity of a
quick response. During the last three years, Kuwait
provided financial assistance as follows: $250,000 to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to assist it
in confronting the effects of the flooding of September
2007; $500,000 to assist those affected by the typhoon
Yamin, which hit the Sindh and Balochistan regions of
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in July 2007;
$2 million to assist Somalia in combating the effects of
the flooding of July 2007; $500 million to assist in the
relief of those affected by hurricane Katrina in the
United States; $100 million to those affected by the
earthquake in South Asia; $100 million to the States
affected by the Asian tsunami disaster; and $300,000 to
some Caribbean States affected by hurricane Wilma in
November 2005.
The aid that Kuwait provides is full and
complete; no amount is discounted for transport,
handling and management. In this regard, I also wish to
mention that my country has also contributed the
amount of $200,000 to the Central Emergency Relief
Fund. Since its establishment, the Fund has responded
promptly to urgent appeals in emergency situations
and, while we commend its performance, we call upon
all States Member of the United Nations to increase
their contributions to the Fund in order to achieve the
desired declared goal of $500 million by 2008.
We affirm the importance of international
cooperation in implementing the commitments made to
the suffering Palestinian people; that is our
responsibility. Here, I would like to pay tribute to the
rapid intervention operations by the United Nations,
non-governmental organizations and the temporary
international mechanism, which have spent some $800
million on food, budgetary and monetary support in

9

A/62/PV.53

emergencies. I would also like to highlight the fact that
my country continues to extend assistance to the
Palestinians, both directly through the Palestinian
Authority or through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Our shared international cooperation cannot solve the
problems of the Palestinian people, and the assistance
is not the ultimate desire of the Palestinians, as long as
Israel continues its inhumane practices against the
Palestinian people in undermining all efforts made in
that respect and refuses to transfer the Palestinian
taxation levies it has collected, except for one transfer
that took place in 2007. These practices have added to
the worsening of the situation of the Palestinians.

coordination of actions of the many important actors in
humanitarian assistance are crucial elements for
achieving the best results.

We affirm the importance of cooperating with the
Secretary-General’s proposal to devise plans of disaster
readiness at all levels, update existing plans, and
enhance regular training for disasters of the magnitude
of Category 5 hurricane Hugo, which struck in 2005. In
this regard, we call upon Member States to strengthen
their roles and make early warning systems among the
priorities of their national, regional and international
plans for disaster management.

Governments have an important role to play in
ensuring availability of funds. We all know that
extensive delays in getting humanitarian assistance to
those in need can prove to be disastrous. For that
reason, predictable, fast and sound funding in the wake
of humanitarian disasters is of the essence.

Finally, I wish to indicate that the State of Kuwait
will continue to provide bilateral assistance through the
United Nations specialized agencies in order to
confront disasters and help rebuild through the efforts
of some national development institutes, such as the
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development and
other
Kuwaiti
charitable
organizations
and
associations. We look forward to a world where
everyone lives in security, stability and prosperity.

We welcome the improvements that have already
been made in humanitarian response, in which the
United Nations has a leadership role. We also
emphasize the need to continue on that path.
We thank the Secretary-General and the Joint
Inspection Unit for the recommendations made for
reform, which provides a good basis for our work. I
wish to underline that gender mainstreaming should be
considered as a cross-cutting issue from the earliest
stages of any reform.

The establishment of the Central Emergency
Response Fund has been very successful. It can
provide a reliable source of financing that helps
agencies on the ground to deal with problems quickly.
It is likely that the need for funds will increase, and
Governments have to intensify their efforts. We look
forward to the pledging conference to be held in
December.

Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): First, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for the reports provided
for this important session of the General Assembly. On
behalf of the Government of Iceland, I would like to
offer our sincerest condolences to the countries that
have experienced humanitarian emergencies. At this
very moment, our thoughts are with the people of
Bangladesh. I express our deepest sympathy to and
solidarity with the families of the victims and all those
affected.

Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) play a
significant part in humanitarian and development work.
The Government of Iceland has, therefore, decided to
double its contributions in 2008 allocated to
humanitarian and relief operations through Icelandic
NGOs and the Red Cross. The private sector is also an
important player in building up economic growth. We
plan to explore further innovative ways of working
with the private sector in developing countries. The
Government seeks to harness the energies and
efficiencies of NGOs and the private sector, strengthen
the pioneering work that they are doing and raise
public awareness of the situation in the poorest parts of
the world.

The international community learned important
lessons in the aftermath of the devastating tsunami in
the Indian Ocean in 2004. But we also learned that
reform of the humanitarian response was urgently
needed. We learned that available funds, impact
evaluation,
needs
assessment
and
effective

I would like to turn briefly to the issue of
assistance to the Palestinian people. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (A/62/82) on the issue,
which provides a good overview of the situation and
underlines the need for continued, and indeed
increased, assistance. The report highlights the role of

10

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

women. We all know that there are strong links
between women’s empowerment and poverty reduction
in general, as has been said so often. In cases of
humanitarian crisis, women and children are not only
the principal victims; women and girls are also
particularly vulnerable to various forms of abuse. We
therefore welcome the intensified emphasis in the
report on protection of women, children and other
vulnerable groups in crises.
In our debates within this institution we should be
careful not to lose sight of the purpose of our work.
What are the reasons behind the effort? As the VicePresident of the Economic and Social Council
responsible for the humanitarian affairs segment this
year in Geneva, I have been fortunate to have an
opportunity to work closely with very efficient experts
on the issue, both representatives from Member States
as well as from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other humanitarian actors. I
was impressed to learn how they focus more on the
why and less on the how — for example, which version
of a text to use. They realize that we are here to help
people in need and that we are here to save lives and
help people to survive disasters, and that the means
should not become the end. If we all continue to do our
work in this positive spirit, we will make a difference.
Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Secretariat for the documents it
has prepared for our discussions.
My delegation would like to reiterate here its
support for a clear division of labour between the
debates of the General Assembly and those of the
humanitarian segment of the Economic and Social
Council.
Preserving the ambit for humanitarian action is a
prerequisite for humanitarian assistance. However,
today we are seeing a shrinking of that space. Local
and international staff of neutral and impartial
humanitarian organizations have paid a heavy toll in
human life this year. Similarly, speedy, comprehensive
and unimpeded access to people affected by disaster or
conflict remains inadequate and unsatisfactory in many
respects.
A humanitarian environment is not a given and
has to be negotiated and secured through a joint effort
on the part of all stakeholders involved, especially in
complex emergency situations. International law —
and above all the Geneva Conventions and their

07-60309

additional protocols — as well as the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
and its Optional Protocol, include essential norms
regulating the arena for humanitarian action.
Unfortunately, those obligations are too often ignored.
Switzerland encourages the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to support efforts to preserve the space for
humanitarian action by actively facilitating access to
affected areas for operational organizations. We
strongly urge all States and parties to armed conflicts
to honour their obligations, authorize speedy and
unimpeded passage of all relief consignments,
equipment and personnel, protect civilian populations
and ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel. We
also underscore the unique nature of United Nations
humanitarian assistance, which should continue to be
independent, neutral and impartial.
The reform of the United Nations humanitarian
system, which began two years ago, has produced some
encouraging results. However, efforts to sustainably
bolster the capacity and effectiveness of the United
Nations system on the ground in all types of emergency
and under whatever administrative structure —
whether that of a resident or humanitarian coordinator
or, in the case of integrated missions, a special
representative of the Secretary-General — must be
redoubled. We also want this process put in a wider
context. The strengthening of the coordination of
United Nations emergency aid is a subject that
precedes this reform, and that will remain at the centre
of our concerns in the future.
The international humanitarian system is
comprised of several components that are both
independent of and complementary to United Nations
agencies — such as local and international nongovernmental organizations and the members of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.
In that regard, we are pleased that the organizers of the
thirtieth International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent, which will be held in Geneva from 26 to
30 November, have chosen “Together for humanity” as
the theme for that important meeting.
Although the reforms of the United Nations
humanitarian system initiated two years ago provide
clear guidance for improving operational aspects of
humanitarian coordination, there is much less clarity as
regards the normative evolution of humanitarian
policies and principles since the adoption of resolution

11

A/62/PV.53

46/182. An analytical evaluation of the normative
framework for humanitarian coordination may help us
to identify priority areas to focus on, including as
regards future resolutions of the General Assembly.
Such prioritization will make it possible to improve the
relevance and impact of resolutions addressing
humanitarian issues.
In a world of ever-changing vulnerabilities and
risks, the strengthening of national disasterpreparedness capacities deserves particular attention.
In keeping with the commitments set out in the Hyogo
Framework for Action 2005-2015, all participants in
the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction —
including Governments, regional organizations, the
Secretariat and the agencies of the United Nations, the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, the
international financial institutions, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector — must act swiftly
and together to help to attain the objective of reducing
for the long term the losses caused by disasters.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General in particular
for the report submitted in document A/62/87, which
will be very useful in our discussions.
At the outset, I wish to indicate that Peru firmly
supports United Nations efforts to strengthen the
coordination of humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief. Such efforts should be based on, inter alia, the
following pillars: observance of the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality in providing
humanitarian assistance; adherence to international law
in the work of humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel; and protection when
any act or failure to act hinders or prevents the
performance of their humanitarian functions.
In that connection, I should like to highlight a
number of strategic guidelines that my delegation
considers fundamental. First, we must take a
comprehensive and systematic approach. Secondly, we
must promote a culture of timely and unrestricted early
warning. Thirdly, we must improve rapid-response
capacities, recognizing the key advantages of local
actors, who are closest to disasters. Fourthly, we need
preventive measures, including public education
activities, as well as preparation, mitigation and
recovery efforts and programmes aimed at, inter alia,
rehabilitation, reconstruction, restoring authority and
the rule of law, developing sustainable ways to make a

12

living and establishing conditions that promote
development. Fifthly, we must promote North-South
and South-South cooperation, participation by experts
and the transfer of practical technology and knowledge.
Sixthly, we must define the respective roles of States,
the Organization and its relevant organs, other
international
organizations
—
including
the
international financial institutions — regional
organizations, local Governments, communities, the
military, experts, non-governmental organizations, the
business community and the media, among other civil
society actors. We must also improve their capacities.
We agree with the report’s diagnosis of the
current world situation. Indeed, the increasingly
devastating effects of disasters are due to a real
increase in the number of natural events and to the
increased exposure and vulnerability of populations to
the destructive effects of disasters. Climate change,
swift and unplanned urbanization and greater
population density, inter alia, are contributing to that
trend. In that connection, if we are to break the new
vicious circle of constant human and material losses,
environmental and social degradation and increasing
vulnerability, we believe it essential, as indicated in the
report, that the international community work towards
a disaster management approach that addresses the
interconnectedness of threats and vulnerabilities.
In part III of the report, on enhancing the
effectiveness of needs-based humanitarian assistance,
it is indicated in section D, on broadening humanitarian
partnerships, that private companies have continued to
emerge as important relief partners. Our country, Peru,
can attest to that. As a result of the earthquake that
occurred on 15 August of this year, we witnessed the
broad and generous mobilization of the entire
population, but particularly of private companies,
which played a key role in providing materials, food
and assistance in the first moments of the emergency.
In that regard, we agree with the report, which points
out that as the private sector becomes an increasingly
important partner, efforts must be made to adapt the
United Nations regulatory environment to facilitate
public-private partnerships.
Finally, we wish to express our agreement with
each of the points set out in the conclusions contained
in the Secretary-General’s report, particularly
regarding the need to organize regional responses to
disasters. Accordingly, we should like to highlight the
project Support for Disaster Prevention in the Andean

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

Community, which is the outcome of a financial
agreement signed in 2003 by the European Union and
the General Secretariat of the Andean Community. Its
overall objective is to help reduce the vulnerability of
persons and property exposed to the dangers and risks
of natural disasters and to promote sustainable
development in the countries of the Andean
Community. It is included in the regional disaster
prevention and management policies reflected in the
Andean disaster prevention and management strategy
and the corresponding strategic plan for 2005-2010.
In conclusion, I wish to express once again the
gratitude of the Government of Peru to the Resident
Coordinator of the United Nations Development
Programme in Lima and, through him, to all relevant
agencies of the United Nations system for the
invaluable assistance provided in so many ways when
the earthquake struck the southern part of my country
on 15 August.
Mrs. Thakur (India): I come from the land of
Gautam Buddha, Swami Vivekananda and Mahatma
Gandhi, all of whom stood for the essential oneness of
all human beings, which is the ethical basis for the
United Nations and its humanitarian assistance. I am
therefore pleased to participate in this debate today.
We thank the Secretary-General for the reports
that have been prepared for the discussions on this
agenda item. We note the factual nature of the reports,
which identify some areas for improvement. We
request the Secretary-General to enhance the analytical
content of future reports.
All countries are vulnerable to disasters. Nations
can, and indeed must, cooperate to find collective and
cooperative solutions to the challenges that disasters
represent. It is therefore heartening that, in recent
years, Member States have come together to promote a
more responsive, prompt, fair and needs-based
humanitarian assistance system.
India welcomes the Central Emergency Response
Fund (CERF) as a non-political collaborative
instrument that supports developing countries in times
of need. India demonstrated its support for CERF by
pledging a contribution of $2 million to the Fund at its
launch in New York last year; those funds have already
been disbursed. Our contribution was a sign of
solidarity with international efforts aimed at addressing
the needs of developing countries for emergency
humanitarian assistance. It reflected our conviction

07-60309

that, through this reform measure, the United Nations
would be better able to assist developing countries in
the aftermath of a disaster by making resources
available in a timely and predictable manner, and by
allocating them evenly across emergencies. It is
through the Fund’s performance and even-handed
approach to requests for assistance that it will continue
to attract the support of Member States and donors. It
is therefore extremely important that CERF retain a
high degree of performance and credibility.
The report of the Secretary-General on CERF
(A/62/72) states that the Fund has promoted early
action and response to reduce loss of life, and that
progress has been made towards achieving its
objectives. The report provides details of the
expenditures from CERF. It would also be useful to
know, in tabular form, the details of all requests
received for funding, the proportion of funding
provided in each case and the criteria used for the
allocations. We look forward to such detailed and
analytical information in the forthcoming independent
review that will examine the functioning of CERF over
its first two years.
In handling disasters, it is important to have
coherent national strategies and national capabilities to
handle both disaster prevention and disaster
management. The development of necessary national
capabilities must be the starting point of a disaster
management strategy. India has a forward-looking
approach to disaster management and mitigation. We
have constituted a National Disaster Management
Authority, chaired by the Prime Minister and statelevel disaster management authorities. The Authority
has come forward with a new approach to disaster
management that is based on moving away from a
relief-centric, post-event approach in favour of a
holistic, integrated preventive approach. The focus will
be on disaster prevention, preparedness and mitigation.
Improved coordination among various agencies of the
Government is a first step in the new approach. Greater
awareness within civil society about prevention,
mitigation and preparedness is the next important step,
bearing in mind that lack of information and
uncoordinated responses hamper relief efforts.
While there is no substitute for effective national
efforts, a national response alone can sometimes be
inadequate. There is a need for more bilateral, regional
and international cooperation to deal with disasters and
to make effective use of our capabilities. Greater

13

A/62/PV.53

cooperation in relief and rehabilitation, in disaster
preparedness and in setting up and maintaining early
warning systems should be a part of the overall effort
to deal with disasters. Through CERF, we have
established a more reliable mechanism for saving lives
after a disaster and addressing the needs of
underfunded emergencies. However, greater efforts are
required for disaster prevention, risk reduction and
early warning so as to reduce the number of lives lost
to disasters.
Disaster risk reduction should be based on
proactive and pre-emptive action. Small investments in
improving the safety of houses, for example, can
reduce the risk of damage to life and property arising
from earthquakes. Valuable lives and property can be
saved through the use of appropriate housing
technologies in earthquake-prone areas. India is
developing affordable technologies of this kind. The
international community should address the need for
information-sharing in such technologies that would
help prevent disasters. This approach would be a useful
way of addressing the challenge of risk reduction.
Another intervention relates to low-cost insurance
against risk. The penetration of insurance in most
developing countries is still very limited. There is a
need for a proactive approach in insuring the riskprone regions through an approach that can spread the
costs and ensure the financial sustainability of risk
insurance mechanisms.
There is also a far greater need for focus on
recovery and development after a disaster. A strong
recovery effort that builds back better and pays due
attention to disaster prevention builds resilience to
future disasters. India contributes to the efforts of the
Group of 77 to highlight this issue by coordinating an
annual draft resolution on international cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development. We hope that greater
attention will be paid to post-disaster recovery, which
strains the capacities of most developing countries in
the post-relief period.
We take note of the report’s assessment regarding
improving the delivery of United Nations humanitarian
assistance, including through the improvement of
United Nations coordination activities at the field
level. The report highlights the cluster leadership
approach as an effort in this direction. We believe that
there is a need for an evaluation of this approach to

14

assess its impact on improving delivery of
humanitarian assistance, particularly its timeliness, the
additional expenditure that it entails and the
perspective of the receiving countries where this
approach has been implemented so far. This approach
should be implemented at the country level with the
consent and under the leadership of the national
Government of the affected State.
India believes that humanitarian assistance must
be provided in accordance with the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality, as contained in
the guiding principles for the provision of humanitarian
assistance contained in the annex to resolution 46/182.
We recall that the guiding principles require that the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of
States be fully respected and that humanitarian
assistance be provided with the consent of the affected
country and, in principle, on the basis of an appeal by
the affected country.
All humanitarian personnel, including those
under the auspices of the United Nations, must observe
the national laws of the countries where they are and
must remain sensitive to the customs and traditions of
the host State. They must function in a transparent
manner and carry out their assistance-related activities
through close consultation and coordination with the
affected Government. That is essential for the
credibility of international humanitarian assistance.
In accordance with Indian culture and philosophy,
we respect all nations and religions. We believe that the
world is one family. So, before I conclude, please
allow me to wish everyone — all of my family
members sitting here — the very best for the coming
festival season from me and from my country, India.
Mr. Savostianov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia attaches great importance to the
development of the humanitarian discourse in the
United Nations. We call for its further strengthening
and enhancement, and for the preservation of the
non-politicized nature of the endeavour. We support
efforts aimed at establishing an optimal division of
labour and effective working relationships among the
intergovernmental United Nations bodies involved in
this process.
We believe that the General Assembly should
focus on defining the parameters of the strategic
coordination of United Nations humanitarian activities,
the Economic and Social Council on developing the

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

practical aspects of General Assembly decisions and
the Secretariat on implementing the requests of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. The United Nations Emergency Relief
Coordinator should continue to react promptly to the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council requests, paying particular attention to
providing these bodies with objective information on
the humanitarian situation around the world.
In this connection, we take note that, in his recent
report on strengthening of the coordination of United
Nations humanitarian assistance (A/62/87), the
Secretary-General rightly emphasized the importance
of intensified international cooperation in the field of
national preparedness for natural disasters, with a view
to improving response and recovery capacities in the
context of achieving the agreed goals of the Hyogo
Framework for Action in the field of disaster risk
reduction.
There is today a growing demand for disaster
preparedness and early warning mechanisms. We
therefore support measures aimed at strengthening
contingency planning and preparing for disasters. We
believe it necessary to strengthen national early
warning, damage assessment and mitigation systems,
and to develop international cooperation to build up
national capacities in these areas. We support
international efforts to promote a global early warning
system for natural hazards of all types.
In our view, a promising area for cooperation is
in the formulation of measures for adaptation to
climate change. We are carefully studying proposals in
this area, and we reaffirm our readiness to participate
actively in the formulation of agreed approaches in this
field.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs is making great efforts to improve humanitarian
response
to
natural
disasters,
technological
catastrophes and complex humanitarian emergencies.
On the whole, we welcome its work. Not everything
here, however, is clear and transparent. For example, in
the case of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
working in close cooperation with the United Nations
and in partnership with the United Nations, including
in the area of security, and at the same time claiming to
be independent, it is not clear to whom they are
responsible and accountable. Independence should not
mean lack of accountability.

07-60309

We believe that the United Nations-NGO
partnership agreements can and should provide for
mechanisms of NGO accountability to the United
Nations. This is fully consistent with the task of
ensuring coherence and coordination in the work of all
organizations involved in humanitarian assistance with
the leading role played by the United Nations. In the
absence of accountability, it is difficult to ensure
responsibility; that could lead to a situation in which a
humanitarian mandate authorized by a recipient
Government, on the basis of which a given NGO
operates in the country, becomes a formal cover-up for
activities inconsistent with that mandate. Moreover,
this would undermine the concept of humanitarianism
as the willingness of the strong to help the weak.
We look forward to the Secretariat’s assessment
of the implementation of the so-called cluster approach
in pilot countries, with an emphasis on the United
Nations family’s interaction with non-governmental
humanitarian organizations in the field.
The establishment of the Central Emergency
Response Fund has proven to be among the most
significant results of our common efforts to improve
the humanitarian response machinery. We welcome the
Fund’s activities during the first 18 months of its
existence in its improved format. We anticipate that the
independent review of the Fund’s activities will be
issued next year. In that review, particular attention
should be paid to the criteria for allocation of the
Fund’s resources. I would also like to underline that it
would be useful for the review to reflect the principles
of interaction between the Fund and other United
Nations financial mechanisms, in particular the
Peacebuilding Fund, through which money is being
channelled to the recipient countries. From our point of
view, it is essential to avoid duplication of efforts and
to maintain transparency in the criteria for the
allocation of funds.
The importance of the compromise reflected in
the fundamental resolution 46/182 cannot be
overestimated. The guiding principles for the provision
of United Nations humanitarian assistance that are
enshrined in it are essential for any activities in this
field, so as to maintain their credibility for all
countries.
Today, the representative of Ukraine introduced
for action by the General Assembly a draft resolution
(A/62/L.12) on the strengthening of international

15

A/62/PV.53

cooperation and coordination of efforts to study,
mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster. More than 20 years after the
tragedy this problem remains relevant, as its
consequences continue to seriously affect the health of
people and the environment, and to hamper the
sustained socio-economic development of the affected
territories of Belarus, Russia and Ukraine.
The Russian Government’s policy on Chernobyl
is focused on continuous assessment of the radiation
impact on current programmes for comprehensive
rehabilitation of these territories, to which Russia has
allocated more than $10 billion over the years. The
adoption of the draft resolution by consensus will
demonstrate the international community’s solidarity
with the work of the affected countries and its
willingness to continue devoting the necessary
international attention to the Chernobyl problem.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Traditionally, we acknowledge the special
catalytic and coordinating role of the United Nations
on this issue, in particular that of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). We are grateful to
the UNDP leadership for the high level of cooperation
that has been achieved in the implementation of our
common objectives, with a view to improving the lives
of people in the affected territories.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): It is my privilege to
participate in this important joint debate on
strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations. We
thank the Secretary-General for his various reports
under this agenda item.
Given the multidimensional aspects, I would like
to focus on issues of disaster preparedness and risk
reduction in the context of challenges posed by natural
disasters.
It is said that those who prepare in advance suffer
less in emergencies. The scale of damage in
emergencies is inversely proportional to the preventive
measures taken to deal with them. It takes time to
build, but seconds to destroy. It should therefore be our
joint commitment to strengthen capacity at all levels to
reduce the impact of disasters.
As indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/62/323), the number and scale of natural

16

disasters, particularly in the developing countries over
the past decade, are on an alarming increase. While we
cannot control the overpowering strength of natural
disasters, we can reduce their impact and the
devastation they cause. For that, we need to have in
place an efficient emergency response system capable
of handling large-scale disasters and mitigating their
negative impact. I would also like to draw attention to
humanitarian issues that used to be discussed during
every General Assembly session.
Vulnerabilities
are
accentuated
in
most
developing countries. The poverty-disaster interface
has the potential for immense suffering and loss. In the
long term, disasters have an adverse impact on the
economic and social development of the vulnerable,
especially the poor. Natural disasters severely impede
progress towards development goals including the
Millennium Development Goals. The 1994 Yokohama
Strategy, the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable
Development, and the Hyogo Framework for Action
2005-2015, provide frameworks for swift, systematic
and well-coordinated responses to disasters by building
the resilience of nations and communities to disasters.
If effectively implemented, those internationally
agreed frameworks could substantially reduce loss of
life and the impact on the social, economic and
environmental assets of communities.
Pakistan welcomes the establishment of the
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF). We remain
committed to the work of the United Nations, and,
accordingly, we will continue to contribute to the
CERF.
I would also like to share our national experience
in responding to a natural disaster of monumental
proportion. The earthquake that struck Pakistan on
8 October 2005 wiped out in a matter of seconds what
had taken many generations to build. That was a wakeup call for all of us. The world witnessed, minute by
minute, the devastation caused by the earthquake. The
loss of lives, bread-earners, livelihoods and
infrastructure was unprecedented for us. The entire
Pakistani nation came together to alleviate the
suffering of the victims. The magnitude of the disaster
was such that without international support we would
have seen more pain and suffering. We acknowledge
the outpouring of sympathy and assistance provided to
the earthquake victims. The United Nations system
played an important role in the coordination and
mobilizing of resources.

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

On behalf of the Government and the people of
Pakistan, I would like to thank each and every one who
helped us in the aftermath of the earthquake.
I would now like to focus on some aspects that
reinforced our belief in disaster preparedness. We were
confronted with a situation where we had to go beyond
the conventional disaster management model of
response, relief and recovery to a more holistic model.
That model included the processes of hazard
identification and mitigation, community preparedness,
integrated response efforts and recovery that had to be
undertaken contiguously within a risk-management
context to address issues of vulnerability.
First, we promulgated the National Disaster
Management Ordinance in December 2006 and
subsequently established the National Disaster
Management Commission and Authority. The Prime
Minister of Pakistan heads the National Disaster
Management Commission, and its members include
senior representatives from all provinces, leaders of the
opposition in the upper and lower houses of the
Parliament and representatives of the armed forces,
civil society and non-governmental organizations.
Secondly, the National Disaster Risk Reduction
Framework was approved by our Disaster Management
Commission in March this year. We are working
towards the implementation of priorities identified in
the National Disaster Risk Management Framework.
That requires aligning federal and provincial
coordination structures, capabilities and resources into
a unified, all-discipline and all-hazards approach to
domestic disaster management. For the first time, a
complete spectrum of disaster risk management
activities is brought together to include prevention of,
preparedness for and response to disasters. The system
will cover all sectors as well as all administrative
levels of the Government.
From our experience in the post-earthquake
phase, we have learned the following lessons.
First, the integration of disaster risk reduction
into all sectoral and national development policies and
practices is necessary for achieving sustainable social,
economic and environmental development. Secondly, it
is important to develop and strengthen institutions,
mechanisms and capacities at all levels, in particular at
the community level, that can systematically contribute
to building resilience against natural disasters. In most
disasters, provincial, district and local resources

07-60309

normally provide the first line of emergency response
and management support.
Thirdly, the communities play the role of first
responders in any disaster management and disaster
risk reduction. Community-based approaches offer
viable solutions for managing and reducing risks and
ensuring sustainable development. Fourthly, it is
important to build on people’s local knowledge, coping
mechanisms and cultural practices. We are convinced
that top-down disaster reduction interventions alone
are not sufficient. Fifthly, there is a need for the
systematic incorporation of risk reduction approaches
into the design and implementation of emergency
preparedness, response and recovery programmes in
the reconstruction of the affected areas.
Pakistan welcomes all efforts to strengthen the
work of humanitarian agencies and the United Nations
in meeting the challenges of natural disasters. In that
regard, we consider that the draft “Declaration relating
to basic tenets of humanitarian action in emergency
situations”, contained in document A/60/627 of
5 January 2006, is an important contribution to support
progress in the world’s preparedness to meet
emergency situations.
The Acting President: I now call on the observer
of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Before I deliver my
written statement, I just want to convey on behalf of
the Palestinian people and our leadership our deepest
condolences and to express solidarity with the people
and Government of Bangladesh following the tragedy
that has befallen them. We are sure that the
Government and people of Bangladesh will be able to
survive this tragedy and to move on with their own
plans and agenda.
I stand before you today to address a most vital
basis for continued Palestinian steadfastness towards
their future independence and statehood: international
assistance. For decades, international aid has helped
ease the suffering and hardships endured by an entire
people, more than half of whom have lived as refugees
for nearly 60 years now and the remainder of whom
have been living for more than 40 years under the
subjugation of an oppressive foreign military
occupation. The assistance that has been provided over
the years in the various fields, both through the United
Nations and as direct assistance to the Palestinian
people, has helped to alleviate the hardship of scores of

17

A/62/PV.53

Palestinians and Palestinian families. For countless
others, it has been the only source of survival and
sustenance throughout endless periods of instability,
crisis and uncertainty.
While the Palestinian people and its leadership
are deeply grateful for that invaluable assistance, we
believe it is imperative to ask ourselves the following
questions as we convene to discuss this issue today.
How much have we helped that assistance to reach its
full potential, and how much sabotage has the
international community endured to its sustained
assistance efforts? How many more internationally
funded projects and efforts are we willing to allow the
occupying Power to undermine and decimate as it
continues pursuing its illegal policies and practices and
continues deepening the humanitarian crisis, inevitably
forcing that assistance to go off track, from
development and State-building to relief and crisis
management? How much longer is the international
community willing to pay for the illegal acts of the
occupying Power by relieving the consequences of
those acts instead of bringing them to an end?
Numbers do not lie, and the latest figures
regarding the humanitarian and economic situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are astounding and tragic. In fact, all recent
reports have documented the enormous burden
international agencies are enduring in trying to address
the continuously emerging needs of the Palestinian
civilian population and to alleviate the crisis. At the
same time, all infrastructure projects, industries and
employment-generation projects have come to a
grinding halt because of the repressive and unlawful
measures imposed by the occupying Power, which have
turned the Palestinian people from a people seeking
development towards the birth of their future State to a
population sinking into abject poverty and struggling to
put food on the table and barely survive.
The latest report by the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia on the economic and
social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the
living conditions of the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and
of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan,
sums up the bleak situation as follows:
“The Israeli closure system remains a
primary cause of poverty and humanitarian crisis
in the occupied Palestinian territory, and restricts

18

Palestinian access to health and education
services, employment, markets and social and
religious networks.” (A/62/75, summary)
The closures, movement restrictions and the wall,
among other unlawful Israeli measures, have battered
the economy, destroyed thousands of livelihoods and
made thousands of families destitute. In that regard,
according to the International Labour Organization,
7 out of 10 Palestinian households, comprising
2.4 million people, are living in poverty in the
occupied Palestinian territory. A report of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) also addresses the extent of economic
devastation caused by Israel’s measures to the
Palestinian economy, concluding that the Palestinian
economy has been reduced to a size smaller than it was
a decade ago due to Israeli restrictions on movement of
Palestinian persons and goods. At the same time, the
trade deficit has reached unprecedented proportions of
73 per cent of the gross domestic product (GDP), 30
per cent higher than its 30-year average. The World
Bank monitoring report of September 2007 also noted
that, in 2006 alone, Palestinian GDP contracted by
nearly 8.8 per cent, and by a further 4.2 per cent in the
first quarter of 2007.
The picture is of course most bleak in the Gaza
Strip, where Israel’s crippling siege has managed to
bring the entire territory to the verge of collapse —
socially, economically, medically and in all other
aspects of life. This most brutal form of collective
punishment by the occupying Power of the Palestinian
civilian population, which undoubtedly amounts to a
war crime, has thus far been unaffected and unshaken
by international expressions of concern and calls for
cessation. Instead, Israel continues to tighten the noose
around Gaza and its population, choking life, hope and
the prospects of a dignified future out of that part of
the Palestinian territory, using illegal pretexts to cover
up its abhorrent crimes. In reference to Israel’s closures
and siege of Gaza, Mr. John Dugard, the Human Rights
Council’s Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, has stated that “it is a controlled strangulation
that seriously violates norms of human rights law and
humanitarian law”. Indeed, the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well as
countless other relevant instruments and provisions of
international law, are being gravely violated by the
occupying Power.

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

For months now, Israel has closed down all six of
Gaza’s crossings, significantly restricting and reducing
the amount and quality of goods allowed into Gaza and
ending the prospect of export from Gaza at the same
time. The effects have been devastating. Gaza’s export
agriculture sector is facing the most serious threat to its
existence as we speak because of that policy.
Additionally, tens of millions of dollars in
internationally funded projects, including construction
projects — such as projects worth $160 million in
necessary construction funded by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, UNDP and other agencies — have been
suspended. Additionally, a shocking 90 per cent of
Gaza’s industries have shut down their operations,
adding tens of thousands more Palestinians to the list
of unemployed and needy. The siege has raised prices,
sent living standards plummeting and forced
international aid organizations and donors to divert
their attention to providing Palestinians in Gaza with
their most basic needs, namely, food and medicine.
The World Bank has noted that the “pace of
capital flight has reached an all-time high in the last
two years, with almost no foreign direct investment”
because of Israel’s punishing policy of closure and
siege on the occupied Palestinian territory.
UNCTAD also notes a downward economic spiral
in the West Bank and Gaza, warning that this has
reinforced the momentum of de-development.
Meanwhile, the report of the Secretary-General on this
matter, which is contained in document A/62/82, while
seriously lacking in terms of political context, does not
address this situation in the context of the occupation
that exists. Nevertheless, the report states in paragraph
73 that
“The effects of these closures could not be
reversed with increased humanitarian assistance.
Development initiatives to improve the
Palestinian economy were expected to have
limited impact in an environment where intense
access restrictions prevailed.”
Therefore, despite a marked increase in aid
levels, socioeconomic indicators have continued to
show significant decline. UNCTAD’s report concludes
that the Palestinian economy has lost $8.4 billion in
potential income in five years, which is twice the size
of the Palestinian economy today. That should alarm us
all; for such potential income, combined with the

07-60309

losses incurred by
destroyed
or sabotaged
internationally funded projects and efforts, shows the
grave trap that Palestinian development efforts and
international assistance have actually fallen into.
The alarming situation I have just described is not
the whole picture. For over a year now, Israel, the
occupying Power, has not only tightened its punishing
siege but continues to illegally withhold hundreds of
millions of dollars in Palestinian tax revenues, further
curtailing the Palestinian Authority’s ability to function
normally and serve the Palestinian public. Despite the
disbursement of some of the withheld Palestinian tax
revenues, Israel continues to withhold a significant
amount, cynically using it as a political bargaining
chip.
Furthermore, the punishing sanctions imposed by
the international community on the Palestinian
Authority, combined with earlier disruptions in
assistance, have made a bad economic situation almost
catastrophic. The suspension of direct international aid
to the Palestinian Authority in early 2006 — which
resulted in limiting assistance to basically humanitarian
needs — and the bypassing of the existing mechanisms
for coordinating aid with the Palestinian Authority
have had lasting negative consequences. As a result,
although international aid through temporary
mechanisms has increased, that cannot alleviate the
long-term ramifications of Israel’s siege and closure.
Moreover, it is necessary to recall here the assessment
by the World Bank that the Palestinian Authority
achievements in transparency and accountability have
been undermined by donor mechanisms to sidestep the
Palestinian Authority.
Perhaps the devastating results and implications
of these sanctions were most aptly described by the
Special Rapporteur, Mr. John Dugard, who said in his
report,
“In effect, the Palestinian people have been
subjected to economic sanctions — the first time
an occupied people have been so treated. This is
difficult to understand. Israel is in violation of
major Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions dealing with unlawful territorial
change and the violation of human rights and has
failed to implement the 2004 advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice, yet it escapes the
imposition of sanctions. Instead, the Palestinian
people, rather than the Palestinian Authority, have

19

A/62/PV.53

been subjected to possibly the most rigorous form
of international sanctions imposed in modern
times”. (A/HRC/4/17, para. 54)
Moreover, the Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Ms. Karen
Koning AbuZayd, in a speech on 22 May 2007, also
said that
“There is a staggering irony in the contrast
between the universal commitment to poverty
eradication and the decision to impose on
Palestinians one of the most severe sanctions
regimes in recent history, thereby virtually
guaranteeing the widespread incidence of
extreme poverty”.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights that the
rapid interventions by the United Nations system,
temporary
international
mechanism
and
non-governmental organizations, which together
disbursed upwards of $800 million in emergency food,
cash and budget support, alleviated what could have
been a much worse situation. However, recent reports
by UNRWA, the World Food Programme (WFP) and
other agencies also note that despite this increase,
incomes have dropped while extreme poverty and food
insecurity have substantially increased.
In fact, approximately two thirds of the children
in Gaza now suffer from anaemia, that is, iron
deficiency. Let me repeat that: approximately two
thirds of children in Gaza today suffer from anaemia as
a result of this situation, and, 51 per cent of the
population in Gaza is food insecure. UNRWA and WFP
are providing food assistance to 1.1 million people in
Gaza, out of a population of 1.4 million. Mr. John Jing,
UNRWA’s Director of Operations in Gaza, has
described one of the consequences of this bleak reality
by saying that the 200,000 schoolchildren attending
UNRWA-run schools come to school “hungry and
unable to concentrate”.
International sanctions may now have been
partially lifted, but the long-term economic damage
arising out of the situation I have just described
remains. Hence, our responsibilities are tremendous
and the challenges that lie ahead are almost
overwhelming. But failure is not an option, and we
continue to rely on international action to support us in
addressing this critical issue, somehow reversing the

20

downward economic trend and meeting the continuing
needs of the Palestinian people in the meantime.
We wish to recall that in the meeting of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC) held in London in
2005, donors established new aid coordination bodies.
However, the effectiveness of those structures was
undermined by the aid boycott. Going forward, those
aid coordination bodies must be revitalized, especially
with the presence of the new Quartet representative,
Mr. Tony Blair, and his leveraging of those structures,
which could strengthen them considerably. We
welcome the results of the AHLC meeting held in New
York on 24 September 2007 and chaired by Norway,
which confirmed the commitment of the international
community to support the Palestinian Authority in
building strong and viable institutions. We look
forward to the meeting to be held in this regard in
December in Paris.
As the Palestinian Authority continues to find
itself facing a large deficit, significant debt and failing
revenues, which hinder its ability to plan for the fiscal
year ahead or to take charge of its planned economic
and other reform plans as a result of the situation I just
described, we attach high hopes and expectations for
the upcoming donor conference in Paris. In this regard,
we look forward to seeing a tangible translation of the
AHLC’s confirmation of the Palestinian Authority’s
Reform and Development Plan 2008-2010, which must
be regarded as a key test of true international support
of and commitment to Palestinian-driven institutionbuilding, recovery and growth. We hope that the
December conference will change the fragmented
nature of aid flowing into the West Bank and Gaza so
far — aid which has largely remained based on shortterm political positions rather than a collective, longterm view based on broader economic fundamentals,
which is what the Palestinian economic recovery needs
most.
The international community should not allow
Israel to continue to defy its obligations as an
occupying Power through the illegal policies and
practices that have led to the state of economic
regression Palestine now faces. It is incumbent upon
the international community to ensure that the
occupying Power does not continue attacking
internationally funded projects and aid workers with
impunity, as these repeated attacks have clearly
derailed the development process and frustrated
assistance efforts.

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

Indeed, the international community must
exercise its moral and legal authority by compelling
the occupying Power to cease its violations and end its
choking siege of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, which plunges Palestine into
hopelessness and deprivation. The cause of the utter
destitution Palestinians now suffer is known to all
parties concerned — it is the continued Israeli military
occupation. Thus, and as numerous international
organizations agree, full economic recovery and
rehabilitation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
which are the goals driving international assistance,
will only be possible when this occupation ends.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, on behalf of the United Arab
Emirates and its Government, I would like to extend
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Bangladesh over the severe loss of life and property
caused by the cyclone that struck that country recently.
We hope that international assistance will be extended
to Bangladesh to lessen the impact of this natural
disaster and to help the affected people there as a
matter of urgency. My country will assume its role in
that effort.
The reports of the Secretary-General on the items
before us forecast an increasing demand for
humanitarian activities from the United Nations and its
partners, the relevant non-governmental organizations
in the humanitarian field, in coming years. This is due
to the increase in the number and severity of natural
disasters, especially in developing countries, as a result
of
climate
change,
population
growth
and
environmental degradation. Their disastrous impact is
compounded by poverty, armed conflict, the spread of
serious diseases and the growing number of displaced
persons in many parts of the world. The result will be
additional assistance responsibilities for the United
Nations and its relevant entities, and a need for more
human and financial resources.
We commend the United Nations for its
humanitarian activities and its essential role in
mobilizing and coordinating international efforts to
provide humanitarian and relief emergency assistance
to millions in affected areas, and in easing the impact
of disasters caused by natural phenomena, wars and
armed conflicts, and we urge all Member States to
strengthen their cooperation with the Organization,
especially by fulfilling their financial commitments to

07-60309

the agencies and to other entities responsible for
humanitarian assistance.
We also urge Member States to build partnerships
with the United Nations to strengthen the necessary
humanitarian arrangements at the national, regional
and international levels. In this context, we reiterate
the importance of implementing the recommendations
of international conferences with respect to
formulating national and international strategies to deal
with disasters in all their stages, including early
warning, relief assistance, reconstruction and
development.
Developing countries should be responsible for
the implementation of these strategies at the local
level, and developed countries should meet their
commitments by taking all necessary measures to assist
developing countries in building national capacity to
deal with natural disasters and the repercussions of
war.
We further stress that, in time of war or natural
disaster Governments and relevant authorities must
provide United Nations humanitarian agencies and
their partners with access to those in need of
assistance. Measures must also be taken to ensure the
safety and security of humanitarian workers.
The United Arab Emirates believes in the
importance of international solidarity in time of
disaster and in the effectiveness of global partnerships
in achieving the best results in emergencies assistance,
and we attach great importance to fulfilling all our
financial commitments to United Nations humanitarian
assistance and development bodies. For next year, the
Emirates has pledged to donate $1,538,000 to such
bodies.
To participate effectively in the coordination of
international relief assistance efforts, we established
the Dubai International Humanitarian City, one of the
largest international centres providing facilities and
integrated logistical services to national, regional and
international humanitarian organizations and agencies.
In 2006, the United Arab Emirates joined the donor
countries group, as well as the Donor Support Group,
which comprises the world’s most active humanitarian
donor countries and which serves as an advisory body
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

21

A/62/PV.53

The United Arab Emirates is one of the major
contributing countries in the field of humanitarian and
emergency relief assistance as well as long-term
assistance in many parts of the world. The Government
and a group of charitable organizations in our country,
such as the United Arab Emirates Red Crescent
Authority, the Zayed Bin Sultan Al Nahayan Charitable
and Humanitarian Foundation, the Mohammed bin
Rashid Foundation for Charitable and Humanitarian
Works, the Al-Maktoum Foundation and others, extend
humanitarian assistance through financial and in kind
donations to affected countries, both through
cooperation with United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and through direct bilateral arrangements
with those countries.
At the same time, the United Arab Emirates
works with such countries to build national capacity to
deal with natural disasters through financing and
otherwise supporting programmes, research and other
efforts aimed at enhancing their capacity to predict
disasters and mitigate their impact and to strengthen
national infrastructure, in order to allow them to
respond to future disasters.
During the last three years alone, the contribution
of the Emirates amounted to $1 billion, allocated to
supporting and enhancing the international efforts to
assist victims of tsunamis, earthquakes and hurricanes
in various parts of the world. Those efforts were in
addition to generous donations to the reconstruction of
countries and regions affected by armed conflict, such
as Afghanistan, Iraq, Lebanon, Darfur and Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The United Arab Emirates attaches great
importance to support and assistance for the Palestinian
people and their Government during the humanitarian
crisis caused by the cruel, aggressive policies imposed
on them by the Israeli occupying forces. Direct
assistance by the United Arab Emirates to the
Palestinians over the past five years has amounted to
more than $1 billion, in addition to other humanitarian
assistance extended through United Nations agencies,
in order to meet immediate needs, and to rebuild towns
destroyed by the continued Israeli assault.
In this regard, the Emirates has doubled its
contribution to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) for 2008. Up to last August, it had also
contributed $80 million to help support the budget of

22

the Palestinian Authority. Meanwhile, the value of
relief and humanitarian projects carried out in Palestine
by the United Arab Emirates Red Crescent Authority,
has exceeded $122 million, in addition to other in-kind
assistance.
The United Arab Emirates is deeply concerned at
the humanitarian conditions of the Palestinian people
in the occupied Palestinian territories, which are
deteriorating as a result of continuing Israeli attacks on
people, property and infrastructure. We are also
concerned at the policy of closures and blockades
imposed on the Palestinian people by the Israeli
occupying forces and at the denial of access to
humanitarian assistance. This poses the threat of a
serious humanitarian catastrophe.
We laud the role played by the United Nations
and its relevant entities in assisting the Palestinian
people, but at the same time we reaffirm the need to
compel Israel, the occupying State, to end its attacks
immediately, to lift its blockade of the Palestinians and
to comply with legal international resolutions and the
provisions of international humanitarian law, as well as
to resume peace negotiations on the basis of relevant
international resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We further urge donor countries to increase their
assistance to the Palestinian people and Government so
as to alleviate their suffering until the end of the Israeli
occupation of their territory and the establishment of
an independent state of Palestine, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
Until then, we continue to reaffirm our support
for the ongoing mandate of UNRWA to provide
services for refugees throughout its area of operation.
In our view, it is necessary to continue financial
support for the regular and emergency activities of the
Agency so that it can fulfil its commitments to
Palestinian refugees.
Mr. McNee (Canada): At the outset, the Canadian
Government and the Canadian people wish to extend
our deepest condolences to the families of the victims
of the recent cyclone in Bangladesh.
Beyond simple goodwill, humanitarian action
responds to the acute needs of crisis-affected
populations and can restore dignity and hope to
people’s lives. This is not without challenge or risk.
Canada attaches great importance to the efforts of the
United Nations to provide leadership and coordination
within the humanitarian system. To that end, Canada

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

welcomes the progress achieved over the past year to
strengthen
the
effectiveness,
efficiency
and
coordination of humanitarian action.
However, the international community can ill
afford complacency. We need to look no further than
the Darfur region of the Sudan, Chad, Sri Lanka or
Afghanistan to measure the toll that conflicts, old and
new, continue to take on civilian populations. In
Afghanistan, to take but one example, we are reminded
that, without security, there can be no reconstruction or
democratic development, and that the provision of
humanitarian assistance can be challenging.
Achieving real results in the face of conflict is
not easy. Moreover, humanitarian action cannot be
considered a substitute for political solutions. In
addition, the hundreds of thousands of people affected
by natural disasters over the past year remind the
international community of the importance of making
strategic investments in disaster risk reduction in order
to minimize vulnerability to natural disasters.
Canada supports the ongoing efforts of Sir John
Holmes, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
strengthen international humanitarian response. The
Canadian Government also agrees with him that these
efforts should no longer be termed “reform” of
humanitarian response. Better coordination, more
flexible financing mechanisms and strong humanitarian
coordinators in the field should simply be viewed as
the best way to conduct international humanitarian
action.
The rollout of the cluster coordination system, for
example, has proven the system to be an innovative
approach to promoting stronger inter-agency
cooperation, including cooperation with other
humanitarian organizations. Canada welcomes the
findings of the recently released cluster evaluation.
Where it has been implemented, the cluster approach
has helped to improve the identification of gaps in
response capacity, contributed to better informationsharing, defined centres of accountability and enabled
more effective advocacy.
These are important successes, but challenges
remain. We now need to buttress the capacity of cluster
leads to ensure they can effectively and consistently
play a guidance role. We must address constructively
those clusters where performance has lagged behind.
Accountability on the part of cluster leads is important
to ensure that enhanced coordination efforts bring

07-60309

results to those requiring assistance. In this context, the
cluster approach rollout should continue.
Effective coordination relies on having the right
people with the right mix of skills and experience
available to provide clear leadership. Here, the role of
humanitarian coordinators remains vital. Their
professional experience, training and skill sets should
enable them to provide invaluable leadership for the
overall humanitarian presence. Canada urges the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
to continue to focus on strengthening the role and
capacity of humanitarian coordinators. This will
require greater attention in order to ensure real and
lasting progress, but it remains central to ensuring
effective international humanitarian action.
Canada also supports ongoing efforts to enhance
the flexibility of humanitarian funding mechanisms.
The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) is an
important example of this commitment. We are very
pleased that CERF continues to demonstrate its value
as a bridge for providing timely financing for rapidonset and under-funded emergencies. Over one-third of
Member States — developing and developed countries
alike — have already contributed to CERF. Canada
urges Member States that have not yet done so to
consider contributing to this important Fund, while
maintaining the level of their commitments to other
humanitarian financing tools.
Humanitarian funding mechanisms such as CERF
must be guided by coherent and reliable evidencebased needs assessments and analysis. This is at the
heart of good humanitarian donorship. Here, OCHA
has a critical role to play in order to ensure that the
quality of needs assessments is consistent, while
timely, since donors rely on them to respond
appropriately. United Nations humanitarian actors must
work closely together to ensure that efforts are
complementary and mutually reinforcing.
(spoke in French)
There are some cases, however, where troops
possess a unique capacity for action that can be put to
use in responding to serious natural disasters. In this
regard, OCHA has a key role to play in ensuring that
assets are deployed based on assessed needs, rather
than being supply-driven, and that such assets are
utilized in a manner that respects the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality. Our goal must be
to provide the right assets at the right time, in order to

23

A/62/PV.53

address genuine needs and gaps in humanitarian
response.

rights law it is our collective responsibility to ensure
that such acts do not go unpunished.

More than ever, the commitment of Member
States to strengthening humanitarian responses in crisis
contexts must include a renewed commitment to
ensuring the safety and security of humanitarian
workers. Attacks against United Nations and other
humanitarian workers increased dramatically during
the past 10 years, and they often occur with complete
impunity. Once again, Canada urges all Member States
which have not done so to sign or ratify the 1994
Convention on Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.

The response from the international community
must be intensified, including by the United Nations,
which should take the lead in establishing more
effective preventive and protective measures to address
sexual and gender-based violence.

Finally, I would like to express our gratitude to
Sir John Holmes for the diligence with which he is
discharging his responsibilities as Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
In conclusion, we as Member States must
together continue to elaborate and improve on the tools
and strategies needed to help guide international
humanitarian action. We must also be in a position to
monitor and evaluate humanitarian access and request
that States report on their actions when such access has
been hindered or denied. To this end, we must all
continue to be vigilant. The success of our efforts will
ultimately be judged on our ability to protect and help
the most vulnerable populations.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me first of all express
my Government’s deep sympathy for and solidarity
with the Government and people of Bangladesh at this
very difficult hour.
Norway is a strong supporter of the humanitarian
work of the United Nations. We support the
Organization’s reform agenda and the efforts made to
strengthen the humanitarian support system. A lot has
been done but, there are still challenges that need to be
addressed. I intend to highlight some important issues
in this regard.
Norway is deeply concerned about the sexual and
gender based violence that each year destroys the lives
of thousands of women and girls, as well as men and
boys. The continued use of sexual violence as a method
of warfare is appalling. Few perpetrators of these
abhorrent acts are brought to justice. There must be an
end to the impunity for these severe crimes. As
guardians of international humanitarian and human

24

The Secretary-General’s recommendations for
action against sexual violence, contained in his report
to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2007/643) are important steps in this
regard and in the formation of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
international community has shown its revulsion of
sexual violence, including by the adoption of various
United Nations resolutions. There is an urgent need for
the full implementation of these resolutions.
Access is another major challenge. Access for
humanitarian actors to populations in need and the
related ability of such populations to receive
humanitarian assistance is the prerequisite for all
humanitarian operations, as set forth under
international humanitarian law. The host Government
has the responsibility to ensure rapid, safe and
unhindered access and to fully cooperate with the
United Nations and other humanitarian actors. The
arbitrary denial of such access is an unacceptable
practice that places the lives of millions in danger and
unnecessarily prolongs their suffering.
Protection is key in this regard. Norway supports
the recommendation of the Secretary-General in his
report to the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we are looking forward
to the debate in the Council tomorrow.
We need to be better prepared to respond to
humanitarian emergencies than we currently are.
Prevention needs to be placed higher on the agenda of
the United Nations. It is widely acknowledged that
climate change causes environmental degradation,
floods, droughts, hurricanes, involuntary migration,
increased urbanization and an explosion in slumdwelling. We are also faced with prolonged armed
conflicts that increasingly affect already vulnerable
States and populations.
Prevention efforts will save more lives and cost
less, but, the world community seems more willing to
pay for the damages than to invest in the cost for

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

preventive measures. What should be done to mitigate
the effects of humanitarian disasters in this changing
world?
First, there is a need for a global spokesperson. In
this regard Norway welcomes the commitment
demonstrated by the Emergency Relief Coordinator in
increasing awareness of the importance of better
preventive measures. These efforts should be
intensified.
Secondly, we need to strengthen our resolve in
reforming the international humanitarian response
system, including more responsive and appropriate
funding mechanism, such as the Central Emergency
Response Fund, and the establishment of humanitarian
response funds in disaster-prone countries. Adequately
funding is key, however, and we urge more Member
States and other donors to contribute to these funds.
There is furthermore a need for better coordination
both among the various United Nations agencies and
between the United Nations agencies and other
humanitarian actors. There is a need to strengthen the
functions of the resident and humanitarian
coordinators. To this end, Norway is a strong supporter
of the cluster approach, which increasingly will
contribute to better coordination and prioritization in
relation to existing humanitarian needs, and
furthermore will serve as an early-warning system for
emerging disasters.
Finally, there is still a need for enhanced efforts
in capacity development for humanitarian personnel, as
well as a need to establish better roster systems with
pools of experts from all humanitarian fields that are
immediately operational and ready for deployment.
Only in this way will we be ready and prepared to deal
with the humanitarian consequences when disaster
strikes.
Mr. Hussein (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to convey my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his reports. They help facilitate
our discussion on strengthening the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations, a subject to which Egypt attaches great
importance and attention. The reality reflected in these
reports raises the concern of the international
community about present and future challenges,
meaning that it should work effectively to tackle those
concerns, as last year witnessed continued increases in
the number of disasters and their victims.

07-60309

We are concerned about the statistics which
indicate that the number of climate-related or hydrometeorological hazard events, such as floods,
hurricanes and droughts, had increased dramatically,
particularly in Africa, over the last 20 years. That
prevailing pattern of increase in frequency and
intensity of disasters and in their strength, destructive
impact and consequences is a major source of concern.
The economic impact of disasters associated with
natural hazards has been recognized as a key factor
challenging the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.
Despite the progress made in some long-standing
emergencies, according to the improvement of political
circumstances in these conflicts and the reduction of
violence, the same period continues to witness an
increased degeneration of those conflicts, the use of
many forms of violence and the steady rate of increase
of natural hazards such as earthquakes, hurricanes,
cyclones, storms and floods. Such hazards affirm the
need to focus on strengthening the capacity of the
relevant United Nations entities to provide
humanitarian assistance to confront the results of
emergency cases on the lives and livelihood of millions
of people.
Other conflicts continue to rage throughout the
world, contributing to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation caused when approximately
4 million people were forced to flee their homes in
2006. This requires the provision of additional
humanitarian assistance to meet their needs. I should
like to emphasis the situation in sisterly Iraq, where, as
indicated in the Secretary-General’s report, the civilian
death toll now averages more than 100 per day. An
estimated 8 million civilians, including internally
displaced persons and refugees to neighbouring
countries, are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. Moreover, the deteriorating situation in
Somalia requires greater efforts by the international
community to provide necessary humanitarian
assistance, given the difficult conditions in the country
and the international disregard of its need for peace
and stability.
Therefore, Egypt emphasizes the urgent need for
institutional capacity-building in developing countries
so they can effectively and successfully manage natural
disasters. That means first strengthening the capacities
of countries in the areas of predictability, preparedness
and early warning and helping them to eliminate the

25

A/62/PV.53

effects of the disaster, to rebuild and to return
effectively to the path of sustainable development.

most vulnerable to disasters. To date, $30 million has
been contributed to the Facility.

Despite the many international documents
emphasizing the importance of building disaster
response capacities, these remain limited because of a
lack of resources and funding, due mainly to the
increasing number of natural disasters and their strong
effects as a result of climate change and our feeble
capacity to deal with it. Greater United Nations efforts
are required to coordinate the efforts of international
bodies and to promote international multilateral
cooperation to respond to these changes.

I should like to express our condolences to the
people and the Government of Bangladesh on the
losses resulting from the most recent cyclone to strike
their country, which caused loss of life and damage to
property. In that connection, we call on the United
Nations to urgently provide, through CERF or any
other relevant initiative, all the assistance necessary to
help that sisterly country recover from the effects of
this painful disaster.

Therefore, we affirm the importance of the role of
donors and the relevant humanitarian organizations,
working together with Member States, in investing in
strategies aimed at preparedness and swift recovery
and in reducing the dangers posed by emergency
humanitarian situations. We also agree that the regional
dimension is important in responding to crises that
require cross-border responses.
In that regard, humanitarian actors must fulfil
their specific obligations under national and
international humanitarian law when they interact with
the citizens — particularly women and children — of
the affected countries in which they operate. In
addition, they must not become involved in activities
such as sexual exploitation and child trafficking, which
violate the principles of the United Nations Charter,
national laws and international humanitarian law. They
must be committed to the rules set out in resolution
46/182, which provides for the role of relevant
non-governmental organizations and civil society in
activities carried out in countries affected by
humanitarian disasters.
Eager to participate in international efforts to
cope with the effects of humanitarian disasters and to
deliver emergency humanitarian relief, Egypt was
among the founders of the Central Emergency Relief
Fund (CERF), providing it with financial and technical
support through an Egyptian expert’s participation in
the Fund’s Advisory Group. In that regard, we support
efforts to maximize the Fund’s effectiveness and help it
achieve the goals set out by the General Assembly, in
areas where insufficient funding has been made
available. We also welcome the role of the World
Bank’s Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery, which was launched in September 2006 to
enhance the disaster-preparedness of States that are

26

Recent events highlight the importance of
according particular attention to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on assistance to the Palestinian people
(A/62/82). The tragic realities faced by the Palestinian
people — including the destruction of infrastructure,
the cutting off of electricity and water, the chopping
down and uprooting of trees and the destruction of
farmland — have worsened their humanitarian situation
and caused a human tragedy. That requires greater
efforts by the international community, particularly the
United Nations, to intervene to stop those policies and
practices and to provide the assistance necessary to
alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian people.
The continued closure operations, the financial
crisis and the withholding of Palestinian tax revenues
by Israel have had an immediate impact in terms of
declining income, increasing poverty, lack of food
security and reduced capacity to respond to natural
disasters in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Therefore, we call on the international community to
provide greater financial support in order to prevent
further deterioration of the quality of life within the
occupied Palestine territories and a further decline of
the Palestinian economy, and to meet the increasing
economic, social, and humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people. Continued international efforts to
that end should be accompanied by efforts to establish
a viable independent Palestinian State with Jerusalem
as its capital.
The role of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East must
also be supported so it can play its role in the
Palestinian territories. Israel must respect the
Agreement on Movement and Access, enabling the
Palestinian people to interact freely with the outside
world, to gain access to humanitarian assistance and to
lift restrictions on delivery of such assistance.

07-60309

A/62/PV.53

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the reports submitted under these agenda
items. I should like to make a few comments on the
theme.
Over the past year, frequent natural disasters have
caused enormous human and economic losses to the
Governments and peoples of the countries affected. In
2006, the world endured 427 such disasters, which
caused the loss of 23,000 lives, disrupted the daily
lives of 143 million people and resulted in economic
damage amounting to nearly $20 billion. Since the
beginning of this year, the United Nations system has
launched as many as 15 humanitarian flash appeals,
breaking the record for the same period in previous
years. United Nations humanitarian relief work now
faces increasingly daunting challenges.
Since emergency disaster relief efforts began in
2004 in response to the Indian Ocean tsunami, the
leading and coordinating role of the United Nations in
international humanitarian assistance activities has
gained increasing attention. With broad and in-depth
participation in international humanitarian assistance
efforts by more and more countries, international
organizations, the private sector and non-governmental
organizations, finding ways to further enhance
coordination and make full and effective use of
resources to maximize the benefits has become a new
and arduous task confronting the United Nations.
The Chinese delegation believes that there are
two main aspects to enhancing coordination. The first
is coordination within the United Nations system.
Many United Nations departments and agencies
involved in humanitarian assistance activities have
different competences, spheres of operation, areas of
focus and comparative advantages. They complement
one another, but they also have a certain degree of
overlap. Therefore, it is necessary to strengthen interagency coordination, to improve the overall planning
of humanitarian activities, to clarify the division of
labour and to enhance the efficiency of operations and
the cost-effectiveness of the use of resources.
The second aspect is the coordination of relief
activities provided by the entire international
community. The United Nations plays an irreplaceable
role in that respect. We welcome the building of
partnerships between the United Nations and relevant
countries,
international
institutions
and

07-60309

non-governmental organizations, with a view to
achieving better information-sharing and broadening
areas of cooperation.
In relief activities, the Government of the
affected country bears primary responsibility for
organizing, initiating, coordinating and implementing
external relief assistance. It should also play a leading
role as emergency humanitarian assistance is received,
as well as during the transition from relief to
development.
When providing humanitarian assistance to
affected countries, the United Nations should always
adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality. It should respect the sovereignty of those
countries, enhance communication and collaboration
with their Governments, fully utilize their existing
relief mechanisms and be guided by the needs of the
affected Governments and peoples in organizing and
coordinating international humanitarian assistance.
In recent years, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has worked tirelessly to
assess disaster situations, appeal for donations and
organize and coordinate emergency humanitarian
assistance worldwide. The Chinese delegation
expresses its appreciation to the Office and supports
the further strengthening of its leading role in
coordinating international humanitarian assistance
activities. It is our hope that OCHA will continue to
cooperate actively with the Governments of affected
countries and provide the necessary guidance and
assistance to humanitarian actors at all levels.
Since its launch in March 2006, the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) has provided
timely and effective relief assistance in a number of
major natural disasters and emergencies, thus playing a
positive role in improving resource allocation and
utilization and in helping some previously neglected
countries and regions hit by disasters to gain access to
humanitarian assistance. The Chinese delegation calls
upon all Governments, those of developed countries in
particular, to contribute generously to the Fund in order
to reach the target of mobilizing $500 million for 2008.
Greater international and regional cooperation is
one of the effective means to help disaster-prone
countries to upgrade their capacity for disaster
preparedness, reduction and response. The United
Nations should attach importance to facilitating such
cooperation; it should offer technical and financial

27

A/62/PV.53

assistance to highly disaster-prone countries to help
them gradually to establish early warning systems and
to enhance their capacity to prepare for, mitigate and
respond to emergencies, so as to ensure that
humanitarian relief helps to address both the symptoms
and the root causes of natural disasters.
China, a developing country, is no stranger to
natural disasters. We know first-hand what suffering
and economic losses natural disasters bring to the
affected peoples and countries. My country is hit by
various kinds of natural disasters every year, so it is the
perennial task of government at all levels to prepare for
and mitigate disasters and to provide emergency
disaster relief, which has entailed huge economic
burdens for the Government.
The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to international cooperation in the field of
humanitarian assistance. It has actively participated in

28

international humanitarian relief activities in response
to requests by affected countries and to appeals by the
international community. This year, the Chinese
Government has provided timely bilateral humanitarian
assistance, within its capacity, both in cash and in kind,
to many affected countries, among them Pakistan, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Madagascar,
the Sudan and Greece, to name just a few.
Those examples fully demonstrate the sympathy,
support and concern of the Government and the people
of China for affected Governments and peoples. My
Government will continue, as always, to support the
efforts of the United Nations and the international
community in disaster prevention, mitigation and relief
and stands ready to help affected countries to overcome
disasters and rebuild their homes.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

07-60309
