S/2018/617

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 June 2018
Original: English

Review of United Nations cross-border operations
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction and methodology
1.
In its resolution 2165 (2014), the Security Council authorized United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners to use routes across conflict
lines and the border crossings at Bab al-Salam, Bab al-Hawa, Ya‘rubiyah and Ramtha,
in addition to the crossings already in use, in order to ensure that humanitarian
assistance, including medical and surgical supplies, reached people in need
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic by the most dire ct routes, with notification to
the Syrian authorities, and to that end stressed the need for all border crossings to be
used efficiently for United Nations humanitarian operations. The Council initially
authorized the operations for 6 months, then extended the authorization for 12-month
periods in resolutions 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017). Most
recently, the Council extended the operations until 10 January 2019.
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations humanitarian
response has included humanitarian assistance deliveries through three possible
avenues: (a) assistance provided from within the Syrian Arab Republic to regularly
accessible areas by United Nations agencies based in Damascus; (b) assistance
provided from within the country, across conflict lines, by United Nations agencies
based in Damascus; and (c) assistance provided by United Nations agencies, together
with Syrian non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as implementing partners, from
across the country’s borders to areas not controlled by the Government. All deliveries
from within the country to regularly accessible areas and across conflict lines are
carried out with the agreement of the Syrian authorities, from which the United
Nations obtains facilitation letters for all deliveries. Cross-border deliveries are
effected by United Nations agencies, together with implementing partners, and are
notified to the Syrian authorities by the United Nations in order to confirm the
humanitarian nature of those relief consignments; however, as they were authorized
by resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions, they do not require the
agreement of the Syrian authorities.
3.
The present review is submitted pursuant to paragraph 5 of Security Council
resolution 2393 (2017), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
conduct, within six months of the adoption of the resolution, an indepe ndent written
review of United Nations humanitarian cross-border operations, including
recommendations on how to further strengthen the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, taking into account the views of relevant

18-09250 (E)

210618

*1809250*

S/2018/617

parties, including the Syrian authorities, the relevant neighbouring countries of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the United Nations humanitarian agencies and their
implementing partners.
4.
In line with that mandate, the present review is focused solely on the delivery
of cross-border humanitarian assistance by the United Nations. Three key aspects of
the response are highlighted in detail in the review: the technical functioning of the
operations, with a specific focus on the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism; the
impact of the operations on people in need in the country; and the accountability
mechanisms in place for projects that are managed remotely.
5.
While NGOs carry out significant relief operations, in particular as relates to
service provision, the present report does not cover their cross-border operations or
deliveries. The information contained herein is based on data available from a wide
variety of sources. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs was
provided with detailed written input by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the World Food Programme
(WFP) and the World Health Organization (WHO), as well as the International
Organization for Migration (IOM). The Office conducted ext ensive consultations
with all relevant actors in Amman, Ankara, Baghdad, Damascus and Gaziantep
(Turkey). All interlocutors were provided with specific questions before the
interviews (see annex). Particular efforts were made to take into account the views of
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as those of the Governments of
Iraq, Jordan and Turkey, from where the United Nations cross -border operations are
carried out. Consultations were held with the full range of humanitarian coordination
forums and actors involved in United Nations cross-border operations, including the
Strategic Steering Group, the Humanitarian Liaison Group and the Cross -Border Task
Force, and, at the intersectoral level, with specific sectors, individual agencies and
NGOs, both Syrian and international. Meetings were also held with donors to
humanitarian operations through the regular channels in place for briefing Member
States in Jordan and Turkey. A thorough desk review was also carried out to compile
existing information on United Nations cross-border operations since 2014.

II. Technical operations
6.
The delivery of United Nations cross-border assistance is based on the
Organization’s assessments of needs and is also coordinated with all relevant partners.
It is preceded by a notification to the Syrian authorities and implemented in
cooperation with a range of agencies’ implementing partners, officials of
neighbouring countries and the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism. Overall, the
success of delivery depends upon a coordinated response by humanitarian actors
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
7.
As with any aid delivery from within the Syrian Arab Republic, assistance
provided across borders pursuant to resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent
resolutions renewing the relevant decisions therein is rooted in humanitarian
principles and based on independent assessments of need by the Organization. All
United Nations programming is conducted in response to needs i dentified in the
annual humanitarian needs overview. The overview prepared for the Syrian Arab
Republic is one of the more robust multisectoral needs assessments in any
humanitarian operation around the globe. For the most recent overview, prepared in
2017, 31 humanitarian partners conducted assessments in 5,154 communities, with
98 per cent carried out in the form of face-to-face interviews with 140,000 Syrians,
to assess needs across multiple sectors.

2/15

18-09250

S/2018/617

8.
All United Nations agencies and most, but not all, NGOs working across borders
participate in the relevant humanitarian coordination structures and operate under the
humanitarian response plan. In addition, significant non-humanitarian operations,
such as support for local councils, are under way in cross -border areas. Those
operations do not fall under the humanitarian coordination umbrella, but their
activities have an impact on certain aspects of United Nations humanitarian
assistance.
9.
Needs assessments are updated at least twice a year, and efforts are made to
review needs quarterly. Such regular and detailed assessments are now particularly
critical because the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic is evolving rapidly. Mass
internal displacement has stretched the response, with an estimated 2.8 milli on people
displaced in 2017 and over 920,000 displaced in the first four months of 2018, many
to areas reachable only by cross-border operations. It has also shown that independent
needs assessments remain as critical as ever to ensuring transparency, effe ctiveness
and accountability.
10. Based on the overall assessments, individual cross-border shipments are
initiated by United Nations agencies in coordination with humanitarian partners, such
as food security or health clusters. Each agency submits a shipment plan to the
logistics cluster, which then submits a compilation of all agency requests to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 72 hours prior to the expected departure
time of the consignment. The Office uses the information provided to send the first
notification of the intended shipment to the Syrian authorities. That notification
provides information on expected crossing dates, the border crossing to be used, a
description of the humanitarian goods to be delivered, the number of tr ucks, the
United Nations owner and the destination (district). The Deputy Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator (for the cross-border operation based in Turkey) or the
Humanitarian Coordinator (for Jordan or Iraq) passes the information on to the Syrian
authorities in the form of a note verbale relayed by the Humanitarian Coordinator in
the Syrian Arab Republic 48 hours prior to the departure of the convoy. Any changes
in the consignments are communicated using the same process.
11. On the day of a delivery, trucks from the originating country travel to the border,
where aid is monitored and transferred to Syrian trucks for delivery in the Syrian Arab
Republic. In the operation based in Turkey, the facility where aid is transferred
between trucks is located inside Turkey, in Jordan the location is in the border zone,
and in Iraq the trucks meet at the zero point and remain on their respective sides. In
all countries, the logistics cluster managed by WFP coordinates most aspects of the
trans-shipment process, hiring security guards (as needed) and labour to load the
Syrian trucks, liaising with customs agencies and ensuring information -sharing and
coordination among the United Nations agencies, the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism, the Department of Safety and Security and implementing partners.
12. In Turkey, Syrian trucks, once loaded with humanitarian items and confirmed
by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism (see sect. III below), are accompanied
by the Turkish authorities and members of the logistics cluster and Mechanism from
the trans-shipment area to the border crossing point.
13. In Jordan, IOM manages the fleet of Syrian trucks that carry assistance. Unlike
the trucks that transport assistance from Turkey and Iraq, the fleet managed by IOM
is based in Jordan and crosses into the Syrian Arab Republic only to make
humanitarian deliveries, after which it returns to Jordan the same day. To be able to
complete those deliveries, the trucks must be loaded the night before, after which they
are sealed by both the United Nations and customs officials. The Jordanian authorities
escort all movements in the border area until the vehicles cross into the Syrian Arab
Republic.
18-09250

3/15

S/2018/617

14. In Iraq, where only two cross-border movements have been conducted,
procedures may evolve further as the border crossing point is rehabilitated.
15. At the Bab al-Hawa and Bab al-Salam border crossings with Turkey, as well as
in Ramtha (at the border with Jordan), there are scanners that examine each truck to
provide a detailed view of its contents. A scanner will soon be installed in Ya‘rubiyah,
at the border with Iraq. In Bab al-Hawa and Ramtha, all Syrian trucks are scanned by
the authorities before entering the border area from the Syrian Arab Republic. In Bab
al-Salam, Syrian trucks entering Turkey are scanned at random. For additional
security, the authorities may also use canine units (as is the case in Jordan), metal
detectors and physical scans before trucks are allowed to cross the border from the
Syrian Arab Republic.
16. Once across the border, the Syrian trucks deliver aid to the warehouse of the
implementing partner in the area, as notified to the Syrian authorities. The assistance
is then delivered and distributed to beneficiaries or provided to support essential
services, as outlined in the humanitarian response plan. In some cases, the aid is
pre-positioned to ensure that assistance can be maintained in the event of a temporary
suspension of cross-border activity. That was the case, for example, in Bab al -Hawa
and Bab al-Salam during increased hostilities in late January 2018, when shelling
from the Syrian Arab Republic into the border areas caused the United Nations to halt
operations for 10 days (21–31 January), as well as in Ramtha in the middle of 2016,
following an attack on a Jordanian border point that resulted in the entire border area
being declared a military zone and cross-border operations being halted for five
weeks.
17.

The following measures are recommended:

(a) Continue regular, high-quality independent assessments of need to ensure
that assistance is based on needs and delivered in accordance with humanitarian
principles and that funds are raised in line with needs;
(b) Increase coordination with actors not operating under the humanitarian
response plan to further improve the quality of the response;
(c) As the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing becomes fully operational, share good
practices from other border crossing points to ensure the smooth functioning of
operations there.

III. United Nations Monitoring Mechanism
18. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism has 41 staff members and an annual
budget of $3.5 million. Its mandate, as set out in Security Council resolution 2165
(2014), is to monitor, with the consent of the relevant neighbouring countries of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the loading of all humanitarian relief consignments of the
United Nations humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners at the relevant
United Nations facilities, and any subsequent opening of the consignments by the
customs authorities of the relevant neighbouring countries, for passage into the Syrian
Arab Republic through the border crossings of Bab al-Salam, Bab al-Hawa,
Ya‘rubiyah and Ramtha, with notification by the U nited Nations to the Syrian
authorities, in order to confirm the humanitarian nature of those consignments.
19. That mandate is made operational through teams working at each of the border
crossing points, under a single set of procedures to ensure consist ency of operations
across hubs. The Mechanism works exclusively in the territory of the relevant
neighbouring countries of the Syrian Arab Republic, namely, Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
Its mandate does not include monitoring the delivery of assistance within the Syrian

4/15

18-09250

S/2018/617

Arab Republic. United Nations agencies and their implementing partners bear full
responsibility for the consignments and their contents within the country.
20. For each of the four border crossings named in resolution 2165 (2014), a
monitoring team, including a team leader, monitoring officers and support personnel,
is assigned to the operation. To help to ensure that its work is perceived as
independent and unbiased, the Mechanism ensures that its staff members are diverse
in terms of nationality. In 2017, its international staff came from 17 countries. The
humanitarian nature of relief consignments is confirmed on the basis of the following
criteria:
(a) The consignment owner must be a United Nations humanitarian agency or
an implementing partner;
(b)

The consignment must be related to a humanitarian relief activity;

(c)

The consignment must not have been manipulated by a third party.

21. The criteria are monitored against positive and negati ve indicators that are set
out in the guidelines for the Mechanism. The monitoring team checks the consignment
visually and physically, which includes performing random verifications of
humanitarian items. Where applicable, technology (e.g., metal detectors) is used. In
the case of a mismatch against the load list or doubt as to the contents of the packages,
the team may request an interruption of the loading process pending clarification by
the consignment owner. To date, it has not been necessary to reque st such an
interruption.
22. Monitoring teams accompany the customs authorities while they check the
consignments. When loading is completed, the team in Jordan monitors the closure
of each consignment, together with customs officials. In cases where the r eceiving
trucks remain in the trans-shipment hub overnight after loading (as is the case in
Jordan), the monitoring team applies seals and tamper-evident tape to the trucks. The
team then checks the seals on the day of the convoy’s departure as a safeguard against
any manipulation by third parties overnight.
23. When monitored trucks cross into the Syrian Arab Republic, the monitoring
team immediately notifies the Chief of the Mechanism, confirming the humanitarian
nature of the consignment. On that basis, the Chief then issues a notification to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, confirming that the shipment is
humanitarian in nature, through a note verbale sent by the Humanitarian Coordinator
in the country. Upon the completion of the operation, the teams archive all monitoring
forms as scanned copies in Iraq and Jordan and as hard copies in Turkey.
24.

The following measures are recommended:

(a) Ensure continuity of the mandate of the Mechanism — as an independent
and trusted body — to allow and facilitate humanitarian deliveries to the Syrian Arab
Republic;
(b) Share knowledge with other operations with a monitoring mandate to
provide an opportunity to compare best practices.

IV. Impact of United Nations cross-border operations
25. As at May 2018, an estimated 4.88 million people were in need in areas where
a significant number continued to be more accessible from across the border than
from within the Syrian Arab Republic: 2.67 million of them are in areas to which only
United Nations cross-border actors have access, comprising 2.21 million in the north west and 460,000 in the south. Thanks to United Nations cross -border support, there
18-09250

5/15

S/2018/617

have been only few reports of malnutrition, with hundreds of thousands of children
screened regularly. Schools are operational and equipped with basic materials
provided by the Organization. Supported by United Nations medical supplies, 82
hospitals and 70 mobile clinics are operational, providing critical assistance to those
in need.
26. The humanitarian impact of the Organization’s cross-border operations is
significant, with the areas reached by cross-border deliveries benefiting from regular
and sustained assistance. From July 2014 to April 2018, millions of people received
humanitarian assistance, many on a monthly basis. A total of 3.7 million people
received food assistance; 4.7 million people received water sanitation and hygiene
assistance; education supplies were delivered to 946,000 people; and nutrition
assistance was provided for 611,000 people. In addition, some 21.1 million medical
procedures were conducted. The table provides additional details on total
humanitarian deliveries, disaggregated by border crossing point, since 2014.
Total cross-border deliveries, July 2014–April 2018
Country

Border crossing

Consignments

Truckloads

Turkey

Bab al-Hawa

346

13 682

Turkey

Bab al-Salam

194

2 054

Jordan

Ramtha

259

4 480

Iraq

Ya‘rubiyah

2

22

801

20 238

Total

27. In its resolution 2393 (2017), adopted in December 2017, the Security Council
noted the impact of the cross-border operations, recalling that the United Nations and
its implementing partners continued to deliver life -saving assistance to millions of
people in need in the Syrian Arab Republic through humanitarian aid delivered across
borders, including food assistance for an average of 1 million people every month
since 2016; non-food items for 4 million people; health assistance for 15 million
treatments, and water and sanitation supplies for over 3 million people.
28. In 2017, United Nations humanitarian cross-border deliveries represented about
20 per cent of overall humanitarian cross-border deliveries to the Syrian Arab
Republic, while NGOs accounted for the remainder. Humanitarian a ssistance by
NGOs is mostly provided through commercial channels, or through a separate
monitoring mechanism run by the Turkish Red Crescent Society at 12 crossing points
at the border with Turkey. Two border crossings from Turkey are open for commercial
access, namely, Bab al-Salam and Bab al-Hawa, the same two crossings authorized
by the Security Council for cross-border operations. In addition to being monitored,
the shipment process through the Mechanism and the Turkish Red Crescent Society
offers the advantage of being able to expedite shipments during emergencies and is
therefore able to respond to immediate needs for life-saving assistance. Using the
commercial channel also provides NGOs with a predictable shipment schedule for
their ongoing humanitarian programmes, along with a well-established customs
mechanism.
29. In 2018, United Nations deliveries have provided assistance for one third of the
people in need in the north-western and southern parts of the Syrian Arab Republic
each month. Those people do not have access to assistance from within the country.
The full and complementary use of all delivery options, both from within the country
and from neighbouring countries, is necessary in order to gain access to people in
need and to ensure that assistance and services are provided to all of them. In making
6/15

18-09250

S/2018/617

full use of the various avenues for access, whether across borders, across conflict
lines or to regularly accessible areas, efforts were made to ensure that humanitarian
assistance was sustained, coordinated and complementary.
30. In the first four months of 2018, food for an average of 887,000 people was
delivered each month. This represents an increase of 12 per cent from the average of
793,000 people reached over the same period in 2017. Of those reached in 2017, some
253,000 received United Nations food assistance in the southern part of the Syrian
Arab Republic, while approximately 634,000 people were provided with food in the
north-west. In addition, health treatments and other assistance, incl uding shelter,
non-food items, education and water and sanitation support are provided to hundreds
of thousands of people every month.
31. In the monthly report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015),
2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018), a breakdown of targeted beneficiaries by
sector has been provided at the district level since January 2018. That additional level
of detail is provided in accordance with resolution 2393 (2017), which calls for more
detailed information on humanitarian assistance delivered through United Nations
cross-border operations.
32. For many people in need in the south and in the north-west of the Syrian Arab
Republic, cross-border operations remain essential to gaining access to meaningful
and predictable humanitarian assistance and essential services. For the United Nations
and its partners based in the Syrian Arab Republic, access from Damascus to hard -toreach areas has been curtailed considerably. More generally, United Nations
inter-agency convoys from within the Syrian Arab Republic to hard-to-reach and
besieged areas have been severely limited over the past 18 months owing to a lack of
security and bureaucratic delays by the Government. Medical and other life -saving
items continue to be systematically removed from inter-agency convoys deployed
from within the country, with over 600,000 medical items removed in 2017. United
Nations cross-border operations play a critical role in ensuring not only that assistance
reaches those most in need by the most direct route, but also that t he types of
assistance and humanitarian items delivered are those that are most needed.
33. Although reporting is focused on the delivery of goods by truck, the impact of
the United Nations cross-border response is broader, in particular its support for th e
functioning of public services, which itself is not a focus of the present review. An
important element of the cross-border humanitarian operations conducted by NGOs
is their provision of services in areas where regular public services, such as schools
or hospitals, are not operational. While the United Nations is not directly involved in
such services provided by NGOs, its cross-border assistance, including school
supplies and medicine, is essential for the NGOs to provide their services. Thanks to
the combination and complementarity of goods provided by the Organization and
services provided by NGOs, millions have received life -saving services.
34. United Nations cross-border operations facilitate specialized services, including
in the areas of protection of civilians, reproductive health and gender-based violence
responses, that benefit the most vulnerable people in the Syrian Arab Republic. Those
services would be especially difficult to provide from within the country, where the
same level of access might not be sustained. In addition, many of the partners
interviewed noted the importance of the trust that had been built between
communities and cross-border humanitarian actors over the years, which had created
the space to address important issues, such as gender-based violence.
35. The partners interviewed highlighted how United Nations cross -border
operations had resulted in more coordinated, efficient and principled humanitarian
action. They underlined that the Organization’s engagement had strengthened the
18-09250

7/15

S/2018/617

sharing of information among humanitarian actors and had helped humanitarian
organizations to focus their efforts on the most vulnerable people. Preparedness
planning was noted as a particularly important achievement. Partners also stressed
the importance of the United Nations in promoting humanitarian principles and
developing and disseminating standards and guidelines applying to all humanitarian
actors.
36. Another important aspect of the United Nations engagement in cross -border
assistance that was highlighted by almost all interlocutors was the importance of
capacity-building programmes facilitated by the Organization for Syrian NGOs
operating as cross-border implementing partners. One of the largest gaps identified in
the review was a lack of trained service providers, such as doctors. Training
opportunities have, at times, been limited by the number of Syrian staff who can cross
the border to Jordan or Turkey; some agencies have stated that the processes for
allowing Syrians to receive the relevant training in those countries could be further
streamlined. In Turkey, five humanitarian staff members per organization are given
special permission to cross the border from the Syrian Arab Republic each month.
The Jordanian authorities have also noted the importance of training Syrian NGOs
and have offered to increase, on a case-by-case basis, the number of staff who are
authorized to cross the border.
37.

The following measures are recommended:

(a) Continue to develop guidance on the provision of assistance and services
to ensure effective coordination and coherence in the humanitarian response;
(b) Expand capacity-building efforts for implementing partners to improve the
effectiveness of the humanitarian response and to ensure adherence to humanitarian
principles and standards.

V. Monitoring assistance delivery
38. While the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism confirms the humanitarian
nature of relief consignments, additional layers of monitoring are carried out inside
the Syrian Arab Republic. End-use monitoring is a standard practice in humanitarian
operations, where the users of the assistance provide feedback on its impact. The
United Nations, however, applies higher standards to cross-border assistance
transported into the Syrian Arab Republic. This difference is due to several factors,
including the fact that the Organization’s cross-border operations are managed
remotely by the United Nations and its partners and that they are thus unable to visit
the distribution or service delivery sites. Remotely managed humanitarian responses
are not unique to the Syrian Arab Republic and have been undertaken at other
locations around the world where insecurity limits movement. While such operations,
by nature, cannot verify end use with absolute certainty, the United Nations and its
implementing partners are well versed in ensuring that assistance reaches those for
whom it is intended. The Syrian context exhibits a high degree of innovation in
addressing potential shortcomings.
39. Monitoring is first performed by the implementing partner, whose responsibility
as project manager requires due diligence to ensure a high -quality response. The
implementing partners for cross-border operations in the Syrian Arab Republic are in
contact with United Nations agencies and with donors almost on a daily basis.
Examples of innovation by implementing partners to ensure accountability to
agencies and donors include geotagging and time-stamping photographs, and in some
cases providing real-time video streams of distribution points to enable direct
monitoring.

8/15

18-09250

S/2018/617

40. Implementing partners also maintain beneficiary lists that indicate who is to
receive the assistance. The lists are based on independent assessments of needs,
including vulnerability criteria. Implementing partners use the lists at distribution
points and collect the signatures or thumbprints of the beneficiaries when the service
and assistance is provided. In some instances, biometric data are used to confirm the
identity of beneficiaries. WFP, the largest United Nations cross-border actor, has
implemented an advanced beneficiary and management system that makes it possible
to prioritize assistance geographically using selection criteria at the household level,
including vulnerability factors such as the number of children and older persons in
the family, the gender of the head of the household, household income, disabilities
among family members and general living conditions, including displacement status
and type of accommodation. In 2018, WFP implemented the system to register and
assist beneficiaries reached through livelihood support and is now beginning to roll
out household verification tools for general food assistance beneficiaries in the south
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
41. The implementing partners are organizations that have been vetted by the United
Nations and engage regularly and closely with their respective contracting United
Nations agencies. Before contracting, assessments are conducted to review the
partners’ qualifications, including to review their financial audits, their capacity to
perform and their adherence to humanitarian principles. Once an implementing
partner is selected, its operations are monitored regularly. Implementing partners
coordinate with the relevant humanitarian cluster coordination leads and provide
monthly updates on their activities to the relevant United Nations agency.
42. The United Nations and donors also use third parties to monitor distribution and
services provided by implementing partners. The role of those monitors is to observe
the distribution of assistance directly to beneficiaries, to assess distributions at the
facility level for items that might be provided to schools, health facilities or child friendly spaces, to monitor service provision and to audit records as necessary. Thirdparty monitors contracted by IOM also visit the warehouses maintained by
humanitarian partners to confirm the humanitarian nature of the supplies therein and
to monitor their distribution.
43. WFP reported that third-party monitoring activities were further strengthened in
2017, with an 8 per cent increase in the number of visits to final distribution points
compared with 2016 across all of its operations (i.e., from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders). In 2018, the WFP monitoring mechanism was again
enhanced for cross-border operations from Jordan, with the allocation of additional
third-party monitors and higher percentages of monitoring compared with other parts
of the Syrian Arab Republic. WHO reported that qualitative and quantitative thirdparty monitoring of the supply chain was launched for deliveries of medical items
from Turkey in May 2018, with a view to monitoring the supply line from the cross border hub to the warehouses and on to the receiving health structures.
44. Another layer of monitoring is the cross-checking of information from the field
gathered after distribution. Such post-distribution monitoring takes various forms, but
one of the most common is beneficiary interviews. Both third parti es and
implementing partners conduct exit interviews with randomly selected beneficiaries
at distribution points to verify the quantity and quality of items received and to elicit
their perspectives on the distribution process. In addition, assistance is l abelled with
contact details so that beneficiaries can contact implementing partners through call
centres or use messaging technologies to provide feedback on the aid received. WFP
is finalizing plans to use those tools to launch a direct complaint and fee dback
mechanism that will allow that organization to ensure enhanced accountability and
interaction with beneficiaries. Furthermore, feedback from field meetings between
implementing partners and beneficiaries, regular reports to humanitarian clusters and
18-09250

9/15

S/2018/617

information provided by local authorities at various levels are received regularly. In
addition, IOM relies on outcome mapping to track not only the delivery of assistance,
but also its impact.
45. In addition to the primary layers of monitoring described above, the cluster
system used to coordinate the delivery of assistance provides another layer of
accountability, which helps to ensure adherence to humanitarian principles by
partners through capacity-building and by defining and implementing system-wide
protocols and policies. In addition, Governments hosting cross -border operations
provide an added layer of transparency, as they monitor the shipments from and into
their territories closely and request accountability and thorough explanations for any
deviations from planned operations.
46. The United Nations strives to ensure that there are no irregularities, and there is
zero tolerance for the diversion of assistance from intended beneficiaries. Owing to
the high-risk environment, it is critical that systems be in place to prevent aid
diversion. If the humanitarian community is not able to provide assistance and
services in accordance with humanitarian principles, the broader humanitarian
operation may be placed at risk, as donors would be less likely to provide support. If
it cannot be ensured that assistance reaches the intended beneficiaries, it might be
necessary to scale back humanitarian operations significantly or to stop the assistance
altogether. As a result, the United Nations has taken preventive actions to reduce the
likelihood of aid diversion. Those actions include the development of guidelines for
implementing partners and active engagement with non-State armed opposition
groups to promote respect for humanitarian principles and the integrity of
humanitarian assistance. They also include developing a clear understanding of the
nature of the impediments faced. The Organization is also working with implementing
partners to ensure that they understand that humanitarian assistance should not be
delivered to persons for whom it is not intended and that they have systems in place
for identifying, reporting and tackling any cases of delivery of humanitarian
assistance to persons for whom it is not intended, should they occur. One example of
a preventive measure was the open letter addressed to non-State armed opposition
groups in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, which outlined the actions taken
by those groups and stressed that impediments to humanitarian operations were not
acceptable. The letter provided a uniform view of such impediments and the risk that
armed groups faced if barriers to access to populations in need persisted.
47. Despite such prevention efforts, and as in many locations where the United
Nations provides humanitarian assistance around the globe, including from within the
Syrian Arab Republic, irregularities in aid deliveries have sometimes been identified
in United Nations cross-border operations. Such irregularities have included instances
of small-scale diversion, where local authorities or non-State armed opposition
groups have been found appropriating aid from intended beneficiaries for their own
use. The Organization has not identified any cases of large-scale or systemic diversion
of its cross-border assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic.
48. When irregularities are reported, it is critical to ensure full transparency and
reporting to the United Nations and to donors. That level of transparency allows the
United Nations to take appropriate measures to recover aid and/or to amend
procedures to ensure that irregularities do not recur. In a recent example of a
transparent response to an irregularity, in April 2018, a convoy from the Ramtha
border crossing point to the southern Syrian Arab Republic was delayed in its retur n,
raising concerns of misconduct. Following a thorough review, including with
implementing partners and local councils, it was determined that the delay arose
because the receiving warehouse was not prepared to receive the convoy, resulting in
slower-than-usual offloading. The details regarding the event were compiled and
shared with all relevant parties, and the recommended steps were taken to ensure that
10/15

18-09250

S/2018/617

the partners at the warehouse were better prepared, thus reducing the likelihood that
such delays would occur in the future.
49. While accountability mechanisms are in place, a certain degree of risk is
inherent in day-to-day humanitarian operations, whether in Afghanistan, Somalia, the
Syrian Arab Republic or Yemen. Risks are constantly assessed, and some may be
deemed inevitable in humanitarian operations. The level of scrutiny of United Nations
cross-border operations in the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the level of
accountability mechanisms in place, is comparable to or higher than that found in
many other humanitarian operations that operate in insecure environments around the
world, including deliveries from within the Syrian Arab Republic.
50.

The following measures are recommended:

(a) Taken together, the mechanisms in place provide significant checks
against issues that might arise; however, those mechanisms come at a significant cost
in terms of financial and human resources. Donors must be willing to continue to
cover the expenses involved;
(b) As currently planned, beneficiary and management tools such as the
system developed by WFP should be utilized more broadly in all areas where it is
practicable and feasible.

VI. Views of the Syrian authorities and of neighbouring
countries hosting cross-border operations
51. In its resolution 2393 (2017), the Security Council requested that the views of
the Syrian authorities and those of relevant neighbouring countries be taken into
account in the review of cross-border humanitarian operations. Using a single set of
key questions developed for the discussions, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs held meetings with government representatives in the Syrian
Arab Republic, as well as in Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
52. The representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Emigrants of the
Syrian Arab Republic stressed that Security Council resolution 2165 (2014) was an
attempt to fuel the crisis in the country and to destabilize the situation further,
weakening the Government through the use of politicized humanitarian assistance.
The impact of cross-border deliveries on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the country was also highlighted as a major issue of concern. The Government had,
however, accepted the resolution, participating in the discussions on the United
Nations Monitoring Mechanism to ensure its neutrality and impartiality and
stipulating that staff members would need to come from countries perceived by the
Government to be neutral. The representatives expressed their view that the
Mechanism team was not neutral or able to ensure the humanitarian nature of trucks
crossing the border. They stressed that “no one knew” where the contents of trucks
went after they crossed the border. In the Government’s view, the aid was not going
to civilians but to terrorist groups. The representatives also stressed that there was no
merit to cross-border deliveries, as all areas could be reached from Damascus if gaps
in trust were addressed.
53. Representatives at the national operations centre in Iraq stressed that the
Government of Iraq acknowledged the “principles of national sovereignty” and
supported the “humanitarian principles that underpin the assistance being provided to
people in need in the Syrian Arab Republic”. They noted that the Iraqi authorities had
worked collaboratively with the United Nations in opening the Ya ‘rubiyah border
crossing to accommodate a pilot convoy for United Nations agencies and that they
had also facilitated a second convoy. They called for the provision of security
18-09250

11/15

S/2018/617

equipment at the border crossing point to ensure maximum protection for convoys
and individuals at the border. They also acknowledged the need for “continued
dialogue” with the United Nations on cross-border operations at the appropriate
levels.
54. In Jordan, the representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs noted the
country’s long history as a leader in support of United Nations cross -border
operations, initially as a pen holder for Security Council resolution 2165 (2014). He
expressed his “strong support” for the work of the United Nations. He also
emphasized the importance of strong teamwork between the relevant ministries in
Jordan and the Organization, highlighting the benefits of information -sharing and
engagement. Movements of people in need towards the Jordanian border were raised
as an area of concern. He noted the “regularity” of the humanitarian deliveries,
stressing that up to that point all deliveries had been humanitarian in nature. He also
noted the role of training to strengthen implementing partners and highlighted that
those efforts could be improved further with additional United Nations training
activities in Jordan.
55. In Turkey, the representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that
United Nations cross-border deliveries were “vital for people in need in the Syrian
Arab Republic”, noting that certain areas were not otherwise accessible. He added
that support for the operations rested on the “realities on the ground” in the country,
which were marked by the humanitarian needs of people close to the borders who
could not be reached with humanitarian assistance from within the country, and by
“the need to uphold international humanitarian law and humanity”. He expressed a
preference for full assistance provided from within the Syrian Arab Republic, but
noted that it was not currently possible. The potential movement of populations to
border areas was raised as a concern, as were the implications that such movements
could have for the people displaced and for regional security. He praised the
engagement with the United Nations in the implementation of the mandate, calling it
the “most legitimate tool” and stressing that the operations had the full support of the
Government of Turkey. He also noted the important role of the United Nations review
of cross-border operations, primarily in addressing misconceptions about the
operations.

VII. Observations
56. United Nations humanitarian cross-border deliveries are the result of an
operation that hinges on a range of actors across the United Nations system, as well
as on implementing partners, working together in a complex and insecure
environment and under a high degree of scrutiny. The aim of the present review was
to shed additional light on the processes in place, to highlight innovations that have
been introduced to ensure an accountable, effective and transparent operation, and to
provide recommendations for further improvements that will ensure more effective
operations in the future. The focus of the review was to ensure that people in need
received the most effective humanitarian response possible in such a difficult
environment.
57. In the second half of 2017, I reported on multiple occasions that United Nations
cross-border deliveries were critical and should continue. The recommendations
provided herein can further strengthen the Organization’s cross-border operations,
which is important, as the Organization and its implementing partners must be able
to gain access to populations in need rapidly, sustainably and without impediment,
based on United Nations assessments of need. Cross-border aid deliveries meet those
criteria. The complementarity of all methods of delivery has proved essential to

12/15

18-09250

S/2018/617

ensuring that those in need receive life-saving assistance; all approaches to reach
those in need remain critical.
58. The year 2018 has seen a rapid evolution of the conflict, including shifts in
control of territory and mass movements of people, with over 900,000 people already
displaced by the end of April. While the geographical space for cross -border
operations has shrunk as areas in the south-east of Idlib have come under the control
of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, the size of the population being
supported by United Nations cross-border operations has not decreased, and the needs
of the people have become ever more acute.
59. The Security Council resolution authorizing United Nations cross -border
humanitarian operations was adopted out of dire humanitarian need, with a significant
number of people in need of assistance who were inaccessible from within the Syrian
Arab Republic. Since 2014, those operations have provided sustained life -saving
assistance to millions of people and continue to do so today. While all parties work
towards a lasting political solution to end the suffering of the Syrian people, it is
important to ensure that basic humanitarian assistance continues to reach people in
need throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, regardless of where they live and based
solely on needs.

18-09250

13/15

S/2018/617

Annex
Questions provided in advance of consultations
Table 1
Questions for humanitarian partners
Review criterion

Questions

Humanitarian impact

• Overarching question: To what extent have the United Nations cross -border
operations implemented under the framework of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014) saved lives and reduced suffering since the adoption of that resolution?
• What key metrics should be considered when analysing the humanitarian impact of
United Nations cross-border operations?
• What determining factors are considered by organizations when deciding to deliver
assistance through United Nations cross-border assistance modalities in the Syrian
Arab Republic? What alternatives are available?
• To what extent have cross-border operations been able to address needs, in particular
acute needs?
• To what extent have United Nations cross-border operations adhered to humanitarian
principles and programming quality standards, including with regard to accountability
to affected people and gender considerations?

Practical functioning

• Overarching question: To what extent have United Nations cross-border operations
functioned efficiently?
• Who are the key stakeholders in United Nations cross-border operations and what are
their responsibilities?
• How have United Nations cross-border operations been coordinated? To what extent
has the coordination included key stakeholders while ensuring concrete humanitarian
outcomes?
• What have the key challenges (e.g., logistical, capacity, access and security) been?
• How have United Nations cross-border operations complemented the assistance being
provided through other modalities?
• What opportunities are available to further enhance coordination and/or more
effectively and collectively address identified challenges?

Monitoring

• Overarching question: How well do United Nations cross-border operations ensure
the accountability of humanitarian action to all stakeholders?
• How does the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
function and how has it evolved since 2014?
• What monitoring mechanisms have been put in place to ensure that aid provided
through United Nations cross-border operations reaches its intended recipients and is
delivered in a principled manner? To what extent are those safeguards effective?
• How could monitoring be further improved?

14/15

18-09250

S/2018/617

Table 2
Questions for Syrian authorities and neighbouring countries of the Syrian Arab Republic
hosting cross-border operations
Review criterion

Questions

Humanitarian impact

• Overarching question: How do you assess the overall impact of the United Nations
cross-border mechanism?
• What are your recommendations to further improve the humanitarian impact of
United Nations cross-border operations?

Practical functioning

• Overarching question: What is your assessment of current United Nations crossborder delivery operations, including the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism?
• What are your recommendations for strengthening United Nations cross -border
operations, including the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism?
• Is the information provided to the Security Council on a monthly basis sufficient, or
could it be made more relevant?

Monitoring

• Overarching question: How would you assess the level of transparency of the United
Nations cross-border operation?
• How can the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism be more efficient in terms of
logistics, timeliness and costs and in its work with host Governments?
• How can the monitoring of and reporting on the end use of United Nations cross border assistance be strengthened?

18-09250

15/15
