S/PV.7793

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7793

rd meeting
Tuesday, 25 October 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Zagaynov/Mr. Iliichev. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Ms. Gerashchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Implementing the common agenda
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2016/822)
Letter dated 14 October 2016 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2016/871)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-34131 (E)
*1634131*

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Implementing the common agenda
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2016/822)
Letter dated 14 October 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2016/871)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives Algeria,
Argentina,
Australia,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mexico, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women; and Ms. Rita Lopidia, Executive Director
and co-founder of the EVE Organization for Women
Development, South Sudan, on behalf of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Ms. Mara
Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender of the European
External Action Service of the European Union;
Ms. Marriët Schuurman, NATO Secretary General’s
Special Representative for Women, Peace and
Security; Mr. Paul Bekkers, Director of the Office of
2/90

25/10/2016

the Secretary General of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe; and Mrs. Louise Sharene
Bailey, Chargé d’Affaires of the Permanent Observer
Mission of the African Union to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/822, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/871, which contains
the text of a letter dated 14 October 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Russian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
very important meeting to discuss women’s role in
peace and security.
Women have a vital role to play in preventing
conflict and building and maintaining peace. But,
although that is now widely recognized, far too often
women are prevented from fully participating in
peacemaking and peacebuilding. We are all suffering
from the effects of that deficit. In our interconnected
world, insecurity and conflict in one country or region
affects us all.
Nine years ago, I addressed the Council during its
first open debate on women and peace and security (see
S/PV.5766). Since then, the United Nations has made
some progress in the promotion of the women and peace
and security agenda. The establishment of UN-Women
amplified women’s voices and created momentum for
women’s leadership on peace and security. The Office
of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict is focusing international attention on one of
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

the greatest moral challenges of our time. The Council
adopted new resolutions on women and peace and
security. Last year’s high-level reviews of our peace
operations and peacebuilding architecture, and the
global study on women and peace and security, spurred
new commitments and determination.
When I became Secretary-General, there were four
countries with national action plans on women and
peace and Security; today there are 63. I personally have
appointed many women as Special Envoys and Special
Representatives. I also appointed the first female Force
commander of a peacekeeping mission and the first
female Police Adviser. Hundreds of thousands of women
and girls are being helped and supported by United
Nations programmes in conflict-affected countries.
National and international tribunals have issued
verdicts that are historic milestones for gender justice.
Many countries have committed to action to prevent
and address conflict-related sexual violence. Perhaps
most important of all, we see more inclusive peace
processes and peace agreements. The Colombian peace
talks included a group dedicated to gender perspectives
and women’s rights. More women than ever before are
making decisions for peace and security in the halls of
Governments and international organizations.
I am painfully aware that, despite all those steps,
the situation remains far from equitable. I am ashamed
of the many atrocities that continue to be committed
against women and girls, including by some of our own
peacekeepers. I am angered by the continued political
exclusion of women. Peace processes, humanitarian
programmes and peacebuilding plans ignore them
and fail to meet their needs and protect their rights.
Look at the pictures of peace negotiations on Syria or
Yemen. There may be one woman at the table or in one
delegation. That is fully representative of the general
picture. And all that is against a backdrop of women
and girls suffering inequalities that are aggravated
by conflict, who are targeted for particularly brutal
crimes by violent extremist groups, including Da’esh
and Boko Haram. As we carry this agenda forward and
build on past efforts, I urge members to take several
specific steps.
First, I urge the Council to seek information
on women and girls in all its reports and briefings
on countries affected by conflict. Without relevant
information, peacekeeping mandates will never meet
the needs of women and girls. Too often, what is not
counted does not count.

S/PV.7793

Secondly, I urge the Council to hold all United
Nations peace operations accountable for putting
women and girls at the centre of their work.
Thirdly, I encourage the members of the Council
to listen to civil society, and in particular to women’s
groups, in all their deliberations on conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.
Fourthly, I urge the Council to make sure that there
are funds available for those activities. The failure to
fund this agenda is possibly the greatest obstacle we
face to implementation. I call on members to earmark
a minimum of 15 per cent of funding on peace and
security to programmes that address the needs of women
and girls, and to make full use of the new pooled fund
that was created to channel more resources to women’s
organizations working for peace.
And, fifthly, I encourage the Council to consider
ways to make peace negotiations more diverse. After
more than 15 years of advocacy, that has not happened.
Clearly, new ideas and stronger action are needed.
In failing to include women and girls in peacemaking
and peacebuilding processes, we are not only failing
women and girls, we are failing the world. This agenda
is not an optional extra, or a favour to women and
girls. It is fundamental to building sustainable peace
and ending the conflicts that are causing so much pain
and damage around the world. There is more research
emerging every year to demonstrate that. Let me remind
the Council of one finding among many, namely, that
peace accords are 35 per cent more likely to last at least
15 years if women are at the table.
I will never forget the strength of the thousands
of women and girls whom I have met in some of the
harshest places on the planet ravaged by war. I have
been inspired many times by women who are working
to prevent conflict and build peace, and by the sacrifice
of countless women human rights defenders. I urge the
Security Council to do everything possible to create the
conditions for peace in our world. I will never stop, and
we must never stop, in the urgent drive to bring women
into their rightful place at the heart of building peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.

16-341313/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: It is an honour to address
the Security Council and to present the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/822) on women and peace and
security on his behalf. I thank the presidency of the
Russian Federation for presiding over today’s debate
and for proposing to review the implementation of
the commitments made last year by Member States,
regional organizations and the United Nations.
Last year’s open debate (see S/PV.7533) had the
highest number of participating speakers in the entire
history of the Security Council. More than 180 political,
financial and institutional commitments were made
in the course of the high-level review of resolution
1325 (2000), and the new resolution 2242 (2015) was
adopted. Such commitments are important and can
make a difference. They must therefore not simply be
plans on paper; we must turn them into action. Last
year’s global study on women and peace and security
was also welcomed as a guide that can keep our work
in moving ahead. Today, therefore, we urge Member
States, regional organizations and the United Nations
to do more to take the study’s recommendations
forward and turn the commitments that were made
into concrete action. The Council is well positioned to
ensure we have greater accountability to one another
for our commitments.
UN-Women is already responding to many of the
findings and recommendations of the global study and
the appeal issued in resolution 2242 (2015). We are
serving as the secretariat for key new mechanisms, such
as the Council’s new Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security and the Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women and Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action. We are pleased to announce that
we will also perform a secretariat function in support
of the new network of national focal points.
And we are responding to last year’s call for
greater visibility and leadership in this area. We are
therefore mobilizing high-level champions who can
amplify our voice, message and presence everywhere,
and ensure that the agenda on women and peace and
security has the broadest possible support all over
the world. We are contributing to the implementation
of the peace operations review, in collaboration with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs. We are collaborating
closely with the Peacebuilding Support Office and
other partners in order to ensure that gender is fully
reflected in the agendas on sustaining peace and
4/90

25/10/2016

on youth and peace and security. I congratulate the
Peacebuilding Commission on adopting a gender
strategy, a first among our intergovernmental bodies.
We are also working hard to ensure that the United
Nations approach to preventing and countering violent
extremism engages women’s leadership, and that it
respects and promotes women’s rights.
While there is still much more to do, this year’s
annual report includes several markers of progress. For
the first time, the Peacebuilding Fund exceeded the
15 per cent target for funds intended directly for gender
equality and women’s empowerment. The percentage
of female beneficiaries of temporary employment
programmes has doubled since 2013, reaching 46 per
cent in 2015. The percentage of peace agreements that
include provisions on gender equality has increased
from 22 to 72 per cent in the past five years. In the
past few months we have seen several gender justice
milestones in both national and international courts. In
Guatemala, a national court prosecuted and convicted
people on charges of sexual slavery during armed
conflict, a first for a domestic court anywhere. In the
past year, the International Criminal Court secured its
first conviction for sexual and gender-based crimes.
And in Senegal, the trial of Hissène Habré saw the first
conviction of a former Head of State for personally
committing rape as an international crime.
But we have many challenges remaining. The
report also notes that there are many areas of concern
and stagnation. The percentage of women beneficiaries
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes has declined markedly, decreasing to 12 per
cent. In countries in conflict and post-conflict that have
no quotas, women occupied a mere 11 per cent of seats
in parliament, and their political participation has not
improved significantly over the past five years. In the 12
months since resolution 2242 (2015) urged that women
in civil society be asked to present briefings during the
Security Council’s country-specific deliberations, that
commitment has not materialized.
Countries in conflict and post-conflict situations
perform significantly worse in the areas of maternal
mortality and education for girls. The Security Council
is very aware of the atrocities committed against
women and girls in war-ravaged countries. We are still
counting the days since the Chibok girls were abducted.
We remain concerned about the many who have not
been found, in Nigeria or elsewhere. Although we
welcome the fact that 21 of them have returned, we will
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

continue to count the days until all are released. There
have also been extensive reports of abuses committed
against Iraqi and Syrian women and girls trapped
between Da’esh and the military operations against it,
including in the current situation in Mosul. Elsewhere,
South Sudanese women and girls are being raped by
armed actors with total impunity, as we will no doubt
hear this morning from Ms. Lopidia.
In addition to such examples of extreme violence
against women, we have countless examples of
women’s extreme political marginalization in public
life and decision-making, which must also be of
concern to the Council, in view of its considerable
power. In the first year of the Informal Expert Group,
members of the Security Council discussed four
country situations — Mali, Iraq, the Central African
Republic and Afghanistan. In Mali, of the 62 Malian
members of the committees in charge of monitoring
and implementing the peace agreement, only one
was a woman. The representation of women among
the committees’ international mediation members
is also dismal. In Iraq, there was not a single woman
in the four command cells for administering people’s
return to liberated areas, chaired by the Government
and members of the security forces, tribal sheikhs,
imams and notable community members. Since the
transition ended in the Central African Republic,
women’s representation in national institutions has
again dropped, to 8 per cent of members of parliament.
In Afghanistan, the international community’s huge
investment in the security sector could offer women
much more. Women make up less than 1 per cent of the
country’s armed forces and less than 2 per cent of its
national police.
In many of those contexts the United Nations itself
shows a similarly poor representation of women. In the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
women account for only 13 per cent of staff overall and
11 per cent of leadership positions. Such stark deficits
in our own gender balance cannot continue. We need
an intervention that can turn the tide. We pay a daily
price for this issue in our reputation and effectiveness
in the areas where we provide services. It is a challenge
that the incoming Secretary-General will have to face
in order to build on what has been started. We welcome
his commitment to taking concrete measures to achieve
gender parity within the United Nations. That would
be a breakthrough that could result in a much more

S/PV.7793

formidable United Nations by building on achievements
so far.
Finally, I would like to end by recognizing our
current Secretary-General’s contribution to women
and peace and security. The United Nations system
has made important progress on that agenda under his
leadership. We know that the issues are close to his
heart and that he will continue to champion them in his
future roles and whatever his new capacity will be, with
the support of UN-Women. UN-Women thanks him for
his commitment to women and peace and security, and
we thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to brief
the Council today.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lopidia.
Ms. Lopidia: I am speaking today in my capacity
as Executive Director and co-Founder of the EVE
Organization for Women Development in South Sudan
and on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.
In my country, conflict is spreading, tribal and
community tensions are mounting and more than
1.6 million South Sudanese are internally displaced.
For the majority of women in South Sudan, peace and
security remain a far-fetched and almost unattainable
notion. Women lack protection, live in fear, are at risk
of being raped daily, have almost no recourse to justice,
are economically disadvantaged and live in limited
freedom. Yet we stand united in our search for peace.
In my role as an activist for women’s rights and peace, I
meet many South Sudanese women, and the stories they
share with me are heartbreaking. A woman in Bentiu,
Unity state, told me recently, “I have been raped several
times, but I still have to go out. What option do I have? I
still have to find food for my children. On a lucky day, I
go out and nothing happens. On a bad day, I go out and
I am raped.”
I want to focus today on the critical involvement
of women during all phases of peace agreements; the
actions peacekeepers must take to include women in
protection strategies and, overall, be more responsive
to the needs of women and girls; our right to justice and
accountability; and strengthening inclusive institutions
and national frameworks.
I was part of the civil society delegation in Addis
Ababa advocating for women’s issues to be included in

16-341315/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

the agreement and for women to participate in all parts
of the peace process. It took significant advocacy for
women of civil society to sit at the negotiating table.
The inclusion of women’s issues and the signing of the
peace agreement in August 2015 gave South Sudanese
women hope. However, its implementation is not
guaranteed, as is evident from the violence that erupted
in July. Peace and stability will not come to South
Sudan if the agreement is not fully implemented.
I have just come from Nairobi where, along with
South Sudanese and global partners, I convened a
peace dialogue with representatives of the Transitional
Government, local and global women’s groups, faithbased organizations and academia. It is important that
such initiatives fostering people-to-people dialogue
be supported. We came together to call for an end to
the violence and for all South Sudanese leaders to rise
above tribal affiliations to build a peaceful national
identity based on respect, diversity, personal integrity
and women’s inclusion. The different parties to the
agreement must honour their commitments; denounce
violence, including widespread sexual violence; and
respect both the letter and spirit of the August 2015
agreement. The Security Council and the international
community must apply all necessary pressure to ensure
that the entire agreement is upheld by every side and
that South Sudanese women from national and grassroots organizations are included in its implementation
and monitoring.
Women peacebuilders and civil society colleagues
from Colombia have also asked me today to urge
the international community to ensure that the
comprehensive agreement reached in Havana is
salvaged. I join them in calling for women, including
Afro-Colombian and indigenous women, to continue to
be part of all discussions on the future of the agreement.
Across all conflicts and crisis situations, the
Security Council must also prioritize women and
girls’ protection. Peacekeeping missions mandated to
protect civilians, including the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), as well as
humanitarian agencies, must do a better job of seeking
out and listening to the needs of women and prioritizing
their protection. A crucial aspect of ensuring that women
are protected must involve increasing the number
of women peacekeepers to enable more responsive
channels for women to communicate their immediate
protection concerns and overall perspectives on the
security situation.
6/90

25/10/2016

Recognizing the urgent situation in my country,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2304 (2016)
in August. The Security Council should not allow
2017 to arrive without the Government and opposition
leaders of South Sudan meeting all the requirements
set out in the new resolution, including the deployment
of a regional protection force, the improvement of
UNMISS peacekeeping operations and the realignment
of transitional security arrangements for Juba and other
major cities and deadly flash points. South Sudan is
increasingly becoming a living hell for a lot of women
and, in my opinion, this should not be happening on the
Council’s watch.
If the Government and opposition leaders of South
Sudan do not meet the requirements set out in the latest
Security Council resolution, then the Security Council
must impose more targeted sanctions on individuals
and a total arms embargo. South Sudan has one of
the highest rates of arms per capita of any country
worldwide, which is exacerbating the violence in my
country. The Security Council’s reluctance to address
the ongoing impunity in South Sudan is prolonging this
conflict and its devastating impact on women.
Additionally transitional justice, accountability
and reconciliation are important parts of healing for
South Sudanese women and for women elsewhere.
The Security Council, the African Union and Member
States need to support the rule of law, including the
establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan and
the appointment of women in senior roles throughout
the Court. The Council must also not allow impunity to
fuel further violence and atrocities. Accountability must
also extend to sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by all United Nations and international staff.
The situation in my country today has reached a
dangerous tipping point. There is an urgent need for
good governance, respect for civil society, institutional
reforms and respect for women’s quotas in powersharing. South Sudan recently launched its national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), however there
seems to be little or no political will to translate it to
realities on the ground and so women continue to be
systematically excluded from decision-making.
Women’s voices not only in South Sudan, but also
from Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Mali, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
other conflict-affected areas around the world, must
be elevated. The Security Council, the Member States
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

and the United Nations must significantly improve their
engagement with women civil society during times of
crisis at Headquarters in New York and in missions,
including those undertaken by Security Council
members. Despite a commitment made this time last
year, the Security Council has yet to invite civil society
representatives to country-specific consultations.
Many other commitments were made last year
during the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000),
on promoting women’s participation and gender
equality, emphasizing conflict prevention and financing
the women and peace and security agenda. Unmet
commitments are just words and do nothing to bring
about peace. I look forward to hearing the concrete
actions that have been taken in the past 12 months to
improve the lives of South Sudanese women and of
other women around the world affected by conflict and
to promote their inclusion in all decision-making.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Lopidia for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I want to begin by commending the Russian presidency
for organizing this debate. We need only look around
the Chamber to see the high number of delegations
of Member States that are joining us today, and look
further up to see all the representatives of civil society,
to realize that there is a very powerful commitment on
the part of the international community as a whole to
the women and peace and security agenda, because, as
the Secretary-General so eloquently stated, this is not a
favour, but simply something we must do.
Exactly one year ago, I was in the same seat that
Ambassador Churkin is sitting in now and presiding
over a similar debate (see S/PV.7533). On that occasion,
113 States, showed their determination to agree to
specific and tangible commitments related to the
women and peace and security agenda.
But, before I move on, I would like to express
my thanks to the Secretary-General for his ongoing
commitment, throughout his two mandates, to the
women and peace and security agenda. I would also
like to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women, my
good friend Phumzile, and of course, Ms. Rita Lopidia
for their truly exceptional briefings. Without those
contributions, we would never reach our objectives.

S/PV.7793

At the high-level review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which my country had the honour
of presiding over last year, it was made clear that each
and every one of us have unavoidable responsibilities in
that regard, and that it is up to us all to achieve results.
Power and responsibility must be two faces of the same
coin. I am proud to say that in the two years that Spain
has been a member of the Security Council, one great
and long-standing daily priority has been resolution
1325 (2000). I would like to take this opportunity to
share two fundamental aspects with this forum. I shall
note first what, in our view, has been accomplished in
the past two years, and secondly, some improvements
that my country has made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Security Council has made
some very important accomplishments in the course of
the last two years.
First, the creation of the Security Council Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
under the joint chairmanship of Spain and the United
Kingdom, is a very innovative mechanism with regard
to working methods. It provides Security Council
members with the concrete information that we need
regarding leadership at the United Nations. It also helps
support efforts to broadly integrate gender perspective
within peacekeeping missions. The experts have held
meetings on Mali, Iraq, whose Ambassador I see here
and with whom we have done exceptional work, the
Central African Republic and Afghanistan.
Secondly, we have managed to help national
administrations to make greater headway in the peace
and security agenda. That is why the President of Spain
announced the creation of a network of national points
of contact for the resolution 1325 (2000). On September
23, Spain’s Minister of Foreign Affairs presided over
the launching of the network. The first conference of
the network of national points of contact will be held in
Spain in the first trimester of 2017. We thank Germany,
which will hold a similar conference the following year.
Over 50 States and regional organizations are founding
members of the focal points network. Moreover, as I
have explained previously and in line with resolution
2242 (2015), my country is committed to a series of
obligations that have truly helped advance resolution
1325 (2000) in Spain.
First of all, we have drafted a new national action
plan that is very progressive and will usher in change.

16-341317/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

Secondly, we will gradually increase the number
of women deployed in peacekeeping missions. It
is important to recall that as of 1999, women can
ascend to all positions of the armed forces and that
we give women priority so that they can participate
in peacekeeping missions. I see the Colombian
Ambassador here today. She knows full well that we
have surpassed the 20 per cent quota in the contingent
of women that will be deployed to that marvellous
country. Additionally, we believe that as the number
of women that participate in peacekeeping missions
increases, the unfortunate instances of sexual abuse
and exploitation that are, regrettably, still ongoing, will
be more effectively addressed.
Thirdly, we will step up prevention and training
efforts, nationally and with third States, by sharing
our capacities.
Fourthly, we have welcomed the interesting
Canadian initiative to create a network of military and
police advisers with regard to women and peace and
security. We also attended a ministerial conference
of defence ministers in London last month, where we
fully committed to uphold the London communiqué
adopted there.
Fifthly, we must all make greater efforts in
financing. We have earmarked €1 million of the 2016
budget to support exceptional instruments, such as
the Global Acceleration Instrument for Women and
Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, and
to strengthen certain capabilities, particularly the
gender units within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations or the Department of Political Affairs.
Lastly, in the humanitarian sphere, Spain has
allocated €1.7 million to specific projects that will
be part of the agenda, notably in Palestine, Syria and
Jordan. Additionally, during the World Humanitarian
Summit, my country committed, among other goals, to
set up a gender marker for 100 per cent of humanitarian
financing in 2018.
The agenda requires real commitment. We have the
tools and we have the resolutions. Now we need to show
that there is genuine political will to implement them.
That is why we hope that the effective participation of
women will be a priority during the next SecretaryGeneral’s mandate. I have heard him speak, I know
him, and I am sure that it will be so, but resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015) represent a cause that
affects us all. It is indeed a just cause, but above all it
8/90

25/10/2016

is necessary if we are to truly contribute to building a
peace with a solid foundation.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, for her
impassioned briefing. I would also like to pay tribute
to the commendable efforts of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon to promote the women and peace and
security agenda.
I would also like to thank Ms. Rita Lopida for her
moving statement. She gave voice to the suffering of
women in South Sudan. During its latest visit to Juba
and Wau, the Security Council witnessed that reality
with its own eyes.
This meeting is particularly important as it has
been a year since the adoption of historic resolution
2242 (2015) and the issuance of the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Despite the
many gains achieved on the issues of women and peace
and security during the past 16 years, there is only
temporary progress.
Women and girls remain the primary victims in areas
of conflict. In that vein, through its current membership
of the Security Council, Egypt is committed to sparing
no effort in supporting and developing the women
and peace and security agenda and implementing
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015), thereby
ensuring the protection of women in areas of armed
conflict and in other situations. It should also ensure
its genuine participation in maintaining and building
peace. In that regard, we look forward to cooperating
with Secretary-General designate António Guterres.
In line with our follow-up to the implementation of
the recommendations of the global study, we would like
to stress the following.
First, it is important to strike a balance between
the two main the pillars of the women and peace and
security agenda: protection and participation. The
international community must pay sufficient attention
to providing and delivering the necessary protection to
women in conflict and post-conflict areas, in parallel
with promoting women’s participation, so as to ensure
complementarity between both pillars. Providing
protection to women is a necessary precondition for their
effective participation during the post-conflict period.
Secondly, the women and peace and security
agenda continues to ignore the suffering of women
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

under foreign occupation. Palestinian women continue
to suffer under the yoke of Israeli occupation. Men are
not effectively participating in the implementation of
the agenda, which undermines its all-round credibility.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the gender-based
structure and gender-technical expertise within the
framework of the United Nations system and provide
assistance to States to build their capacities within that
framework, including increasing financial resources to
facilitate implementing the commitments of the women
and peace and security agenda and resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2242 (2015).
Fourthly, it is important to coordinate all United
Nations efforts, enlisting all its organs, including civil
society, regional organizations and communities, to
implement the recommendations of the global study.
That would avoid any duplication, redundancy or
controversy in carrying out such activities. We should
ensure coherence, as well, between the implementation
of the recommendations of the special review of
resolution 1325 (2000) mandated under resolution
2122 (2013) and the recommendations included in
other United Nations reviews. We should provide
the necessary financial resources to establish the
institutional framework, which will facilitate the followup to the implementation of such recommendations. In
that regard, we look forward to the contributions of the
Secretary-General designate to provide new proposals
to develop an effective institutional framework to
enhance the women and peace and security agenda in
the United Nations.
Fifthly, the recent adoption by the Peacebuilding
Commission of the gender strategy, as well as the
Peacebuilding Fund’s allocation of some of its resources
to empowering women in post-conflict States, represent
important albeit preliminary steps to achieve the
desired goal.
Egypt recently joined the national focal point
network for women and peace and security established
by Spain, and participated in the foundational meeting
of the network. At the regional level, Egypt has
participated effectively in drafting an Arab regional
strategy to implement resolution 1325 (2000) under
the aegis of the League of Arab States and through
cooperation with UN-Women. We have culturally
tailored the women and peace and security agenda
to the Arab context so that it addresses the specific
situations of the Arab region, including in particular the

S/PV.7793

plight of Palestinian women in the occupied territories
and the role of women in combatting terrorism and
extremist ideologies.
At the national level, Egypt is committed to
providing gender-based training for its forces
participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Other institutions are also playing a vital
role in countering the adulterated religious opinions,
including fatwas, issued by terrorist organizations in
conflict areas, especially those affecting the status of
women. Finally, the the Egyptian Agency of Partnership
for Development provides assistance to regions in armed
conflict, and we are sensitive to the gender dimension
in providing assistance.
We call for a renewal of the political and moral
commitment to empowering women in conflict and
post-conflict areas. Women represent the primary
component in the transitional stage from conflict to
development and from a fragmented community, owing
to armed conflict, to a healthy one capable of moving
forward and providing sustainable peace.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I too thank our
briefers and the Secretary-General for his personal
commitment to advancing the Women and Peace and
Security agenda.
I have four key points to make today, but frankly
it is disappointing that I have to make any of them
in 2016. It is my personal hope that by the time New
Zealand presides over the Security Council again, there
will no longer be a need for a separate women and
peace and security agenda. It is also my hope that, by
then, my colleagues will not feel the need to point out
how special it is to thank “Madam President” because
women presiding over the Council will no longer be
considered a novelty. In any case, let me go back to the
points that I am here to make in my national capacity.
First, the meaningful participation of women at all
stages of conflict is essential to achieving sustainable
peace. We know that gender equality is critical to
maintaining international peace and security. We know
that women and girls have a significant role to play
as leaders and decision-makers in the prevention and
durable resolution of conflict. As the Secretary-General
mentioned, we have the data. Women’s participation
increases the probability of a peace agreement lasting
at least two years by 20 per cent. That percentage rises
to 35 per cent after 15 years. But all too often, that is not
reflected in our peacebuilding activities.

16-341319/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

25/10/2016

On a positive note, the peace process in Colombia
has provided a best-practice example of women’s
participation. As we have heard, Colombian women
have successfully advocated for the inclusion of women
and ensured that the peace process adequately addresses
crucial issues, including violence against women and
community displacement. That must be maintained in
the ongoing dialogue towards a final peace agreement
and encourage contributors to the United Nations
Mission to respond to the call to deploy women.

warfare, and supports measures to tackle this challenge.
Ongoing United Nations leadership to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence will be
essential. New Zealand has also consistently supported
the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers.
It is time for an honest conversation among the
Secretariat, contributing countries and Member States
about why this continues to be a problem, how to stop it
and, when it occurs, how to respond.

We also commend the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
to establish a women’s advisory board to ensure
that the voices of Syrian women are reflected in the
peace process. Unfortunately, however, such positive
outcomes remain rare, and we have yet to achieve the
meaningful participation of women as a natural and
necessary element for all peace processes.

New Zealand has full confidence that the
Secretary-General-designate will take forward this
important agenda. We appreciate the strong signals
he has sent about his commitment to gender equality
within the Secretariat, and his acknowledgement that
full participation of women is essential to peace and
prosperity.

My second point is that the Security Council should
match rhetoric with action. That includes doing better
in the mandates we set for peace operations, ensuring
that United Nations missions have the right specialized
personnel and skills sets, and being more open-minded
about who briefs the Council.
Thirdly, the United Nations system must ensure
that gender perspectives are integrated across activities.
Appointments across the United Nations, including
at senior levels, must reflect the world around us. If
not the United Nations, who will take responsibility
for improved representation of women at all levels?
That is especially important for those operating in
conflict, fragile and post-conflict environments.
We should monitor and review such issues in the
Fifth Committee when we approve and fund posts.
That also means deploying more women in United
Nations missions. And it means ensuring that those
deployed — male and female — have the knowledge
and training required to respond to challenges related
to a lack of gender equality or women’s empowerment.
That requires making greater effort within our national
military and police forces. New Zealand is actively
increasing the recruitment, promotion and retention of
senior women within the police and the defence force.
We are determined to deploy women at all levels of
decision-making in conflict-resolution processes.
My final point is the need to combat conflict-related
sexual violence. Like others, New Zealand condemns
the use of sexual violence, including as a method of
10/90

We all benefit when the women and peace and
security agenda is fully realized: the operational
effectiveness of our peacekeeping missions improves,
our peacekeeping efforts are more likely to take hold
and we improve the chances of sustainable peace being
achieved. Those are goals to which we all should aspire.
Ms. Gerashchenko (Ukraine) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank the Secretary-General; Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women;
and the other briefers for their remarks. We very
much appreciate the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the issue of women and peace and security
(S/2016/822), issued in September. We approve of the
activities of new structures of the United Nations,
including the Informal Expert Group set up under
resolution 2242 (2015) on the problems of women and
peace and security, and the national coordinators in
Member States dealing with questions of women and
peace and security. The protection of women during
armed conflicts is an international issue.
Allow me now to speak in Russian to inform the
Council of the situation of Ukrainian women since the
war was launched against Ukraine.
(spoke in Russian)
I want to appeal to citizens of the Russian
Federation, that they should be able to know the real
truth of the war in Donbas and of the suffering of
Ukrainian women and children. Unfortunately, we have
first-hand experience of the horrible effects of conflicts
on women and children. The victims of Russian military
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

aggressions since the spring of 2014 have been millions
of Ukrainian women, and the Russian Federation is
fully responsible for violating human rights, both in
occupied Crimea and Donbas. This was recognized by
two recent resolutions of the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe.
Women and children are the most vulnerable during
these conflicts. Allow me to provide a few harrowing
figures. According to recent data, in Ukraine today
there are 1.7 million internally displaced persons. Of
those, about 900,000 are women and more than 236,000
are children. Over the past two years in Donbas, 495
women have died in the civilian population.
In this Chamber I would like to recall Yelena
Lafazan, a Russian-speaking woman from Mariupol.
She protected her 9-year-old daughter with her own
body during the attacks in Mariupol two years ago.
When she died, she had not even turned 40, and her
child lost one of her limbs. In another instance, Klim
Klimenko, a 3-year-old child, was protected by her
mother during a shooting in Kramatorsk in February
2015. The heroism of her mother, who was not even
30 years old, saved her life. During the armed conflict
launched by the Russian Federation against Ukraine, 68
children died and 152 children were seriously injured.
It is quite possible, though, that the figure we have is
incorrect because neither Ukrainian authorities nor
international humanitarian organizations yet have
access to the occupied territories. We therefore cannot
know the exact number of the women and children who
have died. That is with regard to the civilian population.
With regard to the military, since the Russian
military aggression against Ukraine in Donbas began,
2,130 soldiers of the Ukrainian armed forces have
died, including the two women. Those soldiers were
protecting their motherland from the aggressors. As a
result of the war, 1,937 children have become orphans,
1,213 women have become widows, 1,975 Ukrainian
mothers have lost children and 142 Ukrainian women
are awaiting the return of their family members from
prisons in the occupied Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
And as a member of the Minsk Group on humanitarian
questions, I wish to inform the Council that,
unfortunately, the process of releasing the detained
persons has been blocked, and that is being used to
blackmail the Ukrainian authorities.
In this particularly difficult situation regarding
violations of the rights of women and children in the

S/PV.7793

occupied territories, the Russian occupying army has
taken Ukrainian women as hostages. According to the
Security Service of Ukraine, there are 238 Ukrainian
women in prison at the moment. At the moment, 233
women have been found they either have been released,
or their bodies have been identified, although five were
left in prison. The most well-known Kremlin prisoner,
Nadiya Savchenko, spent almost 2 years in a Russian
prison. Another Ukrainian woman — a journalist,
Maria Varfolomeyeva — was imprisoned for more than
a year in Luhansk. She was freed in March of this year.
Who was exchanged for those two Ukrainian
women? Russian militarymen Aleksandrov and
Yerofeev were released to free Savchenko, and one Ivan
Gorbunov to free Ms. Varfolomeyeva. This is a symbol
of the Russian Federation’s war in Donbas. Russian
military personnel are fighting by killing and taking as
prisoners Ukrainian women and children. Conflicts are
always accompanied by violence against women and
girls. We are aware of cases of trafficking in persons
on temporarily occupied territories, sexual violence
and exploitation, and the use of minors in military
activities, which are incompatible with human rights
law and unacceptable in our contemporary world and
goes against the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which was ratified by the Russian Federation. .
Allow me now to offer a few examples. Last month
we discovered a shocking fact regarding the gender
element of the violence in the temporary occupied
territories of Donetsk oblast. Such violence was
perpetrated by members of armed gangs and terrorist
groups, including fighters of the so-called Pyatnashka
International Brigade of the so-called Donetsk People’s
Republic. That involved the setting up of establishments
where minors were forced to provide sexual services.
Human trafficking also took place. Foreign nationals
established studios to produce child pornography, and
the materials were then distributed outside of Ukraine.
Furthermore, children were recruited and received
military training to participate in the fighting. That is
yet another example of what we are also trying to resolve
in the Minsk Working Group on Humanitarian Issues.
In the prisons of the so-called Donetsk People’s
Republic, a group of teenagers is being detained
under a charge of sabotage. We have videos of their
interrogations, in which tearful and frightened 14-yearold children are being threatened to the point that they
allegedly confess to various offenses. The militias
posted the videos on the Internet. Meanwhile, those

16-3413111/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

25/10/2016

children are still in prison, their fate is unknown
and international human rights organizations do
not have access to them. According to human rights
organizations, one in four persons imprisoned by
the militants has been subjected to violence or has
witnessed such violence. Human rights activists point
out that sexual violence is being used as part of the
torture regime in order to sow panic and fear.

first and foremost in the peacemaking processes. In
February 2016, the Ukrainian Government adopted
a national plan of action for implementing resolution
1325 (2000). The implementation of the plan will allow
us to ensure even greater participation by women in
peacekeeping and decision-making in the field of
national security and defence, and in further combating
gender-based violence.

Those facts give an idea of the
​​ real situation with
regard to human rights, or, more accurately, the lack
of such rights, in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine. More detailed information on the human
rights situation in the occupied territories is very
scarce. The Ukrainian authorities do not have accurate
statistics, including on gender-based violence, because
of the absence of Ukrainian human rights organizations
in the territories controlled by the rebels. And they do
not allow international human rights organizations to go
there, neither the Red Cross, Médecins sans frontières
nor United Nations organizations. We have been unable
to gather a complete set of evidence on the incidents,
including the cases of sexual violence.

The aggression against Ukraine has led to greater
involvement by women in the peacemaking processes,
and the President of Ukraine has appointed a woman to
a position in charge of the peace process in the Donbas
region. We also have women in at least two Minsk
working groups dealing with humanitarian and political
issues, and they are doing everything possible to ensure
a peaceful solution to the situation in the Donbas.

In that regard, I want to take this opportunity to
reiterate once again, on behalf of Ukraine, our appeal
to the United Nations to include in the mandates
of the appropriate bodies of the Organization the
need to combat sexual violence during the provoked
armed conflict in Ukraine and the Crimea. It is very
important for us to have not only rhetorical support
from the United Nations, but also specific actions
by the Organization, so that we can genuinely assess
the situation on the ground, and to have the results
reflected in the Secretary-General’s reports and in
further recommendations.
As to specific actions by our country in the context
of the problems relating to women and peace and
security in the current conditions of foreign aggression
against Ukraine and the occupation of part of Ukraine’s
territory, I would like to say the following. Ukrainian
women have rallied to deal with the current situation.
Female politicians, social activists, volunteers
and human rights activists are working actively to
re-establish peace, and their role in dealing with women
and peace and security issues is extremely important
and ever-growing.
I should also point out that today women make up
12 per cent of the members of the Government and the
Parliament of Ukraine. They play a very active role,
12/90

But the war has also meant greater involvement
by women in the armed forces. Many Ukrainian
women voluntarily signed enlistment contracts in
order to protect their country against the aggression.
We now have 19,892 women in the armed forces of
Ukraine, of whom 2,458 are officers and 17,000 are
non-commissioned officers or soldiers. Of that group,
266 women were mobilized directly into the ranks of
the armed forces. Women also play an important role
in providing medical help at the front, and very often
they have been active in saving both civilians and our
soldiers during the conflict. This year we took a number
of special steps to include the gender component in the
area of security-sector reform. Although those measures
are just at their initial stage — to speak frankly — they
have already brought initial results: they have brought
about a transformation in the military structures and
the military culture.
This past summer we expanded the list of
specialities in which women can serve in the armed
forces, including in military functions. We need to
bring gender advisers into the military. We hope that
will be done soon and that the Ukrainian Government
will adopt such a measure. We plan to enact broader
legal changes so as to eliminate barriers, ensure the
equal representation of women in the military and
enhance parliamentary oversight of national security
and defence.
In order to respond appropriately to violence
against women, one of the upcoming steps to be taken
by the Parliament is to ratify the Council of Europe’s
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

against Women and Domestic Violence. I believe that
the Parliament in Ukraine will ratify the Istanbul
Convention during the current session. The relevant
bills have already been introduced in the Parliament,
and I hope that Parliament will ratify them this autumn.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Ukraine
wants to further promote the rights of women and
ensure their participation in peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction, as well as to protect
women against all forms of violence.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Russian Federation for organizing today’s
open debate on the topic “Women and peace and
security: implementing the common agenda”. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Executive
Director Mlambo-Ngcuka for their briefings. I also
listened carefully to the briefings delivered by the
representatives of civil society.
Thanks to the common efforts of Member States,
United Nations organs and regional organizations,
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security has recently made
progress. The international community has undertaken
comprehensive efforts to protect women’s security,
safeguard their rights and interests and push for a
greater role for women on peace and security. Those
efforts have resulted in progress. At the same time,
the international security situation remains complex
and grave, with the frequent occurrence of regional
conflicts. In some countries and regions, the threats of
terrorism and violent extremism are on the rise. And
women, being a vulnerable group in that regard, bear
the brunt of such violence. The international community
should closely coordinate and cooperate in providing
assistance and comprehensively enhancing the allround protection of women in conflict situations. I wish
to emphasize the following points.
First, the political settlement of regional hot-spot
issues needs to be promoted so as to create a favourable
external environment for the protection of women’s
rights and interests. The international community
should advocate the concepts of win-win cooperation
and peaceful development, assist the countries
concerned, advance political settlements and national
reconciliation and promote dialogue and consultations
as ways of resolving differences and of ensuring that
women are spared the impact of conflicts and are
able to enjoy a peace dividend. The full participation

S/PV.7793

of women in decision-making needs to be ensured at
all stages of peace processes so that they can leverage
their unique advantages and act as a positive force in
peacemaking.
Secondly, comprehensive economic and social
development needs to be promoted in order to provide
a sound basis for women’s empowerment. The
international community should help the countries
concerned in carrying out post-conflict reconstruction
by supporting them in enhancing capacity-building
so as to promote economic and social development
and better protect women’s rights and interests. The
international community should actively provide
development assistance and technical support to
developing countries to help them promote gender
equality and women’s empowerment, and at the same
time guide women’s groups and civil society so that they
can play a positive and constructive role in that respect.
Thirdly, cooperation among the various organs
of the United Nations should be promoted to generate
synergies aimed at protecting women in conflict
situations. The Security Council should fully shoulder
its primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, accord priority to issues related
to women and peace and security and strengthen
coordination with the relevant organs, including the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission and UN-Women. As
part of that process, the various organs of the United
Nations should fully utilize existing mechanisms and
improve their efficiency, and, at the same time, place
strong emphasis on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in protecting women in conflicts.
Fourthly, attention must be given to combating
sexual violence in conflicts in order to effectively
protect the legitimate rights and interests of women.
The international community should pay close attention
to the heinous acts of terrorists and extremists violating
women and aggressively combat such actions. The
international community should also pay attention to the
leading role of the countries concerned and help them
to comprehensively implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and enhance their ability to combat
sexual violence. The international community should
respond appropriately to terrorist threats, advance
international counter-terrorism cooperation and take
comprehensive measures to protect women from
terrorist and extremist forces.

16-3413113/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

In September last year, China and the United
Nations jointly sponsored the Global Summit on Women.
Chinese President Xi Jinping and representatives from
more than 140 countries, including approximately 80
Heads of State or Government, attended the Summit. The
Summit forged an international consensus, with world
leaders recommitting themselves to implementing the
outcome of the Beijing World Conference on Women.
That will have a major and profound impact on the
global women’s cause. President Xi Jinping announced
at the Summit China’s new commitments in support of
the development of the global women’s cause, including
contributing to UN-Women and providing assistance to
developing countries. Those commitments demonstrate
China’s firm resolve and practical action in its
commitment to the healthy development of the global
women’s cause. China is making comprehensive efforts
to implement those commitments.
In May, the 2016 Chinese presidency of the Group
of 20 (G-20) held the Women 20 Meeting in Xi’an,
under the theme “Equal participation and innovative
development”, in an effort to push for equal participation
of women in economic development and global
governance, as well as for improvement in women’s
economic empowerment. China is willing to work
together with the rest of the international community
to continue to push for the implementation of the goals
regarding women and peace and security and to make
tireless efforts towards further progress in the global
women’s cause.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
join others in thanking today’s briefers, Ms. MlamboNgcuka and Ms. Rita Lopidia, for their valuable insights
on this important topic.
Allow me to begin with a quotation from Ms. Alaa
Murabit, a Libyan female activist:
“I am an arms dealer in Libya, but my weapons
reduce violence and last longer than a bullet.”
Needless to say, the arms that Ms. Murabit promotes
are not real weapons, but rather take the form of
women’s participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. I believe her words well illustrate why the
Security Council has held annual debates on the issue
of women and peace and security for more than 15
years. The issue of women’s participation has real and
tangible effects on the promotion of international peace
and security.
14/90

25/10/2016

We continue to witness a large number of conflicts
around the world. According to the World Bank, 90 per
cent of conflicts from 2000 to 2009 were relapses.
It is against such a backdrop that securing women’s
participation in peace processes is vital for the success
and sustainability of those processes. For example, in
2014 a peace agreement was reached in Mindanao, the
Philippines, after 17 years of conflict, and another was
recently reached in Colombia after half a century of
civil war. It is noteworthy that in both of those recent
cases one third of the negotiators at the table were
women. Just like the case of Ms. Murabit in Libya,
those examples illustrate that many female activists are
seeking to bring peace to their countries — and they
are succeeding.
The year 2015 was a landmark year for the women
and peace and security agenda. The Security Council
adopted resolution 2242 (2015), which was the eighth
resolution on this agenda and which represents a steady
accumulation of norms on the issue. We welcome
the steady implementation of the resolution. Close to
70 countries have already announced their national
commitments to implement it. We also welcome
the establishment of the Informal Expert Group in
accordance with the resolution. We appreciate the
efforts that go beyond the resolution, such as the
establishment of national focal points in approximately
50 countries to exchange best practices on the issue.
Furthermore, the United Nations peacekeeping defence
ministerial meeting that Japan co-hosted in London
last month provided further momentum to women’s
participation in peacekeeping operations.
Those developments show that norms and
commitments are already on the table. I believe
that Council members should now implement their
commitments to advance the agenda. Japan has been
steadfast in implementing its own commitments
announced last October. To that end, Japan began
monitoring the implementation of its national action
plan this year. Moreover, we have expressed readiness
to support other countries in creating their own action
plans.
First, Japan and UN-Women co-hosted an AsiaPacific regional symposium in Bangkok in July, with
the aim of sharing our experiences in the draftin and
implementation of our national action plans. Similarly,
Japan supported the UN-Women project for League
of Arab State countries. By funding projects of UNWomen and the Office of the Special Representative of
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

the Secretary-General, led by Ms. Bangura, Japan aims
to protect and empower displaced and migrant women
in the Middle East and Africa. That issue requires
immediate and constant attention from the Security
Council in the world of today, as eloquently illustrated
by our briefers.
Before concluding, I would like to state that
Japan will once again host the World Assembly for
Women — WAW! for short — in Tokyo in December,
for the third consecutive year. Women and peace and
security will be one of the main topics of discussion,
and I look forward to sharing the outcomes with the
Council.
Security Council members must stand united in
promoting the agenda. Such a demonstration of unity
would carry greater political weight and convey a
stronger message to the world. During its tenure as a
member of the Council, Japan will continue to work
with other Council members and with the United
Nations as a whole to promote the important agenda.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
important debate on women and peace and security. We
commend the briefings by the Secretary-General and
by the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, whom we commend on her excellent
work leading that body, as well as the excellent
testimony given by Ms. Rita Lopidia.
The various forms of violence, discrimination
and gender inequality against women and girls are the
product of a number of factors having political and
economic roots that aggravate inequality. This is a
priority matter for the world today, in particular when,
because of armed conflicts of varying scales, women
are considerably and disproportionately impacted by
war more than ever.
The report presented this year (S/2016/822)
illustrates the fact that there has been some progress
in specific aspects of the agenda on women and peace
and security. An example is the increase in the number
of peace agreements that have specific provisions
relating to gender. We have also seen an increase in the
participation and presence of women in the mediation
processes that have been co-led by the United Nations.
There has also been significant progress with regard to
women and peace and security over the past 15 years
in legislative terms. However, there are still major

S/PV.7793

challenges. Women in conflict situations continue to
suffer in a disproportionate and brutal manner from the
consequences of armed conflicts. They continue to be
subjected to systematic violence and sexual abuse.
Venezuela urges the international community to
continue working on dealing with exclusion, inequality
and the various forms of sexual violence against women
and girls during armed conflicts. Such inexcusable
instances of violence only reflect and exacerbate the
disequilibrium and imbalance that women and girls are
already subject to in periods before armed conflicts.
During armed conflicts, those problems generate
specific vulnerabilities that require urgent action and
the highest possible political commitment.
We believe that it is a priority to address the
underlying causes that lead to the feminization of
poverty and the lack of opportunities regarding
access to health care, jobs, and political and economic
participation. We must therefore prevent exclusionary
paradigms and stereotypes that ignore the cultural and
ethical diversity and richness of our world. Women
cannot continue be the object of manipulation; they must
not be treated as objects used to advance commercial,
military or political goals. We are convinced that the
participation and contribution of women at all levels
and stages and in areas related to conflict resolution
are vital to preventing such conflicts and to achieving
lasting peace. There can be no international peace and
security if the half of the population that is represented
by women and girls is not included and taken into
consideration.
The bolstering of efforts aimed at ensuring the
effective implementation of resolutions dealing with
women and peace and security demands effective
coordination on the part of the States concerned, the
various relevant offices of the United Nations under
their respective mandates, and the various regional and
subregional mechanisms that deal with the issue. In
advancing those efforts and initiatives we should take
into account the participation of women in each of the
national contexts and conflicts. We should consider the
prevailing political models and the social, cultural and
religious models of each society in order to find the
most appropriate way to address the issue. We ought to
consider specific contexts and build models that can be
fine-tuned to each of those contexts.
It has been shown that, with respect to peace and
security, the percentage of aid given to promoting gender

16-3413115/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

equality and equity is very low. It is much less than what
we need in order to meet our commitments in that area.
A fundamental aspect of meeting those commitments is
the provision of sufficient resources to create resilience
in zones of conflict and post-conflict — in particular,
training and increasing the national institutional
capacities regarding gender, justice, health and social
welfare, and the empowerment and training needed for
the preparation and implementation of national action
plans on women and peace and security.
One of the other challenges facing the international
community today is the high level of violence and
sexual abuse used as tools of war by terrorist groups
in the Middle East and Africa, particularly the socalled Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, Jaysh al-Islam,
Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front, Boko Haram and all
other associated armed groups. Thousands of women
and girls have been victims of atrocities and crimes
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
particularly those who fall into ethnic and religious
minorities. Boko Haram has perpetrated more than
2,000 kidnappings of children, 276 of whom continue
to be missing.
It is unacceptable that women and girls throughout
the world continue to be considered the loot of war. It
infringes upon their human condition and is shameful.
There is also the situation of women and girls in
the Palestinian occupied territories, where they are
victims of disproportionate and constant violence,
assassinations and detentions. Other conflicts, such
as those in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen, have made
women and girls the targets of hate, violence and armed
attacks, all of which represent flagrant violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We cannot accept impunity in the
face of such crimes. Venezuela advocates assigning
accountability for all forms of sexual violence, and
there should be exemplary sentences handed down to
those found responsible for such crimes.
In that regard, we repeat our appeal regarding
the texts and resolutions of the Council relating
to the prohibition against the provision of arms or
financial and logistic support to such groups, so that
we can neutralize their operational capacities and
the horrendous practices of sexual exploitation and
violence. We reiterate our appeal to the international
community to strategically coordinate efforts to prevent
sexual violence. There must be a common front linking
16/90

25/10/2016

all possible efforts to prevent extremist violence and
terrorism.
We must also reiterate our categorical condemnation
of all incidents of sexual abuse and exploitation
committed by foreign armed forces, police or civilians
deployed by the Organization in peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. That includes
those staff who have not been formally deployed on
such missions. In accordance with the provisions of
resolution 2272 (2016), we support the zero-tolerance
policy regarding any sexual violence that is committed
by members of peacekeeping operations or military
missions under the mandate of and supported by the
Security Council. The United Nations should serve
as an example of coherence regarding the importance
of preventing such acts, particularly regarding the
accountability of all personnel of the Organization and
international armed forces who have been authorized
by this body and who commit such crimes.
We reassert our firm belief that women can be
major players in ensuring the emancipation of our
people. In our country women play a vital role in
constructing society. In the process of our Bolivarian
revolution, they have taken very important steps in
the legal and constitutional context aimed at achieving
gender equality at all levels regarding the functionality
of our State’s society. At the global level, women should
be working in and benefitting from equal conditions
and opportunities in the development of peace and they
should be included in an equal way. They have wrought
change. In the aforementioned historical process, we
reiterate our country’s commitment to continue to work
with determination in following the noble goal of paying
the historical debt of humankind back to women.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish first to thank
the presidency for convening this timely meeting,
which comes roughly one year after the completion
of the review of resolution 1325 (2000). I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon;
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka; and Ms. Rita Lopidia of South Sudan,
representing civil society, for their respective briefings.
My delegation greatly appreciates their tireless
commitment to women’s rights and empowerment in
the pursuit of peace and security, and we pay tribute to
their continued efforts in that regard.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and I wish
to add the following remarks to further contribute to
the discussion.
The high-level review and its accompanying
global study of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) successfully renewed international momentum
towards fully actualizing the involvement of women
and leveraged their influence on matters of peace and
security. Similarly, the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015) provided additional impetus for the Security
Council to explore issues of women and peace and
security more deeply, including in country-specific
contexts through the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security. I take this opportunity to
acknowledge and commend Spain and the United
Kingdom for their able leadership of the Informal
Expert Group, which has enriched broader Council
discussions. We commend the steps taken by Member
States to adopt or review national action plans on women
and peace and security and encourage their continued
implementation. The establishment of a women and
peace and security national focal point network is
another useful platform for sharing information and
experiences among Member States, including on
national action plans.
While there has been some progress, we stress that
much more can and must be done to fully utilize the
women and peace and security agenda to resolve and
prevent armed conflict. In our assessment, three key
areas require more focus and attention, namely, peace
processes, peacekeeping and policymaking.
We fully support efforts to increase and prioritize
the participation of women at all levels in peace
processes and mediation efforts. The peace process in
Colombia showed us how the significant involvement
of women, both at the main peace talks in Havana and
in regional and national consultations, was critical in
supporting the successful conclusion of the initial peace
agreement between the Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército
del Pueblo. Increased access to gender expertise by
international mediators and negotiating parties in the
drafting of peace agreements, resulting in the inclusion
of gender-specific provisions in a greater number of
agreements, is another positive development that should
be sustained.
We also share the assessment that the presence of
women peacekeepers in conflict zones can facilitate

S/PV.7793

interaction and confidence-building with local
communities and affected populations, particularly
women and children. In addition to endorsing the
three P’s — planning, pledges and performance — the
London communiqué adopted by the United Nations
peacekeeping defence ministerial meeting held last
month also affirmed the commitment to increase
women’s participation in uniformed roles. In that
regard, I am pleased to share that, as of 16 September,
Malaysia has increased from 26 to 40 the number
of women military personnel deployed within our
contingent under the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon.
Additionally, in implementing pledges on capacitybuilding made during the 2015 peacekeeping summit,
the Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre conducted three
training courses in the first half of this year on the
issues of gender, cultural diversity and the protection
of civilians, the latter with the cooperation of the
Government of Japan. The courses benefitted more
than 40 military and civilian personnel. We hope to
maintain and expand such training in the coming years.
Resolution 1325 (2000) recognized the need
for gender perspective to be taken into account in
political, security and humanitarian action. While
there has been some progress in mainstreaming gender
considerations in the work of the United Nations,
notably the recent adoption of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s gender strategy, there is still a long
way to go in fully implementing such policies. In that
regard, Malaysia believes that increasing the number
of women in decision-making positions contributes to
the development and implementation of holistic and
gender-inclusive policies that benefit the community,
the State and the Organization as a whole.
The call made in resolution 1325 (2000) for increased
representation of women at all decision-making levels
remains as acute and relevant now as it was then,
including within the United Nations. We continue to
support the Secretary-General’s efforts to achieve
gender parity within the United Nations, especially at
senior decision-making levels.
In conclusion, the women and peace and security
agenda aspires to restore the role of women and
girls — one half of humankind — as effective actors with
an equal stake in peace and security efforts. Our task
will be complete only when women’s representation and
participation in conflict prevention, management and

16-3413117/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

resolution is axiomatic. Until then, my delegation offers
its steadfast commitment and support to furthering the
Secretary-General’s agenda. We hope that SecretaryGeneral-designate Guterres will continue to build on
the women and peace and security initiative begun
under Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Under-SecretaryGeneral Mlambo-Ngcuka and Ms. Lopidia for their
briefings and reality checks from the real world. I have
two impressions from this debate so far.
First, the energy in the Chamber is palpable — it is
not an energy we often feel here — and it is very fair
to say that this agenda would not be before the Security
Council if not for the work of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), civil society and women’s
groups. This is something I think that States Members
of the United Nations need to bear in mind, especially
those that are increasingly trying to keep NGOs, civil
society groups and others from participating in United
Nations meetings.
Secondly, after listening to Council speakers, I am
struck that we are all drawing from the same handful of
examples. It is sad that we have only a limited roster of
very inspiring examples to draw from. I think another
true measure of our progress would be if each of us
spoke without repeating the same examples of Liberia,
Yemen et cetera. You will hear me draw upon the very
same examples that my colleagues have drawn upon;
we have got to do better. It is incredible that women
are fighting out in the world in the way that they are
and giving us these great sources of inspiration and
learning, but it should not be so exceptional and there
should not be so few.
Do not get me wrong: of course there has been
genuine progress since resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted, 16 long years ago, and some of that progress
is apparent on paper. In 2015, 70 per cent of peace
agreements signed had gender-specific provisions, as
compared to just 22 per cent of agreements in 2010.
That is a big leap in a short period. Over the past year
alone, 11 new countries completed national action plans
explaining how they are going to empower women to
resolve conflict and promote development. As we have
heard, that brings the total number to 64 countries.
Some progress has been made in representation, if
not on the Security Council, as there was at least one
woman present in the delegations for 9 of 11 active
18/90

25/10/2016

negotiation processes in 2015, as compared to 4 of 14 in
2011. That is not nothing.
The United States continues to support that
progress. President Obama released our second national
action plan in June and, in addition to contributing
$31 million to new initiatives launched over the past
year, we are also looking through our plan at how to
address new challenges. That includes how women can
more effectively contribute to strategies on countering
violent extremism.
Unfortunately, what the statistics miss is the
persistent gap between how men and women actually
contribute to peace processes. Even if women are present
at the table, which is still too rare, men are the ones who
almost always decide when and how to make peace.
Therefore, today I would like to talk briefly about why
we need to do more to promote not mere participation
but meaningful and effective participation, with a stress
on the word “effective”.
Let me start by describing the benefits of women’s
participation. As we have heard — and, again, these
are the same studies all of us cite — peace processes
are more likely to succeed when women are involved.
One study of 40 peace processes since 1989 found that,
the more women influenced a negotiation, the higher
the likelihood that an agreement would be reached.
Another study found that the likelihood of a peace
agreement lasting more than two years increased
by 20 per cent when women were involved. Why
is that? In part, it is because women often demand
results. When negotiations stall, as they inevitably do,
women’s groups can help push for talks to resume and
press the parties to reach consensus. Women tend to
demand more than what is politically expedient or in
their narrow self-interest. Again, this is on the basis
of limited data, because of the limited participation,
but women’s groups are known for lobbying for causes
that do go beyond gender, including for human rights,
transitional justice and reconciliation to be addressed
in peace agreements. Those are causes that are all too
often deferred or ignored when women are not there.
Here I will turn to the example of the Philippines.
In negotiations between the Government and the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front, a group seeking greater
autonomy for the country’s south, women were active
at every level, from working groups to serving as lead
negotiators. After negotiators reached an impasse
in 2010, the women participants called for a national
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

dialogue that generated new ideas to get the parties
talking again. When violence broke out after the
signing of the 2012 framework agreement, women
helped organize protests calling for the parties to get
back to the table.
Or let us consider the Colombia peace process,
where up to one-third of the participants at the table
were women. Those female representatives lobbied
relentlessly so that those who committed sexual violence
in the conflict would not be eligible for pardons. And
they advocated for economic support to help women
access new development opportunities in rural areas.
But these examples are still the exceptions. In
Syria, South Sudan and Yemen, men are the ones
making decisions, even as we sit here in negotiations.
Maybe it is time to heed the famous aphorism that the
definition of insanity is to do the same thing over and
over again and expect a different result. Too often, what
gets labelled as women’s participation is just checking
a box — a perfunctory meeting of male negotiators
with female members of civil society. This matters not
just for the content of a peace agreement itself; when
children see peace accords signed by groups of men,
the message received is that the men are the ones who
matter in affairs of State and who are empowered to end
conflicts. We do not want young girls internalizing that
message. We members of the Security Council need to
demand that women have the ability to influence the
course of negotiations, not just because women deserve
it — which of course they do — but because when women
are effective and meaningful participants, we have a
better chance at achieving the mission of the Security
Council, which is preserving peace and security.
That brings me to my second and final point. In
places where sexual violence is used as a weapon of
war, the Council needs to address more fundamental
needs — the protection of women and accountability
for those who commit abuses. Let us consider South
Sudan, which has already been mentioned. In South
Sudan’s Unity state, Government soldiers killed and
raped civilians, pillaged homes and destroyed livestock,
forcing families to flee into swamps to hide. Anyone
who left the swamps risked sexual assault, so when
women had to start venturing out to find food, these
communities reportedly nominated the oldest women
to go first to protect the children and teenagers from
being raped. When the first ones grew too weak or had
been raped too many times, these communities moved
to the next oldest woman. Let us just imagine for a

S/PV.7793

moment what the impact of these choices must be on
the women of Unity state in South Sudan — imagine
that was our own mother or grandmother going out to
shield our daughter.
Extremist groups are using medieval tactics
elsewhere to subjugate women. We see this with Boko
Haram, when the organization kidnapped schoolgirls
to be forcibly married to fighters or brainwashed to
be suicide bombers. We see this with Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, when Yazidi women and girls
are sold as sex slaves in markets. So building peace
in those conflicts must start by stopping the attacks
against women and making sure that women will not be
attacked with impunity. That means ending impunity
generally, which we are not doing a good job of.
Those women, however, are not just victims of
violence. Their experiences need to be part of the long
process of healing and rebuilding from a conflict.
Recognizing their dignity means not just inviting
them to negotiations but making sure that they are not
relegated to waiting in a side room for the men to break
from the real negotiations and to deign to come in and
receive their petition or hear their views. That may sound
simple, but frequently Member States treat violence
against women as a tragic by-product of conflict, left to
resolve itself once the men stop fighting.
Protecting women from attacks and holding
accountable those who commit these abuses need
to be essential components of brokering peace,
whether in our resolutions, in mediation processes or
in peace operations. We have seen and we live every
day how challenging this is. One place for members
of the Security Council to start is to make certain
that all components of the United Nations system do
their utmost to keep women in conflicts safe. That
is why the United States will continue to demand
that peacekeeping missions carry out their mandates
to protect civilians and why the Secretary-General
must ensure, as he recommitted to again today and as
stipulated in resolution 2272 (2016), that when there is
credible evidence of widespread or systematic sexual
exploitation and abuse by a peacekeeping unit, that
unit is swiftly repatriated. Zero tolerance must come to
mean zero tolerance.
Let me conclude with Liberia. Nobel Laureate
Leymah Gbowee organized women who were fed up
with the violence of Liberia’s civil war. When the
negotiators went to Ghana, Leymah and her growing

16-3413119/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

movement went too, surrounding the negotiators in
their hall to make sure that they did not come out until
peace was reached. As she told a reporter at the time,
the protest was
“a signal to the world that we the Liberian women
in Ghana at this conference are fed up with the war
and tired of fighting the killing of our people”.
Leymah added, “We can do it again if we want to”.
Let us imagine where we would be if every conflict
had groups of women like this. Now let us imagine our
world if people like Leymah were not just calling for
peace from outside conference centres, but if she and
others like her were sitting at the table on the inside.
Before a conflict, during a conflict and after a conflict,
women must have an effective, meaningful and impactful
voice. We on the Council must not rest until paper
progress becomes tangible progress and check-the-box
participation becomes meaningful participation.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank the Russian presidency for having
organized this annual debate on the topic of women
and peace and security, which the Security Council and
the international community continue to attach major
importance, in accordance with its primary mission of
conflict prevention and resolution.
The critical and multidimensional nature of this
issue were both clearly evident in the briefings we
have heard this morning. I warmly thank the briefers,
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women; and Ms. Rita Lopidia, Executive Director
of the EVE Organization for Women Development.
The Senegalese delegation also aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, to which Senegal belongs.
Insecurity in all its forms — social, political,
economic and environmental — is an impediment to
gender equality and to the empowerment of women.
Whenever and wherever there is insecurity, women and
girls are those primarily affected. However, as former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said, “women, who
know the price of conflict so well, are also often better
equipped than men to prevent or resolve it”.
But the specific life experiences of women in
conflict, as well as their skills, are not sufficiently
20/90

25/10/2016

taken into account in reconciliation, reconstruction
and peacebuilding processes, precisely because women
and girls are often kept away from decision-making
bodies. Last year, therefore, when we reviewed the
15 years since the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the Security Council recognized the urgent
need to effectively implement all its provisions at the
international, regional, subregional and national levels.
As is known, Senegal was among the earliest
African countries to enact legal standards for absolute
parity between men and women for all its elected
and semi-elected posts. At the same time, we have
pushed for the adoption by the African Union of the
same full gender parity within the governing bodies
of the African Union Commission. Senegal is also the
first African country to have successfully tested the
powerful mechanism of the “situation room”, the crisismanagement tool through which women deploy all their
energy, all their commitment and their entire sense of
responsibility in order to ensure that election processes
are as free, transparent and peaceful as possible.
Senegal has also taken the innovative approach of
translating resolution 1325 (2000) into the main popular
languages of Senegal in order to facilitate ownership of
its contents by the population and to promote capacitybuilding for women, for therein lies the success of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
On another level, in Senegal, a sectoral strategy
implemented by the Ministries of Defence and Security
has led to the institutionalization of the gender approach
in actions taken by the Senegalese defence and security
forces. Senegal has also adopted the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on sexual or gender-based
violence, particularly in peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore, Senegalese civil society organizations
are very active when it comes to advocating for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), primarily by
providing support for capacity-building for women and
girls.
Senegal has expressed its national commitment in
favour of resolution 1325 (2000) at the West African
subregional level, at the African continental level and
at the international level. With respect to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Senegal
has participated actively in the planning, organization
and monitoring of periodic regional conferences where
experiences with the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) are shared. At the first such conference,
organized in September 2010 in Dakar, the ECOWAS
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

Regional Action Plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted.
It was pursuant to this regional action plan that
Senegal drew up its own national action plan for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), which revolves
around three pillars. The first pillar is prevention,
which involves setting up monitoring structures to
better detect and fight against all forms of violence
against women. The second pillar is participation,
favouring the involvement of women in the conflictprevention, management and resolution mechanisms
and in traditional governance bodies. The third pillar
is assistance and restructuring, which are primarily
aimed at protecting the physical and mental health of
women, their economic empowerment, specific support
for women from vulnerable groups, and the launching
of programmes and structures that take into account
the specific needs of women in conflict and postconflict phases.
It is in this spirit that many efforts are currently
being made in Africa, where the commitment of regional
organizations clearly shows that peace is inextricably
linked with gender equality. In this respect, we welcome
regular holding of consultative meetings among the
member States of the African Union to assess regional
mechanisms for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The most recent of these meetings was held
in Addis Ababa in December 2015 at the initiative of
Mrs. Bineta Diop, African Union Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security, who is also the person
who conceived, hosted and popularized the situation
room I referred to earlier. We welcome her leadership
and tireless efforts to guarantee the safety of women
and children in countries affected by conflict in Africa.
Senegal also actively participates in other regional
initiatives such as the intergenerational dialogues
on peace and security involving women and girls.
It is along the same lines that my country joined the
wonderful Spanish initiative that my colleague Román
Oyarzun Marchesi has so eloquently spoken about,
namely, the establishment of the national focal point
network for women, peace and security. The first
meeting of that network took place on 23 September,
with the participation of Senegal.
Despite these commendable efforts, much remains
to be done because it is very clear that women and girls
continue to suffer disproportionately in conflict zones
and during conflict periods around the world. That is

S/PV.7793

why, in the context of emerging challenges in terms
of peace and security, it is urgent to invest further in
national early-warning and rapid-response mechanisms
in order to ensure the full participation women
and civil-society organizations in peace processes.
Similarly, we have to think about strengthening
dialogue between women and national and regional
authorities on women’s rights and the involvement of
women in peace and security processes. Accordingly,
we must further encourage the holding of regional
events on conflict before, during and after elections. It
is also crucial to promote education focused on peace
in order to create a true culture of peace in all States,
while further sensitizing defence and security forces,
legal practitioners and religious and traditional leaders
on all the implications of resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, I would like to point out that
improving women’s access to justice, the fight
against impunity and the effective empowerment of
women remain priority objectives in terms of the full
implementation of international, regional and national
instruments to promote and protect women’s rights, as
resolution 1325 (2000) calls on us to do.
Last year, at the global leaders’ summit meeting
presided over by the Chinese President here in New
York, at which Senegalese President Macky Sall
participated, strong and encouraging commitments
were made in favour of the full participation and better
representation of women at all levels. The effort to
fulfil these commitments will be the price we have to
pay to achieve peaceful and inclusive societies by 2030.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement and the
Russian presidency for organizing today’s debate
on a subject that, since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) 16 years ago, has been a priority of the
highest order for France in the Security Council. I
also thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for her
statement and her commitment, and Ms. Rita Lopidia,
for her statement and for her outstanding work as the
head of EVE Organization for Women Development,
South Sudan.
The promotion of women at the United Nations is
not a marketing ploy or a public-relations operation. It
is a fundamental issue in itself, and it is — let us make
no mistake about this — a condition of the success and
effectiveness of the United Nations. This is particularly
true for the women and peace and security agenda,

16-3413121/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

where we must fulfil our commitments and indeed
make them operational.
Since the adoption of foundational resolution 1325
(2000), seven other resolutions have been adopted by
the Security Council in the context of the women and
peace and security agenda. This topic has emerged
as a major element in the Council’s work, in United
Nations agencies and in peacekeeping operations. We
have worked collectively to take greater account of the
situation of women in conflict both to meet the specific
threats to them and protect them and to ensure their full
participation in peacebuilding.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2242 (2015)
one year ago marked the rebuilding of that agenda
and the renewal of our joint commitment. The reform
that began in 2015 is, above all, a political reform.
Resolution 2242 (2015) highlights the need for States to
ensure that women participate more actively in political
processes, peace negotiations and conflict prevention
and resolution mechanisms. States are responsible for
ensuring that women’s organizations are included in
discussions on international peace and security, not only
to hear their opinions but also and in particular to allow
them to make a contribution to the discussions. It is also
up to States to appoint more women to decision-making
posts, in particular, within the competent conflict
prevention and resolution structures. That same
responsibility lies with the United Nations, as it appoints
a greater number of women to posts as Special Envoys
or High-level Experts to the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General. This is encouraging but the
practice must become more widespread. During the
first few years of the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, some perhaps viewed
those appointments as symbolic but they should be
seen as effective actions that were taken to promote
international peace and security.
That leads me to the second aspect of the
reform that began 2015, relating to operations. The
increased participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is vital and relates both to the number
of women who participate in peacekeeping operations
and the level of their participation in all activities
pertaining to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Operational planning and the development of mandates
must take those challenges into account at all stages of
the crisis — at the start of conflicts to prevent risks,
in particular by including women in decision-making
processes and conflict prevention policies; and during
22/90

25/10/2016

conflicts to protect women from violence, in particular
sexual violence and post-conflict, and to assist victims
in rebuilding their lives and by enabling them to fully
participate in rebuilding their country.
That would require close cooperation between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Department
of Field Support and the Department of Political Affairs,
on the one hand, and UN-Women, on the other. Much has
already been done to take into account the dimension
of gender equality in peacekeeping operations.
The mandates of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic have included the relevant
elements of resolutions on women and peace and
security. We must now go even further and streamline
that approach in all peacekeeping operations mandates.
France will continue to work towards that goal. Finally,
the implementation of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security allows for the improved
follow-up of such goals and a more systematic approach
to equality between men and women, with regard
to issues related to international peace and security.
France will play an active part and continue to play its
full role.
France has also set ambitious goals. At the national
level, on 4 March 2015, we adopted a second national
action plan for the period 2015-2018. That plan will be
subject to a mid-term review by civil society over the
next few weeks. In that regard, the French Government
is determined to pursue those efforts on the basis on
commitments made in 2015 within the framework of the
high-level review. The French Government will concern
to act with a view to gaining greater visibility for our
national action plan and to enable a greater number of
women to gain access to high ranking positions related
to peace and stability, in particular, to cite just one
example, with the goal of having 40 per cent of women
at the helm of our diplomatic network by 2018.
At the regional and international levels, we
continue to actively promote the women and peace
and security agenda. Within the European Union, we
implore other member States to systematically include
in their common defence policies the protection of
women in situations of conflict and the promotion of
their role in crisis emergence. I have said that, at the
United Nations, we work with a better understanding of
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7793

the agenda within peacekeeping operations mandates.
Within the Group of Seven, we encourage an ambitious
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda with our country partners. Finally, no later
than tomorrow, we are organizing in Paris a high-level
conference on peacekeeping operations in Frenchspeaking environments, which recalls the importance
of that agenda.

as well as the persistent non-compliance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law by the parties
in armed conflicts merely serves to intensify the
above-mentioned impact by increasing the suffering
of millions of innocent people. Resolution 1820 (2008)
was the first to recognize sexual violence as a tactic of
war.

At the same time, we remain committed on the
ground, with more than 900 persons deployed in six
peacekeeping operations, who receive training that
includes human rights and gender equality within
the context of peacekeeping operations. Above and
beyond the strict framework of international peace and
security, France remains fully committed to the United
Nations on the vital issue of violence against women
and, in that regard, along with the Netherlands, we will
present the biannual General Assembly draft resolution
on violence against women.

In spite of the efforts made at the national and
international levels, women and girls continue to be
subjected to deliberate attacks and are victims of
rape, gender-based violence, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, genital mutilation, human trafficking,
forced marriages and pregnancies and sexual
exploitation and abuse. The victims of sexual violence
in conflict situations endure irreversible physical and
psychological trauma and, on many occasions, suffer
from sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/
AIDS. That situation is of particular concern in the case
of forced pregnancy, given the impact of such diseases
on the health of mother and child and the stigmatization
and social exclusion they face and of which they are the
primary victims.

The holding of today’s public debate and its
success illustrates our common interest in promoting
an agenda that is crucial to all of our work on peace
and security. More than ever before, France would like
to play a leading role in this area through its national
public policies in the Security Council and in all
international forums in which our country participates.
The promotion of women at the United Nations is a
daily struggle for us all.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Russian presidency
for having convened today’s open debate and for the
concept paper (S/2016/871, annex); Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for the briefing on his annual report
on women and peace and security (S/2016/822); the
Executive Director of UN-Women, Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, for her briefing; and the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
and South Sudan civil society representative, Rita
Lopidia, for her valiant plea.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement of
the Group of Friends of women and peace and security
to be delivered by the representative of Canada.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a question mark with
regard to the women and peace and security agenda
by acknowledging the disproportionate impact of war
and armed conflict on women, boys and girls. Today,
16 years after its adoption, the growing incidence of
terrorism, the nature and proliferation of conflicts,

Attacks on hospitals and humanitarian personnel
are not the only form of violations of international law
but they prevent the victims of sexual violence, as well
as newborns and pregnant women, from having access
to health services and sexual and reproductive health
services, including abortion services as well as the
medication needed to ensure their survival. I urge parties
to armed conflict to comply with their international
obligations, in particular with the provisions of
resolution 2286 (2016), whose implementation is crucial
to alleviating the suffering of the weakest.
Likewise, we must deploy additional efforts to
ensure the sexual and reproductive rights of women in
conflict situations, as well as provide comprehensive,
non-discriminatory
health-care
services
and
psychological support to victims. Similarly, we deem
it crucial to step up the efforts of the United Nations as
a whole and of Member States to prevent and respond
to sexual violence against women in refugee camps,
which currently poses a major challenge.
Uruguay would like to stress the link between
sexual violence and the maintenance and financing
of terrorist organizations, since the latter use women
and girls as prizes or incentives to recruit men and
boys and thereby force them into prostitution. Given

16-3413123/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

this cruel reality, we deem it crucial to reaffirm the
collective political will and commitment to fight sexual
violence, mobilize additional financial resources so as
to create programmes that are capable of responding to
the needs of victims, and ensure effective research and
data-gathering procedures as well as access to justice
at the national and international levels, including the
International Criminal Court.
Similarly, we call for progress in the implementation
of the commitments undertaken at the international
level to eliminate all forms of human trafficking and
discrimination due to race, colour, gender, language,
religion, political views or any other characteristic or
social condition.
We are deeply concerned by the impact of armed
conflict on the education and in particular the literacy
of girls, whose schooling is disproportionately
impacted. We are also deeply dismayed at the impact
of forced child marriage on the education of girls, who
are excluded from formal education and in many cases
forced to do domestic work. According to the report
of the Secretary-General, in conflict situations girls
are 90 per cent more likely not to receive secondary
education than in countries that are not so affected.
Appropriate access to educational and political systems
and the economic empowerment of women must be
guaranteed in order to be able to make progress with
respect to these goals.
Women must be part of the solutions to these
global challenges. Their inclusion in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding as well as in decision-making processes
is not only fair but also necessary, and it is crucial
to take measures and actions that are sustainable
over time and properly reflect the challenges on the
ground. Experience has shown that women are relevant
players in the prevention and resolution of conflict.
They play an important role in the peacebuilding
process, the rebuilding of societies and the promotion
of new approaches with a gender perspective. In this
framework, we believe that it is necessary to provide
opportunities that enhance the potential of women in
these areas and ensure their planned and equitable
access to decision-making posts.
The participation of women in the military and
police components of peacekeeping operations has a
positive effect on the population, since it reduces the
undue use of force and makes it possible to become
closer to the local population, in particular when there
24/90

25/10/2016

have been cases of the sexual exploitation and abuse of
women and girls.
Despite all of the foregoing, very often we face
serious difficulties in enhancing the participation
and action of women in areas related to peace and
security. The number of women who participate in
peace negotiations is very low, as it is in terms of the
personnel deployed in peacekeeping operations, both
military and police. According to the report of the
Secretary-General, in December 2015 women made
up only 4.7 per cent of all deployed military experts,
3.2 per cent of military troops and 16.9 per cent of
police officers.
In this context, Uruguay reaffirms its commitment
through strengthening measures such as maintaining
an above-average percentage of women deployed in
peace operations; continuing with the mandatory
training of military troops that are to be deployed on
issues of the prevention of and response to violence,
sexual exploitation and abuse; and continuing with the
zero-tolerance policy in cases of misconduct, sexual
violence are any other violation of the code of conduct.
Likewise, we reiterate our commitment to the zerotolerance policy established by the Secretary-General
and our readiness to continue to ensure that those who
carry out acts of sexual exploitation and abuse are
held accountable.
We are aware of the fact that the problems associated
with women and girls due to armed conflict are very
extensive and complex and require multifaceted efforts to
be able to address them in a coherent and comprehensive
manner. In this respect, we welcome the efforts of civil
society and acknowledge in particular the synergies
that are possible in the context of the various global
tools available in this respect such as the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Sustainable Development Goals, the
value of exchanging experiences through the national
focal point network established by Spain, and the work
of the Security Council’s Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security.
Also crucial is the quality and quantity of the
information that reaches the Security Council, and,
in this respect, we commend the work done by the
Secretary-General in including specific information
in his country situation reports urging fine-tuning of
the relevant mechanisms. The efforts made to ensure
the greater participation of women in peacekeeping and
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

peacebuilding, as well as to adopt measures that reduce
the disproportionate impact of conflict on women, have
not had the desired results or allowed us to respond
effectively to the challenges on the ground. That is
why we deem it crucial to go beyond any approach that
leads us to exclude a segment of the population that is
particularly vulnerable to the effects of conflict from
the solutions and measures that are to be adopted.
Women are key actors precisely because they are direct
victims and because they make up approximately 50 per
cent of the civilian population affected.
In this respect, Uruguay is considering the holding
of an Arria Formula meeting in December to address
the possible synergy between the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the women and peace and security agenda.
We call upon the Secretary-General-designate, the
United Nations as a whole and all Member States to
continue to give pride of place to the women and peace
and security agenda and all that it entails.
It is frustrating that in the twenty-first century,
after so many discussions at the international level,
this reality has remained unchanged. We must act
with a focus on the challenges we are facing, which
require the more equitable participation of women at
all levels in peace and security discussions. We cannot
disregard this reality. We must undertake commitments
and devise solutions that are based on inclusion, not
exclusion. Millions of people are waiting for us to act.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his opening remarks and to UNWomen Executive Director Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/822), and we welcome Ms. Rita
Lopidia of South Sudan, who spoke on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
We were deeply touched by the message she conveyed
to the Council on the dire situation of women in
South Sudan.
Since the holding more than a year ago of the
open debate celebrating the fifteenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and the high-level review, this is an occasion
to assess the progress achieved so far. The global study
on the resolution’s implementation highlighted the
critical contribution of women to peace and security.
We join the Executive Director of UN-Women in her
call on Member States, regional organizations and the

S/PV.7793

United Nations to do more to take forward the study’s
recommendations and turn commitments into concrete
action.
We further share the Secretary-General’s view
on the need to strengthen women’s particiaption and
leadership in peace and security endeavours and on
United Nations progress towards achieving a gender
balance in its staff at all levels by emphasizing the
essential link between women’s involvement in
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction in order to ensure the effectiveness
and sustainability of these processes. The Permanent
Representative of the United States was particularly
eloquent in illustrating that reality.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/822)
provides key information on progress made following
the high-level review, highlighting some headway
made in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
More women are involved in peace talks, more peace
agreements include provisions related to the special
needs of women and girls in support of their rights,
additional personnel are being trained to prevent and
respond to sexual and other forms of violence against
women, and more countries are implementing national
action plans or related strategies. The establishment
of national focal point networks for women and
peace and security is step forward in strengthening
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda and in assisting Member States and
regional organizations through the exchange of best
practices and by improving coordination, funding and
assistance programmes.
Despite these improvements, including several
judicial cases of conflict-related sexual violence,
violations of the rights of women and girls persist,
including by non-State actors and terrorist organizations
that attack the fundamental rights of women as part of
their political agendas, making women and children
the main victims in conflict and post-conflicts
situations. We urge States to comply with international,
humanitarian, refugee and human rights law and to hold
violators accountable. The equitable participation and
full involvement of women in preventive diplomacy and
related decision-making processes regarding conflict
resolution and peacebuilding have been highlighted
by the Security Council and are attested to by the high
quality of gender expertise provided by the United
Nations in relevant mediation processes.

16-3413125/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

In Angola, women’s participation was decisive to
the attainment of peace. After the end of the armed
conflict, their direct involvement in peacebuilding
efforts was instrumental in providing psychological
support to the victims as counsellors of peace, in
national reconciliation and in strengthening social
cohesion. Moreover, relevant measures were adopted
promoting women’s empowerment, and women
are currently playing a crucial role in the political,
economic and social life of the country.
Following the review of resolution 1325 (2000),
significant progress was made in formulating a national
action plan, which has already been drafted by the
Commission for Social Policy and is due to be approved
soon by the Council of Ministers. The action plan sets
out seven objectives, with specified activities, goals
and indicators of performance aimed at increasing
the participation of women and integrating gender
equality into the prevention and resolution of conflicts;
the training and empowerment of women, girls and
boys focused on gender equality and gender-based
violence, the promotion and protection of women’s
and girls’ rights, their empowerment and education;
the participation of civil society in preventing and
eliminating gender-based violence; raising awareness
and knowledge of the women and peace and security
agenda in all ministerial departments, including a
gender-perspective in the national budget with a view
to fulfilling the commitments set out in resolution
1325 (2000); promoting women’s socioeconomic
development in rural communities; increasing food
security and contributing to poverty eradication.
Finally, we support the systematic inclusion of
provisions related to preventing conflict-related sexual
violence in relevant country-specific resolutions and
in the mandates of special political and peacekeeping
missions, and to increasing the inclusion of women
and gender advisers. We attach utmost importance
to the empowerment of women in peacebuilding
and sustaining peace efforts by making them full
participants in conflict prevention and resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): As the penholder
on women and peace and security, I want first to
welcome all of our numerous guests today and to thank
the Secretary-General and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
their briefings and all the work they do on this agenda.
26/90

25/10/2016

I also want to pay tribute to Rita Lopidia for her
briefing. Sha has given us a valuable insight into what
“women and peace and security” really means on the
ground in South Sudan. I commend the work that she
and others like her are doing to turn the words “peace”
and “security” into a reality. I also want to welcome the
fact that Russia, in organizing this debate, has accepted
the importance both of the women and peace and
security agenda and of the role of civil society on this
and, I hope, on other issues. Talking of civil society, I
want to pick up one of Rita’s points and assure her that
the United Kingdom will invite civil society to brief
in country-specific meetings under our presidency in
March, and I call on other presidencies to do the same.
More broadly, it is not enough to support the
women and peace and security agenda today, one day
a year. Words spoken in this Chamber are not enough.
Commitment means action every day throughout the
year in mandate renewals and other negotiations, here
and in capitals. And sadly, the reality at the moment is
that women and girls continue to be affected inordinately
by conflict and insecurity in Syria, in South Sudan and
in so many other places. And to compound the injustice,
while women’s lives are on the line, their voices are
seldom heard in the pursuit of peace. We need only look
at the gender balance of the Council.
And yet, in this very Chamber a year ago, we all
committed to doing something about it — to take the
words of resolution 2242 (2015), which I was proud
to draft with Román, and turn them into something
meaningful, something real. We have had a year — a
year to increase the effective participation of women
in peace processes; a year to increase women’s roles
in the military and peacekeeping; a year to increase
the finance to support all this work and more. So
how have we got on? Well, let me take those three
points — participation, peacekeeping and money — in
turn.
On the first, over the past year the United Kingdom
has been pushing to get women a seat at the negotiating
table, and not just because it is the right thing to do.
We are doing so because it works. As the SecretaryGeneral and Samantha reminded us, when women
are at the table the chances of peace increase by 20 to
35 per cent. And yet less than one in ten negotiators
is a woman. In Yemen, United Kingdom support has
enabled the United Nations Special Envoy to employ an
expert on women’s political participation. It has enabled
a UN-Women project to boost the influence of Yemeni
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

women in the peace process. And in Syria, we have
worked hard to ensure that women’s views are heard,
including through support for the Women’s Advisory
Board and the Women’s Consultative Committee that
Carolyn rightly mentioned.
Some would say that this counts for very little when
the bombs still fall — that these are just token gestures.
But as many of my colleagues have done, let us look at
Colombia. The guns have fallen silent. The negotiations
included a gender subcommission. Three delegations of
women’s organizations held talks with the negotiating
team in Havana. Those are not token gestures. They
are meaningful steps towards bringing a sustainable
end to more than 50 years of war, and I am proud of
the diplomatic and financial support from the United
Kingdom that has helped to make that happen.
Secondly, however, we must match those steps at
the negotiating table in United Nations peacekeeping
missions and our own militaries. Women have as much
of a role to play in keeping the peace as in negotiating it.
That is why the United Nations peacekeeping defence
ministerial meeting, held in London last month, included
such a strong focus on women and peace and security,
as Siti reminded us earlier. More than 60 countries
signed our ambitious communiqué, and we now need to
deliver on it, doubling the number of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations by 2020, increasing
the number of women in missions as a whole and
tackling every single allegation of sexual exploitation
and abuse until such horrific practices end. Our efforts
should not stop at peacekeeping. The United Kingdom
is updating the training that our armed forces receive
so that everyone understands the agenda on women and
peace and security and knows how to prevent sexual
violence in conflict. And we will be doing the same for
the troops we train from other countries, too.
Finally, an increase in our ambitions for women
and peace and security should be matched by an
increase in the financing underpinning it. That includes
more support for the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women and Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action (GAI), and for UN-Women and civil society.
It means making our development spending gendersensitive, something that the United Kingdom
continually strives for. And in the most basic terms, it
means increasing our spending on projects related to
women and peace and security. The United Kingdom
has increased its spending by more than 50 per cent, to

S/PV.7793

$10 million in this financial year, including $1 million
for the GAI, and I hope others will do the same.
But in conclusion, we need something more than
money. We need leaders — leaders like Rita Lopidia.
We did not choose a woman to be the next SecretaryGeneral, but in António Guterres we have chosen a
true champion of gender parity, and in appointing a
gender-balanced transition team, he is already off to
a good start. We look to him to continue that work
when he begins in earnest, and to help to make the
second anniversary of resolution 2242 (2015) an even
greaters success.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
Next year my country — and, we believe, others
far from its borders — will mark the centenary of an
event that has left a deep imprint on world history, the
October Revolution. As we look back on it today, our
assessments of its impact may be mixed, but one is
indisputable — it enshrined the full equality for women
in our country that has become firmly established on the
global socioeconomic and political agenda. In a certain
sense, the work the Security Council has been doing
in the past 16 years is a continuation of that process,
begun a century ago.
Since 2000, the Security Council has traditionally
held an open debate on women and peace and security in
the month of October. Sixteen years ago, our delegation
wholeheartedly supported the Security Council’s
consideration of this agenda item. As Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, the then Permanent Representative of Russia to
the United Nations, noted at the Council’s first meeting
on the subject, women
“are an enormous strength and can provide
invaluable assistance in reconciling belligerents
and tending the wounds of war” (S/PV.4208, p. 21).
The annual debate in the Council always evokes
great interest among delegations and presents a good
opportunity for analysing progress in achieving
the goals that have been set and how to increase the
effectiveness of our efforts. In the years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), much has been
done to turn its provisions into concrete action aimed at
improving the protection of women in armed conflicts
and ensuring their full and effective participation in
efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts.

16-3413127/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

25/10/2016

The women and peace and security agenda has
had increasing attention both from the Security
Council and the United Nations system in general,
as the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2016/822)
testifies. While it is vital to ensure that the work begun
continues, it is important to ensure that in developing
complex approaches we do not end up neglecting the
specifics of a given situation, and that the inclusion
of gender perspectives in that work does not become
an end in itself. The best results come when we avoid
grandstanding and focus on specific returns. That fully
applies to developing national action plans, which can
be an effective tool for concerned States when they
become involved in an armed conflict.

No less important is ensuring that the Security
Council’s work is focused on issues related to its
mandate. Artificially connecting the entire gamut
of gender issues to Council activity will lead to
an imbalance from the point of view of systemwide coordination and create obstacles to effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The Council
should focus its attention primarily on the situation
of women in extremely serious, large-scale armed
conflicts. That goal corresponds to the inclusion of a
gender component in the Secretary-General’s reports
on specific country situations. Needless to say, that
does not diminish the urgent task of combating threats
women’s lives and security caused by the barbarities of
terrorist groups.

Where my country is concerned, we are not about to
start preparing this type of national plan. Instead, work
is under way in Russia on a document of a different
kind — the Russian Federation’s national strategy for
action for women 2017 -2022. Its key areas of focus
include increasing women’s participation in political
life and the decision-making process; improving
their economic situation, including promoting
entrepreneurship for women; creating conditions
conducive to better women’s health; preventing
violence and protecting women from it; and overcoming
stereotypes about men’s and women’s social roles.

I would like to once again affirm our belief in
the importance of ensuring that the international
community gives proper attention to the situation of
women in armed conflict and their participation in
peacemaking. At the same time, of course, we should
remember that there is no more reliable way to protect
humankind, including women and children, from the
horrors of war than resolving crisis situations as quickly
as possible.

We should point out that in our country women
occupy a number of leading Government posts — the
President of the Federation Council of the Federal
Assembly, Deputy Prime Minister, President of the
Central Bank, the Ministers of Health and Education
and a number of other responsible positions. Women
also play a very significant part in the work of the
State Duma. They make up 17 per cent — six of 36
officers — of Russian police contingents abroad.
We
agree
with
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation on the need to strengthen the
coordination of United Nations entities in order to
accommodate gender mainstreaming in the context
of armed conflict. However, it is important to ensure
that they avoid duplication and contradictory action
and that their efforts are based on reliable sources of
information. The programmes and projects produced
by the Secretariat’s experts should be submitted for
intergovernmental discussion and follow-up approval.
It is after all the States that play the lead role in
implementing the women and peace and security agenda.
28/90

In conclusion, I am compelled to make one
more observation. Not for the first time, today the
representative of Ukraine strayed a long way beyond
the confines of our discussion to touch on the general
topic of the conflict in eastern Ukraine. That would not
exist were it not for the fact that Kyiv took the route of
armed suppression of the mood of protest that emerged
in the country after the Government was overthrown
with direct support from external forces. Ukrainian
forces have been shelling residential areas of Donetsk
and Luhansk for two years now, killing peaceful
civilians, including women and children.
As far as the attitude of the Ukrainian authorities to
women is concerned, I will simply cite a few facts from
a recent report of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. On 19 January 2015, some men in masks and
camouflage arrested a woman in her home. For more
than a week, they kept her in a basement in a Ukrainian
Security Service building, where they beat and
tortured her with electric shocks and burning plastic.
They threatened to rape her daughter if she refused to
confess. In another case, in June 2015, 10 armed men
in masks and black uniforms arrested another woman.
They put her in the basement of an unfinished building
where they beat her head and body with their fists and
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

a metal tube while threatening to rape and kill her. As
of August, the woman was still in detention. Those are
just two of the many examples that members can read
about in the report.
I would like to add that the conflict in eastern
Ukraine would have been resolved long ago had the
Kyiv authorities not time and again tried to rewrite or
tinker with the Minsk agreement reached a year and a
half ago. There was a reference to Nadiya Savchenko
in the statement by the representative of Ukraine. She
returned to Russia, where she stated that Kyiv should
apologize to the inhabitants of Donetsk and Luhansk. It
is a pity that the Government has neither the humanity
nor the political will to do so.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I would like to appeal
to speakers to deliver their statements at a normal speed
so that interpretation can be provided accurately.
I should like to inform participants that, given the
long list of speakers, we will continue with this meeting
through the lunch hour, and perhaps into the evening.
Speakers who wish to make a second intervention will
be able to do so once all those on the list of speakers has
been exhausted.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
Ms. Söder (Sweden): I am honoured to address the
Security Council at this yearly open debate. In fact, this
is a debate on peace and security, conflict resolution
and conflict prevention. It is about the core business of
the Council, not an add-on or an ad hoc discussion on
women and girls. The full and effective participation
of women and girls in peace processes is a necessary
condition for sustaining peace and for durable and
equitable peace for all. We strongly support the call of
Secretary-General-designate António Guterres for a
surge in peace diplomacy and his manifest dedication
to achieving gender equality. They go hand in hand. We
are convinced that to succeed such a surge must put the
participation of women and girls at centre stage. That
will guide us as we prepare to assume our seat in the
Council in January.

S/PV.7793

Both the world and the Council have made
progress, but we are still falling short. The task facing
the Council is to close the gap between ambition and
reality. After the global study and the adoption of the
corresponding resolution 2242 (2015) last year, our full
attention should be directed to carrying out our tasks to
effectively integrate and operationalize the women and
peace and security agenda in the daily business of the
Council. I would like to highlight some areas where we
see a need for improvement.
First, we must adopt a gender equality perspective
from the very outset, with a focus on the objective
of strengthening the situation of women and girls
in conflict situations. Their needs, challenges and
opportunities must be brought to the attention of the
Council — by the Secretariat, the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, UN-Women and others — and acted upon.
A continued dialogue with women’s organizations
and the relevant stakeholders in the field, through the
various parts of the United Nations system, is therefore
paramount. The Council should be actively engaging
with them.
Secondly, there is a need to improve data collection,
including sex-disaggregated statistics. Too often, we
make decisions based on incomplete data and analysis.
We cannot afford to fail to grasp the root causes of
conflict or to identify peace dividends and agents. For
instance, mothers, sisters, wives and daughters often
know where small arms are, and they are more likely to
see to it that they are handed in in under disarmament
programmes. They need to be part of such programmes
from their design to their implementation. For that to
happen, we need proper data. The Security Council and
the Secretariat should jointly endeavour to ensure that
the basis for every decision has a solid and actionable
gender perspective.
Thirdly, there is a need to ensure the full and
effective participation of women and girls in peace
processes. That requires the Security Council to
adopt strong mandates on participation, but also that
we strengthen our follow-up on such mandates. We
need to make sure that guidance is implemented and
that national efforts are recognized and supported, or
encouraged and requested if missing. We should hold
United Nations mediators, peacekeeping missions
and political missions accountable to their womenand-peace-and-security mandates. That is how we
can assist Colombian women in following through on

16-3413129/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

their remarkable peace work; or help Afghan girls to
receive an education; or Somali women to be properly
represented in the next legislative assembly.
Fourthly, we must incentivize through financing and
other means. We must make sure that enough resources
are dedicated to realizing this agenda. The 15 per cent
target in the three peace and security reviews is a step
in the right direction, but only as a first step. I am glad
that the Peacebuilding Fund is leading by example.
Conversely, we should critically review peace and
security missions, operations, projects and programmes
that do not meaningfully address gender equality or
provide for the participation of women and girls. We
should consider discontinuing funding to those that do
not. Indeed, there is an acute need to gender-mainstream
the United Nations regular and peacekeeping budgets.
Sweden believes that the Secretary-General should
be asked, in the outline draft resolution for the next
biennium, to present proposals on how to address
that shortcoming.
I am pleased to represent a feminist Government
with a feminist foreign policy. In that context, Sweden
naturally follows the work on women and peace and
security. For us this is about our three R’s: rights,
representation and resources. We will pursue this
agenda intensely during our term in the Security
Council, not only because it is right but also because
it is smart. We count on the partnership of all members
of the Council. More women simply means more peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): Given that
Sweden will become a non-permanent member of the
Security Council beginning in January, the statement
just delivered by its representative is very promising.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amolo (Kenya): Allow me to recognize the
presence earlier of the Secretary-General and that of
my sister the redoubtable Executive Director of UNWomen, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, as well as to
add the compliments of my delegation to those of other
delegations for the convening this important discussion
on women and peace and security.
Kenya welcomes the report (S/2016/822) of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
and takes note of the recommendations and conclusions
therein. They provide useful information on key areas
that need to be reinforced to enhance gender equality and
women’s empowerment in peace and security settings.
30/90

25/10/2016

Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted a year after
Kenya’s tenure on the Security Council came to an
end. Kenya commends the Security Council for its
sustained, committed engagement to the agenda on
women and peace and security over the past 16 years.
Kenya’s commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, is unequivocal. It is further underlined by our
full support at the regional level of the African Union
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa. I
am pleased to inform the Council that our Government
has undertaken a number of far-reaching measures to
that end.
In 2016, Kenya launched a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), aptly entitled
“Kuhusisha Wanawake ni Kudumisha Amani’ — which
in Kiswahili means “To Involve Women is to Sustain
Peace” — that encompasses the changing nature of
insecurity by incorporating women’s human security.
Secondly, the action plan will continue to
mainstream resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
into Kenya’s national development framework. The
national plan also takes into account progress made
by Kenya in advancing the promotion and protection
of women and girls, in accordance with the Kenyan
Constitution and intergovernmental and regional
policies related to security, peacebuilding and conflict
resolution; in improving the quality of women’s
participation in their contribution to security at the
national level by increasing their numbers through welltargeted recruitment; and in developing programmes
at the National Defence College that integrate gender
training for troops prior to deployment in peacekeeping
operations undertaken in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The Kenyan Constitution, promulgated in 2010,
now addresses structural discrimination challenges
and protects and guarantees fundamental freedoms
and the civic and socioeconomic rights of men and
women equally. Based on our national experience,
I would like to underscore the important role that
education, capacity-building and communication can
play in combatting violence against women and girls.
Kenya therefore urges all stakeholders, Member State
and the United Nations to prioritize education and the
creation of awareness of the critical role of women in
peacebuilding, peace and security.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

As the current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Kenya has been at the forefront of efforts
to operationalize the United Nations women and peace
and security agenda. On 7 September, the Commission
adopted a gender strategy to promote gender-sensitive
peacebuilding. The strategy acknowledges the vital
role of women’s leadership and participation in conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Kenya urges all
Member States to address issues relating to existing
gaps. I am convinced that only thus can we meet our
collective commitments to women, peace and security.
We therefore welcome the cogent remarks made by the
representative of the penholder, the United Kingdom,
advocating for champions and leaders, and we were
happy to note that the representative of Sweden is a
good candidate for such a champion.
Kenya also appreciates the comments made by
the representative of China, assigning additional
blame to terrorists in blatantly targeting women,
especially in our continent, Africa. Earlier today, the
President of our Republic, His Excellency Mr. Uhuru
Kenyatta, condemned in the strongest terms a terrorist
attack in Mandera by such depraved individuals. We
also appreciate Japan’s forward-looking approach to
enabling the World Assembly of Women meeting next
year in Japan. It is therefore necessary that we provide
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding,
target more funds towards gender equality, and support
special funds, such as the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women
and the United Nations Fund for Gender Equality.
Finally, Kenya believes that if the issue of the
diversion of resources from development to waging
war is not urgently addressed, our efforts to meet our
commitments to women and girls will continue to
lag behind.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Nigeria.
Ms. Ibrahim (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
the Russian Federation for convening this open debate
and for the excellent concept paper (S/2016/871, annex)
provided to guide our discussions.
Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
for his abiding investment in the cause of women, to
the Executive Director of UN-Women for her lucid
presentation, and to the non-governmental organization
representative for sharing her perspective.

S/PV.7793

Nigeria welcomes the opportunity to reflect on the
progress made in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda 16 years after the adoption
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). While we
acknowledge the substantial achievements made in this
endeavour, there are still challenges and significant gaps
yet to be addressed. They include the participation of
women in decision-making and leadership roles, more
involvement of women in the prevention of conflict and
peace efforts, insufficient funds, lack of disaggregated
data, forced displacement exacerbated by persistent
armed conflict, and continuing unprecedented levels of
sexual violence and assault. It is our expectation that
this debate could offer prospective solutions to address
the prevailing challenges and gaps, and suggestions
for acquiring the needed resources to advance the role
of women within the context of the global peace and
security architecture.
Meeting these challenges is critical to making
progress on the women and peace and security agenda.
This will require a multi-stakeholder approach involving
actors at the global, regional, subregional and national
levels. Communities, civil society and individuals also
have a crucial role to play.
At the global level, we acknowledge that the
Security Council has provided the leadership necessary
to give impetus to the women and peace and security
agenda, beginning with resolution 1325 (2000), which
set up the framework for subsequent Council resolutions
upon which the women and peace and security agenda
was built.
In Africa, the African Union has been a useful
platform for the advancement of the women and peace
and security agenda. It is to be noted that the African
Union Agenda 2063, which was adopted by African
Heads of State and Government in Addis Ababa in
January, places particular emphasis on the engagement
of women and youth in the continent’s development.
At the subregional level in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has been a major driver of the women and
peace and security agenda. In collaboration with the
United Nations Office for West Africa, in September
2010 ECOWAS developed an integrated plan of action
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
plan of action emphasizes the importance of the role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution, mediation

16-3413131/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

and peacebuilding efforts, as well as the rebuilding of
post-conflict societies.
Consistent with the subregional efforts, in August
2013 Nigeria launched a national action plan to fully
implement the relevant provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan reflects the Federal Government’s
commitment to ensuring the security of women and
girls during armed conflict and enhancing their
active and direct participation in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. Nigeria is also committed to the
provisions of resolution 1820 (2008), on ending acts of
sexual violence against women in conflict situations.
We are collaborating with our neighbours Chad,
Cameroon, the Niger and Benin, within the framework
of the Multinational Joint Task Force , to fight the Boko
Haram insurgency, which is targeting women and girls.
Our experience today is evidence that with determined
international collaboration, terrorism can be defeated.
The sustained efforts of Nigeria and its international
partners have culminated in the liberation of territories
previously occupied by Boko Haram.
It is to be noted that 80 per cent of the 2 million
internally displaced persons in the north-east of Nigeria
are women and girls. We have taken concrete steps to
address their humanitarian needs and to ensure that
the necessary conditions are established to enable the
voluntary return of the displaced persons to their places
of origin in safety and dignity. Indeed, as a sequel to the
aforementioned efforts, 21 of the captured Chibok girls
were released last week. The efforts will continue until
the remaining ones are eventually released.
We acknowledge the contributions of civil society
organizations as partners in the prevention, management
and resolution of disputes. The Nigerian Government
will continue to engage them as key stakeholders and
partners in the women and peace and security agenda.
Nigeria remains fully and firmly committed to the
promotion and protection of the rights of women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. We shall
work assiduously to enhance the participation of women
in peace and security initiatives. We are determined to
reinforce and implement the principles of resolution
1325 (2000) and, within that context, to address the
factors that impact negatively on the lives of women
and girls.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
32/90

25/10/2016

Ms. Bokhari (Norway): I am honoured to be
making this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway. I would like to thank all the previous
speakers, and not least Ms. Lopidia for her powerful
statement reminding us all of why we are here.
The eighth resolution, resolution 2242 (2015), on
women and peace and security was adopted at last year’s
open debate (see S/PV.7533). Never before had so many
countries sponsored a Security Council resolution.
Never before had so many statements been made. We
made commitments; we created expectations and we
were right to do so, because by then we knew what we
used to just believe. Where women are included and can
exert an influence, we are more likely to reach a peace
agreement and the peace is more likely to last. Where
women are involved in peacekeeping, the operation
enjoys more trust and is more effective. Where there is
political will, sexual violence can be addressed, even in
humanitarian crises.
Yet, in spite of our knowledge and experience, in
spite of our commitments, we still have a long way
to go. Women are still excluded from many processes
that will decide their future. Women are still suffering
abuse and even being targeted directly. We are still
not tapping into the resources of 50 per cent of our
populations when it matters the most. But steps have
been taken. We welcome the new Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security that briefs
the Security Council, and we welcome the national
focal points network that has been formed to ensure
greater accountability. We welcome UN-Women’s new
flagship on women and peace and security. And on the
ground, in spite of the challenges ahead, the Colombia
process has raised the bar.
From now on, women will expect to take part. Civil
society will demand to be heard. More stakeholders
will want to have a say, because it has been done before.
And even though the Syria talks are not moving in the
direction we hoped, the Geneva process has achieved
something new: women and civil society are consulted
regularly through innovative formal mechanisms. We
now have very concrete examples of inclusion. We have
been very happy to support these developments.
Inspired by a South African initiative, a Nordic
network of women mediators was launched in November
last year in Oslo. This means that Nordic women now
form a part of a global network of women mediators,
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

whose experience and competence we should draw on
in future peace and security operations. To refer to the
lack of competent women is no longer a viable excuse.
Finland and Norway are also cooperating with
the Department of Political Affairs on the training of
senior United Nations mediators. As sustaining peace
is coming to the forefront of the United Nations peace
and security efforts, the Nordic countries are working
to ensure that the women and peace and security agenda
is at the heart of this effort. Importantly, as we work
to prevent and counter violent extremism, we support
women’s organizations and youth networks, because
we believe that they are key players. We listen to them
in our policy development and support them through
concrete programmes. The Norwegian Prime Minister
recently launched a new dialogue forum for women
peacemakers on the front lines of violent extremism
and policymakers at the highest level. Training is
crucial to raise awareness and improve implementation
of the gender aspects of peacekeeping missions. That is
why the Nordic countries established the Nordic Centre
for Gender in Military Operations. In September, the
Swedish Armed Forces issued a handbook for gender
mainstreaming in operations, the very first of its kind.
In this context, we would also like to express our
strong support for the proposal by Spain and the United
Kingdom regarding a framework for a strengthened
Gender Advisory/Women, Peace and Security Unit in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support. This would enhance the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in both the short- and the long-term perspectives.
The Nordic countries deploy many women to
United Nations peace operations: 35 per cent of the
police officers deployed by Norway and 50 per cent
of those deployed by Sweden are women and 40 per
cent of all personnel Finland sends to civilian crisis
management operations are women. Women made up
50 per cent of the experts deployed by the Icelandic
Crisis Response Unit last year. This is because we
know that gender balance makes our contingents better.
We also support the African Union and several African
countries in their endeavours to train more women and
to ensure that their police forces are gender responsive.
Sexual violence destroys both individuals
and communities and it undermines peace and
development. That is why the Nordic countries are
focusing on preventing and combating such atrocities.

S/PV.7793

We are engaged in the Call to Action on Protection
from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies, which
is currently led by Sweden. We work with the African
Union and we support United Nations action, Justice
Rapid Response and civil society.
The Nordic countries will continue to promote the
1325 (2000) agenda wherever there are discussions
about peace and security, because we want peace and
we want a peace that lasts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Marinaki: First and foremost, we would like
to extend our special thanks to Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral on women and peace and security (S/2016/822)
and for her excellent leadership in promoting the
agenda of UN-Women and also to Ms. Rita Lopidia for
her moving testimony. It is an honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. I would like to express our appreciation
to the Russian Federation, as the President of the
Security Council, for organizing this open debate.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
The full and effective implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda remains a priority for the
European Union. The global strategy on the European
Union’s foreign and security policy sets a clear direction
that women and peace and security will continue to be
mainstreamed into all our external action. We firmly
stand by our commitments set out one year ago and we
promote as a priority the women and peace and security
agenda. We have actively followed up on our pledges
based on four main priorities.
First, we have promoted women’s participation
and leadership and we remain committed to leading
by example, such as in the case of the conclusion of
Iranian nuclear issue agreement in 2015, where High
Representative and Vice-President of the European
Commission, Ms. Federica Mogherini, as well as
Secretary-General of the European External Action
Service, Ms. Helga Schmid, were leading the European

16-3413133/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

Union’s negotiating team and now they are leading
and providing proper guidance to the important next
implementation phase. Out of our 10 civilian crisis
management missions, five are now led by women.
From Syria to Kosovo to South Sudan, we have been
using our influence externally to support women’s
participation in peace and security processes and in
humanitarian work.
Secondly, we have taken action against sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict with a strong
focus on the humanitarian dimension. We have funded
transitional justice processes in Kosovo, Colombia and
the Philippines to help address past abuses. We are
supporting projects in Ukraine and Burundi to tackle
the use of violence against women. Our humanitarian
projects that address sexual and gender-based violence
have reached almost 3.5 million direct beneficiaries
and we continue to support the excellent work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura.
Thirdly, we have further integrated gender into
countering emerging threats, including terrorism and
violent extremism, and in engaging women directly
in tackling the root causes of violence and extremism.
We have financed diverse community-based projects
across the Horn of Africa, in Pakistan and in the whole
of the Middle East and North Africa region.
Fourthly, we have strengthened our cooperative
frameworks, both within the European Union and with
our external partners. In June we also reconfirmed
our strategic partnership with UN-Women, and we are
finalizing the European gender focal points network
and the women, peace and security national focal
points network to connect all European stakeholders
through the agenda on gender and women and peace
and security. We have made progress in meeting the
substantial financial commitment we pledged a year
ago, and we will shortly publish new project proposals
to contribute to gender equality and women’s and girls’
empowerment in partner countries.
Let me conclude by reaffirming our commitment
as expressed during last year’s debate (see S/PV.7533).
The United Nations can continue to rely fully on the
European Union’s support, including in better, more
broadly, faster and more effectively promoting the
women and peace and security agenda worldwide.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
34/90

25/10/2016

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women and Security Council members
for their statements in support of the participation of
women in my country’s peace process. I would also
like to thank Ms. Rita Lopidia and her organization for
having shared her testimony. She can rest assured that
her appeal to the international community on behalf of
women from Colombian civil society who are seeking
to build peace to make sure that the agreement reached
in Havana is safeguarded will not fall on deaf ears.
My delegation thanks the Russian presidency for
convening this open debate, almost 16 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The President’s
concept paper (S/2016/871, annex), which his delegation
disseminated for the debate, states that all of the studies
that the Secretary-General commissioned last year
point to a significant link between the participation
of women in conflict prevention and resolution and
the effectiveness and sustainability of the subsequent
rebuilding. That conclusion was reflected in last year’s
resolution 2242 (2015). We must continue to prioritize
the participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution and peacebuilding, and States must
fully assume the responsibility of safeguarding
and guaranteeing women’s rights in a safe and
suitable environment.
In Colombia, as we close a difficult chapter of the
hemisphere’s most protracted conflict, we understand
that women and girls play a fundamental and proactive
role in the building of the peace we so desire. We can say
that the process has been a new, almost unprecedented
experience. It is the first time that a gender focus is
expressly included, not only through the participation
of women as fully empowered members of both
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
guerillas and the Government, but also through the
creation and work of a gender subcommission — that the
Secretary-General and many of delegations recognized
this morning — which, through often difficult but
respectful dialogue, bore fruit as all resulting chapters
of the final peace agreement provide concrete genderspecific provisions.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/822)
on women and peace and security indicates, women
accounted for up to a third of the participants at the
table, approximately half of those participating in the
consultations and over 60 per cent of the victims and
the experts that visited the negotiation table in Havana.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

We recognize that civil society, especially women’s
organizations, have spurred that rebuilding and the
future adherence to the agenda for women’s rights.
That is why they are now strategic State partners in
the search for that shared goal. Although challenges
remain, the Government’s resolve to overcoming
them is underpinned by its commitment to offering
women reparations for the injuries they have suffered,
guarantees that the abuses will not recur and preventive
measures. My country will continue to promote a culture
free of all forms of discrimination and violence. To that
end, we have signed on to the recently created Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network, an
initiative led by Spain and other regional countries.
In conclusion, in spite of the difficult results of
the 2 October referendum, the Government has called
for a national dialogue to bring together all parties to
help reach an agreement and its implementation as
soon as possible. The commitment to gender equity and
peace was strengthened on 21 October when President
Santos and 109 women’s organizations reaffirmed
their support for the peace agreement and welcomed
the fact that victims’ rights were at the heart of the
agreement and that the fundamental role of women and
girls in peacebuilding was recognized. The President
of Colombia will continue to strive for peace until the
very end of his mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank the Russian Federation for having convened this
debate, and the Secretary-General and the two briefers
for their unflagging commitment to this issue.
When it comes to peacebuilding, the international
community’s record this past year is uninspiring. Not
since 1945 have there been so many displaced persons,
many of whom are women and young girls. Armed
conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Iraq are ongoing, causing
immense suffering to their civilian populations. In
these challenging times, it is essential to promote
partnerships with civil society, and in particular with
women’s networks. Colombia is a perfect example of
the role that civil society women’s networks can play
in peace and peacebuilding efforts. In that regard,
I thank the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security and all affiliated organizations for their
tireless efforts to promote the women and peace and
security agenda here in New York.

S/PV.7793

Switzerland’s national action plan is a Government
instrument that contemplates a participative mechanism
designed specifically for civil society. This year will
see the third review of that plan. In that regard, civil
society organizations have drafted an alternative
implementation report. Switzerland will consider its
conclusions when it updates the national action plan
in 2017. Reports on the implementation of the national
action plan are regularly submitted for parliamentary
oversight. As for the fulfilment of the commitments
undertaken last year, we would like to highlight three
points.
First of all, in order to support political dialogue
in Libya and the process of drafting the constitution,
Switzerland has facilitated women’s discussion groups.
Thirty-eight women’s groups of different backgrounds
negotiated and drew up a peace programme, which
they launched at a high-level meeting in Geneva in
November 2015.
Secondly, non-State armed groups must be
considered in the implementation of the agenda
on women and peace and security. Switzerland
continues its efforts to facilitate direct dialogue with
those groups, which must recognize the principles
of international humanitarian law and commit to
respecting existing rules, including those regarding
sexual and gender-based violence. In that connection,
Switzerland supports the Women’s Initiative for Gender
Justice, a non-governmental organization that aims to
rehabilitate and reintegrate former child soldiers of
the Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda and victims
of sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by providing psychosocial support and access
to medical assistance. The project also contributes
to holding perpetrators of sexual and gender-based
violence accountable under national and international
law. For example, the documentation of sexual and
gender-based violence that was made possible through
this project was used against two Congolese rebel
leaders at the International Criminal Court.
Thirdly, sexual and gender-based violence is a
major, pressing issue. Accordingly, Switzerland will
make sexual and gender-based violence a priority in its
humanitarian commitments. That will include fostering
access for victims to various services, mainstreaming
the topic in the various areas of humanitarian aid and
supporting partner humanitarian organizations in their
work in the area of sexual and gender-based violence.

16-3413135/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

Switzerland continues to be one of the major donors
to UN-Women and has increased its contribution to
CHF48 million Swiss for the period from 2015 to 2017.
Earlier this month, we also inaugurated the new UNWomen Liaison Office at Geneva. As the SecretaryGeneral stated, Member States continue to shoulder the
primary responsibility for implementing the agenda for
women and peace and security. Switzerland is ready
to embrace that role and renews its commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Russian Federation for convening
this annual debate on women and peace and security.
I also thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women and the representative of civil
society for their briefings.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) and the
Global Study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) mandated under resolution 2122 (2013)
can only give new momentum to the role played by
women in conflict situations, the inclusion of a gender
perspective in all phases of peace processes and the
importance of increasing women’s participation in the
prevention of, and response to, conflict and in postconflict reconstruction.
Althouh we acknowledge that progress has been
made in implementing the agenda, it has not been
widespread, owing to geographical and political
limitations. It is therefore important that we take this
opportunity to review the peace agenda to renew the
commitment of the membership and advocate for
women and the gender perspective as core aspects in
international peacekeeping and security, and, above all,
the role of women and development in peacebuilding
and sustainable peace.
The adoption of General Assembly resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) has
served to establish a paradigm shift in the United Nations
international peace and security agenda with regard to
the concept of sustainable peace. Sustainable peace
requires comprehensive and long-term approaches that
link political action, security, justice, development, and
the promotion of human rights in support of national
36/90

25/10/2016

efforts, in which women play a central role. In particular,
we recognize the need to foster greater participation by
women in United Nations initiatives relating to conflict
prevention, mediation, the cessation of hostilities,
disarmament and the monitoring of peace agreements.
In that regard, Mexico highlights the successful
case of Colombia, where the negotiations process
leading up to the peace agreement in that country was
marked by the significant presence and participation
of women. We also acknowledge the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia to maximize the
number of women as observers and in all other roles.
The approaches followed in Colombia must become the
norm. Accordingly, we support calls upon the SecretaryGeneral to appoint more women mediators and women
leaders of mediation groups and to ensure that United
Nations-launched mediation processes incorporate a
gender perspective. Similarly, gender perspectives and
the specific needs of women must be comprehensively
included in all peace agreements.
It is essential that the activities carried out by a
peacekeeping or special political mission take into
account the specific needs of women and girls and
recognize the importance of their participation in
interactions with local communities. We therefore
support the idea of peacekeeping operations integrating
a gender perspective, starting from the planning phase
and in all other phases, and we support the integration
of gender advisers into such operations so as to provide
specific and differentiated attention to women and
girls who fall victim to conflict and violence. We
acknowledge that 16 peacekeeping operations already
have units or focal points dedicated to gender issues,
and we call for the same effort to be made in special
political missions, as there are gender experts in only 6
out of the 10 ongoing missions. In that regard, we also
underscore that the deployment of a greater number
of women on the ground, as well as an increase in the
number of female personnel in the national armies of
States Members, continues to be a priority.
Crises are not neutral in nature from a gender
perspective. Armed conflicts affect women more
because, unfortunately, sexual abuse and exploitation
have become a weapon of war. Mexico condemns in the
strongest terms the violence and sexual exploitation to
which women and girls have been subjected in situations
of armed conflict. For that reason, our country is a
regional champion of the Preventing Sexual Violence
in Conflict Initiative.
16-34131

25/10/2016

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

My country commends the actions taken by the
Secretary-General to prevent sexual abuse by personnel
serving under the United Nations flag. Such acts
must not be allowed to happen again. We particularly
welcome the appointment of a special coordinator
to deal with those issues and call upon all troopcontributing countries to strictly implement the zerotolerance policy in connection with the commission of
sexual abuse by their personnel. At the same time, we
support international efforts to harmonize the training
of military, police and civilian personnel in issues
involving gender and the prevention of sexual abuse.
Mexico also expresses its concern with regard to
the alarming increase in the use of sexual violence as
a tactic by terrorist groups, particularly those involved
in armed conflict. On that account, we welcome the
initiative of the Secretary-General to identify gender
equality as one of the priorities of his Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism, and we see it as a positive
sign that General Assembly resolution 70/291, which
was the culmination of the fifth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, highlights
the importance of promoting greater synergies among
Member States, the United Nations and women’s
organizations in developing strategies to combat
terrorism and violent extremism.
Finally, I reiterate Mexico’s commitment to the full
implementation of the sustainable peace agenda, while
comprehensively promoting programmes that meet the
specific needs of women in connection with prevention
and conflict in all of its phases.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his insightful briefing and strong
leadership in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda. We also welcome the briefin made by
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the important
civil-society perspective that we were provided with
this morning.
The 2015 high-level review on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), mandated under resolution
2122 (2013), provided an important opportunity not
only to reflect on the progress made towards the
implementation of the resolution, but also to calibrate
our collective ambition to promote our shared goal of
strengthening the role of women in conflict resolution,

peacebuilding,
justice systems.

peacekeeping

and

transitional

Resolution 2242 (2015) reaffirmed our strong
commitment to the normative framework that views
women as a pivotal element of the conflict-resolution
paradigm. We also welcome resolution 2250 (2015),
on youth and peace and security, as an important
complement and reinforcement of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Women across the world, from Columbia to
Uganda to Burundi to Tunisia, have emerged as leaders
and consensus-builders, thus inspiring hope of peace
and prosperity amid conflict, chaos and violence.
Yet millions of women and girls remain among the
most vulnerable in situations of armed conflict. The
perpetrators of crimes against women and girls include
Da’esh and Boko Haram, as well as States that use
sexual abuse as a weapon of war. In our region we
have seen thousands of women fall victim to brutal
oppression; countless others have suffered rape and
sexual abuse — the worst and the most traumatic form
of violence.
We agree with the Secretary-General that, despite
the momentum for change, support must go beyond
words. Renewed focus on the implementation of the
common agenda is therefore crucial. That is key to
overcoming operational gaps and challenges and to
delivering on our promise of peace and security. As
agents for peace, women also have a vital role to play in
achieving sustainable development, because peace and
development, as we all agree, are inextricably linked.
The empowerment of women is therefore also essential
for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
including those on poverty eradication, health care,
education and inclusive development.
Women’s special skills in mediation make them
particularly suited as Special Envoys and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, yet they
have had very few such missions. That clearly needs
to change.
Pakistan fully supports the objectives of the women
and peace and security agenda and has played an
important role in advancing those goals as a major troop
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Pakistani women peacekeepers have served as police
officers — brave police officers — and as doctors and
nurses in missions in Asia, Africa and the Balkans.
Gender sensitization is a mandatory part of training

16-3413137/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

for our peacekeepers. My country stands ready to share
our experience by conducting training programmes for
women security officers so as to enhance their capacity
to respond to crisis situations.
As host to the largest protracted refugee population
in the world, Pakistan has allowed unhindered access
by Afghan refugees, including women and girls, to
free education and health care and has enabled them
to secure employment. It is gratifying to note that the
core skills acquired by our Afghan sisters in Pakistan
are being used for the welfare of their homeland,
Afghanistan.
Pakistan firmly believes that the best way to
promote and safeguard the interests of women in
conflict situations is to address the root causes of
those conflicts and address cross-cutting issues of
governance. That would require synergy of efforts
towards conflict prevention and resolution. We also
believe that the Security Council should continue
to address the issues of the women and peace and
security, in accordance with its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. Any
digression from that mandate, or proliferation of new
mandates, runs the risk of undermining the consensus
around the vital issue.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Russia for putting the spotlight on
the women and peace and security agenda, and the
Secretary-General for his insightful recommendations
in his annual report (S/2016/822). We express our warm
appreciation to the UN-Women Executive Director
and her team. We also thank Ms. Rita Lopidia, a civil
society representative.
We commend the ongoing mechanisms set in place
after the 2015 high-level review panels on peacekeeping
and peacebuilding and the 15-year review of resolution
1325 (2000), which powerfully highlighted the women
and peace and security agenda. Notable among these
mechanisms are the Security Council’s new Informal
Expert Group, the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women and Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action, the network of women and peace and
security national focal points and the Peacebuilding
Commission’s gender strategy.
38/90

25/10/2016

At the same time, despite laudable strides made,
there is still insufficient participation and leadership by
women, both in times of conflict and of peace. As the
Secretary-General underscored in his report, the overall
share of women is either at the same level or has even
regressed in many key areas. It is therefore essential to
bridge the gap between intent and implementation and
between word and action. There is a need to increase the
availability of gender-disaggregated data and of reports
on progress towards implementing and monitoring these
commitments, to step up intense capacity-building
and to formulate strong new pro-women policies and
legislation. We need women to be engaged in mediation
and conflict resolution and in post-conflict and recovery
phases, with closer coordination by the relevant United
Nations entities.
Global processes are effective only when they
become strongly rooted on the ground. Allow me to
elaborate the steps taken by Kazakhstan to support
global efforts.
In collaboration with the Multi-Country Office
of UN-Women in Almaty, regional organizations,
the Parliament and civil society, Kazakhstan has
formulated its 1325 National Action Plan with a
designated budget, to be adopted this December. We
will enhance training on gender equality for the armed
and security forces, promote the participation of
women soldiers in peacekeeping operations and strictly
implement the zero-tolerance policy towards sexual
violence. We will ensure that women are present on
mediation teams and will appoint gender advisers, or
focal points, in the relevant ministries and departments.
We will work to achieve the global target of earmarking
15 per cent of our official development assistance for
women and peace and security. In 2017, we will set
out monitoring frameworks with progress indicators to
assess these targets.
We recognize the vital role of women in United
Nations peacekeeping and conflict resolution. We
are presently contributing by deploying our highly
qualified military observers with gender competence
to the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara and the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire. Kazakhstan has signed the London
Communiqué, which, among other topics, highlights
the role of women in peacekeeping. We also support
the new United Nations initiative for the appointment
of more women in senior United Nations leadership
positions and, at the same time, doubling the number of
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

women in the United Nations peacekeeping operations
by 2020.
We welcome the close links between peace, security
and sustainable development in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development — the nexus that is essential
for conflict prevention. We are focusing on Afghanistan
with a multidimensional approach of conflict prevention
and resolution, recovery, reintegration and humanitarian
assistance, through our official development aid
program, KazAID. In cooperation with Japan and the
United Nations Development Programme, in August
2016 we launched numerous interventions for gender
equality in Afghanistan, including providing policy
support and capacity development to its Ministry of
Women’s Affairs.
Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing support to the
women and peace and security agenda when it takes its
non-permanent seat on the Security Council, and would
like to see it kept as a cross-cutting priority item in the
Council’s deliberations. My country can be counted on
to be a strong voice on behalf of women’s protection
and empowerment.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Zehnder (Liechtenstein): It is my honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Austria, Slovenia,
Switzerland and my own country, Liechtenstein.
We welcome the opportunity to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
follow-up resolutions, notably resolution 2242 (2015),
adopted last year in the wake of the high-level review.
We would like to use this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his unwavering
support of the women and peace and security agenda
during his time in office. We look forward to working
with his successor, Mr. António Guterres, to strengthen
the women and peace and security agenda. We
would like to commend the Security Council for the
establishment of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, thereby implementing one
important aspect of resolution 2242 (2015). We hope
that the Council will keep the broader membership
informed of the work of the Expert Group and that its
work will lead to a stronger presence by women and
further peace and security debates and draft resolutions
on conflict situations before the Council.

S/PV.7793

As we can see from the name, peace is at the
centre of the women and peace and security agenda.
It is not just about making conflict safer for women or
including women in post-conflict reconstruction; most
important, it is about empowering women in order to
prevent conflict.
The need for the United Nations to become more
effective in conflict prevention was one of the main
outcomes of the three high-level reviews last year and
is one of the most important aspects of the global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
therefore call on the Security Council, the United Nations
and its States Members to place greater emphasis on
gender-sensitive conflict prevention and early warning.
We see the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up
Front Initiative as an important tool for doing so. We
also see a strong need for the United Nations to become
more effective in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) with regard to peacekeeping missions.
Therefore, we support the call for proper resources
for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations/
Department of Field Support gender advisers.
When we look at positive examples of the inclusion
of women in peace processes — for instance, in
Colombia — we clearly see that it is indispensable
to empower women as agents of peace. We have data
that show that women’s participation increases the
probability of a peace agreement lasting at least two
years by 20 per cent, and at least 15 years by 35 per cent.
In order to make that possible, we need to eliminate
barriers to their participation in peace-related activities.
We also need to ensure that women are fully included
during the formulation and implementation of earlywarning systems and peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts at all levels.
The massive displacement of people in different
conflict areas in the past year has once more shown
that, when conflicts arise, women and children are
among the first victims to suffer, not only in the
conflict zone but also when fleeing it. Hence we also
need to further strengthen the fight against human
trafficking. For that reason, we will jointly organize
a side event, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, on countering human trafficking
and achieving the universal ratification of the Palermo
Protocol, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, on Thursday,
27 October at 11.15 a.m. in Conference Room 9. We

16-3413139/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

call on all States that have not yet done so to ratify and
effectively implement the Palermo Protocol.
Let me conclude by emphasizing once more our
full commitment to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and all follow-up resolutions. We continue
to be committed to the pledges that we issued last
year during the fifteenth anniversary of the women
and peace and security agenda, and we hope that the
impressive amount of pledges issued by other States
will also be implemented in due time.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union and that
made by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Women, Peace and Security. In
addition, we fully support the statement to be made by
the representative of Italy later today, in the light of our
cooperation related to our upcoming split term in the
Security Council. Together with Italy, we will continue
to place gender at the heart of peace and security issues.
We feel proud that resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted
by the Council the last time that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands was a Council member, in 2000.
I will focus on three issues: first, on the Dutch
vision; secondly, the integration of resolution 1325
(2000) in our foreign and security policies; and, thirdly,
on the importance of national action plans.
My first point concerns the Dutch vision. Perhaps
I will also include a comment on our support for the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security. We are a strong supporter of the entire women
and peace and security agenda. As the global study has
shown us, our focus should be on putting the normative
framework we have built together over the past 15 years
into practice — into daily reality. We are convinced
that the only way to achieve sustainable peace is
by the meaningful inclusion of women in conflict
prevention, in conflict resolution and in mediation and
peace processes.
We promote the engagement of women and men
in changing power relationships and gender norms in
support of a more inclusive society. We believe that the
way forward is to take our best practices and turn them
into standard practices. The inclusion of women in peace
processes should be the rule rather than the exception.
40/90

25/10/2016

We welcome the establishment of the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security by the
Security Council as a result of resolution 2242 (2015).
We commend Spain’s efforts to make that resolution
a reality. We support the regular participation of civil
society in that Group, and we hope the Group will
continue to prove its added value to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.
That brings me to my second point, that is, the
integration of resolution 1325 (2000) in our foreign and
security policies. This is a key aim in the Netherlands.
I will provide an example. In the joint Spanish-Dutch
Gender in Operations training initiatives, we tried to
teach diplomats and military personnel about gender
and human rights issues. In that way, we tried to
contribute to the effectiveness of peace missions and
crisis management operations. Another example relates
to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. There, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands has made senior gender experts
available in an effort to address the high numbers of
sexual violence cases in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali.
Our third point focuses on the implementation of
our national action plan and on our support for the
national action plans of other countries. We published
our third national action plan last March. We drafted
it in partnership with more than 50 Dutch civil society
organizations and knowledge institutions. By trying
to coordinate our activities with those of civil society,
we aim to make each other stronger and to achieve
better, more sustainable results. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands encourages other countries to develop their
own national action plans, and we will try to support
them in doing so. Currently, in our third national action
plan we focus on eight countries in Africa and the
Middle East and North Africa region.
We support women’s participation in peace processes
through the support of civil society organizations. For
example, together with UN-Women — I am glad to
see the head of UN-Women is here — we assist female
members of Syrian civil society to unite in the Syrian
Women’s Initiative for Peace and Democracy. With
that initiative, which dates back a couple of years, we
aim to help Syrian women from different backgrounds
to pursue a common agenda and to give them a voice
during the Syrian peace talks. Some of the women we
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

supported have joined the Women’s Advisory Board of
the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura.
The advancement of the role of women is crucial in
all our efforts for peace, justice and development. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands will remain a partner to
promote the rights of women in all those dimensions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to thank the Russian Federation for the
invitation to take part in this important open debate
on women and peace and security on the sixteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
which Argentina supported as a non-permanent member
of the Council in 2000.
The merit of resolution 1325 (2000) has been to
acknowledge the important role that women play as key
actors in peace processes. The international community
should join forces to make this role possible. One of the
greatest challenges still is the implementation on the
ground by all stakeholders of the commitments made in
the framework of the United Nations.
Sustaining peace will be achieved only if we
increase the participation of women as actors in all
stages of the peace process, including in particular in
peacekeeping operations. We wish to underscore that
15 per cent of Argentine personnel participating in
peacekeeping operations or in special political missions
are women, according to the latest data. That is higher
than the general average of 4.22 per cent. We will
continue to work on deepening that commitment.
Argentina welcomes the establishment of the
informal national focal points tetwork for the agenda
on women and peace and security. I congratulate the
Kingdom of Spain for that initiative. The establishment
of that network multiplies the efforts for the full
achievement of the human rights of women in countries
in conflict, which contributes to the implementation by
States of their obligations and commitments.
Argentina fully agrees with the importance that
the United Nations attaches to the role of women in
preventive diplomacy, at the negotiating table and
in post-conflict reconstruction. That perspective is
naturally linked with the new concept of sustaining
peace, which recognizes the important role to be
performed by women.

S/PV.7793

For Argentina, the gender perspective in the design
and implementation of public policies is a priority. That
is why the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions is fully embedded in the firm
commitment assumed by the Government of my country
to achieve gender equality, the empowerment of women
and the defence and protection of women’s rights.
Argentina is committed to the meaningful
participation of women in decision-making and in all
peace processes. That is why we adopted our national
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions as an instrument
that integrates all national agencies working in the area
of women and peace and security. One of the goals of
the national action plan is to increase the participation
of women from various spheres — political, social,
economic and security — to contribute to conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and peacemaking.
My country strongly believes that more equitable
and egalitarian societies that respect the rights of
women are more peaceful societies. With that in mind,
strengthening the meaningful role of women in all
the phases of peace processes and mainstreaming a
gender perspective in peace agreements and in public
policies are priorities of our foreign policy in that
area. Argentina also encourages the incorporation of a
gender perspective into all peace processes involving
the United Nations. We consider it fundamental to work
with civil society organizations, which should continue
to participate in designing and implementing policies
related to the topic.
After the adoption of Argentina’s national plan
and its launch in 2016, Argentina offered to cooperate
with Columbia on gender topics in order to contribute
to the country’s peace process. We are convinced that
working towards the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will have a real impact on peacebuilding in
various parts of the world, which is why my country
has promoted its policies regarding women’s access to
justice and the fight against impunity. It has done that,
to give just one example, by participating in the Justice
Rapid Response initiative; my country is a member
of the initiative’s governing body and has nominated
experts to be included in its roster.
In many cases, the violation of women’s human
rights and the assaults against the sexual integrity of
women and girls in situations of conflict, as well as
the abduction of women and girls, with the goal of

16-3413141/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

exploiting them for work, sexual slavery and trafficking,
are committed by members of rebel or terrorist groups,
as well as by members of armed forces or security
forces. In some cases, such crimes are even committed
by members of participating peacekeeping operations.
We need to work in favour of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and to strengthen measures
aimed at preventing cases of sexual abuse and
exploitation in peacekeeping operations, in line with
the Organization’s zero-tolerance policy. We should
also implement the resolution with regard to its military,
police and civilian components, so as to move from a
culture of impunity to a culture of prevention. Such
measures would have a real impact on peacebuilding in
various parts of the world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): It is my pleasure to speak
on behalf of the 10 member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), which is made up
of Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country,
Thailand.
ASEAN wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2016/822), as well as
the Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and
the representative of civil society for their informative
briefings. We also wish to thank the Russian Federation
for convening this timely debate, which comes one
year after the conclusion of the high-level review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in
which Member States reiterated their commitment to
effectively implementing that milestone resolution.
It is encouraging to witness the growing awareness
around the world of the indispensable role of women
and their perspectives in the areas of peace and
security. Nevertheless, as rightly pointed out in the
Secretary-General’s report, the subject of women and
peace and security is not being sufficiently utilized to
prevent conflict, and much remains to be done at all
levels. In that regard, ASEAN would like to update
Security Council members on the progress made in our
region as a result of resolution 1325 (2000), confirming
its validity.
42/90

25/10/2016

As ASEAN implements the early stages of its
post-2015 Community, it continues to underscore
the increasing role and participation of women in all
three ASEAN pillars: the ASEAN Political-Security
Community, the ASEAN Economic Community and the
ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community. Women-related
issues and the gender perspective are addressed through
several key ASEAN mechanisms and frameworks.
Among others, allow me to mention the ASEAN
Committee on Women and the ASEAN Commission
on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of
Women and Children. The ASEAN Declaration on
the Advancement of Women was adopted to promote
the equitable and effective participation of women,
wherever possible, in all fields, as well as to integrate
the specific concerns of women and their roles as active
agents in peace, security and development into member
States’ national plans. The adoption of the ASEAN
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women and the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action on
the Elimination of Violence against Children provides
another concrete example that reaffirms ASEAN’s
commitment to tackle violence against women in
all forms. During the ASEAN Summit in Vientiane
in September, ASEAN leaders tasked the ASEAN
Commission on the Promotion and Protection of the
Rights of Women and Children to continue its efforts
in implementing the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action
on that issue.
At the second ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on
Women, held in Manila on 23 October 2015, all ASEAN
sectoral bodies and member States were encouraged to
promote gender responsiveness and integrate gender
mainstreaming into their respective activities and
initiatives. The Meeting also adopted the 2016-2020
Work Plan of the ASEAN Committee on Women,
which focuses on six key priority areas: the promotion
of women in leadership, non-gender stereotyping and
social norm change, gender mainstreaming across
the three pillars, the elimination of violence against
women, the economic empowerment of women and the
protection and empowerment of women in vulnerable
situations. Those priorities are comprehensive and very
much in line with the key aspects of resolution 1325
(2000).
ASEAN recognizes the constructive role and
valuable contributions of female peacekeepers, and we
therefore support the call for an increase in their number.
Several ASEAN members have already provided,
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

and will continue to provide, well-trained female
peacekeepers in response to that call. We strongly
hope that ASEAN’s holistic approach to addressing
women-related issues will be complementary to global
endeavours to implement resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security.
Please allow me to say a few words in my national
capacity. Like other Member States, the Kingdom of
Thailand attaches great importance to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which
requires collective international efforts. We therefore
welcome the establishment of the women, peace and
security national focal points network, proposed
by Spain and the United Kingdom, as an important
step towards that goal, and we have gladly joined
the initiative.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the need
for all of us to ensure the universal implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Thailand, together with other
ASEAN members, stands ready to work closely with
the international community in that respect.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): This morning we
heard from Ms. Rita Lopidia that women in conflict
situations lacked protection, lived in fear, were at risk
of being raped on a daily basis, had almost no access
to justice, were economically disadvantaged and lived
with limited freedoms. I therefore believe that women
have to transition from being victims to establishing
themselves as active agents for peace and security. We,
together with the United Nations system, must help
them to that end.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to concentrate today on the need for
cooperation. The issues that form part of the women
and peace and security agenda are interrelated and
interconnected, and must be addressed as such. For
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security framework at the national and international
levels, close and comprehensive cooperation is needed
among institutions and Governments. Hungary
welcomes the launching of the women, peace and
security national focal points network, and we hope that
it will effectively assist Member States to implement

S/PV.7793

the women and peace and security agenda. Moreover,
Hungary has already engaged in an interministerial
cooperation process to review how its national
contribution could be improved and has established
a women and peace and security national focal point
within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
In order to successfully implement a holistic
approach, we need to use all the tools available
within the United Nations system. We need actionable
recommendations on women and peace and security
matters, not only from the Security Council but also
from all treaty bodies. In addition, we should find ways
to use the Universal Periodic Review to accelerate its
further implementation.
Hungary strongly supports the efforts to increase
the meaningful participation of women at all stages and
levels of peace processes. We also encourage Member
States to support women’s engagement in local, national
and global decision-making structures, including the
participation of women in electoral processes. We have
heard today strong examples. They should inspire all of
us because they are examples for all of us and through
those examples we could create mechanisms that enable
the participation of women in conflict resolution,
peacebuilding and conflict prevention. In this period,
for example, Hungary financed a gender-based training
workshop in Kenya within the framework of its
international development cooperation strategy.
Women play a key role in areas affected by conflict
in ensuring the livelihoods of their families in the midst
of chaos, and are particularly active in communitybuilding and peace movements at the grass-roots level.
However, such women-led organizations are noticeably
fewer, or even absent, from formal peace processes.
We hope to see recognized the important role that
civil society and women-led organizations play in
peace processes. Similarly, the increased participation
of women in peacekeeping missions is of the utmost
importance. Their contribution could be particularly
useful in designing and implementing strategies for the
protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance.
The Security Council should also continue
to promote women’s participation and gender
mainstreaming as part of making peacebuilding
processes and post-conflict recovery efforts more
inclusive. We do not only want women to be present in
decision-making at the negotiation table because it is
just; we want them to be included because history has

16-3413143/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

shown so many times that the participation of women is
vital to peacebuilding and the creation of peaceful and
inclusive societies.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Galbavý (Slovakia): We thank the Russian
presidency for convening this open debate. We
appreciate the leadership and commitment of the
Security Council to gender equality in international
peace and security. We especially commend Spain and
the United Kingdom for their efforts in establishing and
co-chairing the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security. I would also like to commend the
UN-Women and its partners for their numerous ongoing
initiatives related to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Slovakia welcomes the establishment
in September of the women and peace and security
national focal point network, which will periodically
share and exchange lessons learned and best practices.
While aligning ourselves with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I
wish briefly to highlight a few additional points in my
national capacity.
As pointed out by speakers before me, the challenge
we face in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda is not a lack of a normative
framework, but rather the significant gaps that exist
when it comes to its implementation. That is a fact
despite the overwhelming evidence of the contributions
women bring to prevention and peacebuilding efforts
as agents of change. Resolution 2242 (2015) provides
a critical tool for the international community to make
tangible progress towards gender equality and peace.
The equal participation and involvement of women
in peace and security is a cross-cutting issue and gender
expertise is needed in all areas, including security sector
reform. The participation and involvement of women is
key to operational effectiveness, local ownership and
strengthened oversight. Increasing the recruitment of
female staff, preventing human rights violations and
collaborating with women’s organizations contribute
to creating an efficient, accountable and participatory
security sector that responds to the special needs of
both women and men.
Slovakia underlines the importance of the effective
implementation of resolution 2151 (2014), on security
sector reform. That landmark resolution underscores
44/90

25/10/2016

the importance of the equal and effective participation
and full involvement of women in all stages of
security sector reform. It underlines the vital role of
women in preventing conflict and in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as well as in strengthening civilian
protection measures in security services during the
reconstruction process. It suggests including more
women in training for security personnel and calls
for effective vetting processes in order to exclude
perpetrators of sexual violence from the security sector.
In conclusion, we underline our continued support
for the zero-tolerance policy of the United Nations and
the approach of zero impunity for all military, police
and civilian personnel of the United Nations in the area
of prevention and protection against sexual violence in
peacekeeping operations. We support resolution 2272
(2016), which requested that the Secretary-General
assess whether a Member State had taken steps to
investigate allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse,
held the perpetrators accountable and informed him
about the progress of investigations when determining
its participation in peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): First of all, I would like
to thank the Russian Federation for convening this
important and timely meeting.
I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
members of the Human Security Network, a crossregional network made up of Austria, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Switzerland, Thailand, South Africa as an observer
State and my own country, Slovenia. The Human
Security Network is an informal group of States that
promotes the integration of a human security approach
into policies and programmes at international, regional
and national levels.
We welcome this important and timely debate.
One year ago here in the Chamber we reaffirmed
commitments to further realize the women and peace
and security agenda (see S/PV.7533). With the adoption
of the resolution 2242 (2015), the Council once again
reaffirmed the importance of the agenda.
A crucial element of the women and peace and
security agenda is the involvement of women in
peace-related activities. We see today that more
women are involved in peace talks and that more peace
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

agreements include provisions that relate to the specific
needs of women and girls, including supporting their
human rights, as the 2016 report (S/2016/822) of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
highlights. The Network supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call that initiatives to promote women’s
participation and inclusive consultations should become
standard practice in the mediation of peace agreements.
Their important role as active agents of change in the
promotion and maintenance of peace and security in
all phases of conflict resolution and peacebuilding is
invaluable not just for women, but for society as a whole.
Despite the progress made and the recognition
of the facts that the women and peace and security
agenda is critical for conflict prevention and effective
responses to complex crises and that women are
important agents of progress in peace talks, they remain
unequally involved in those processes, particularly in
political dimensions. The positive role that women play
in all stages of conflict prevention and resolution is
often underestimated or even ignored, instead of being
recognized and utilized.
The Network calls upon Member States, United
Nations entities and regional and subregional
organizations to support Member States in their efforts
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent
resolutions, including resolution 2242 (2015). We call
for greater recognition of, and support for, women’s
participation in all stages of conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconciliation processes so that peace
agreements can be more attainable and sustainable.
The Network expresses its profound concern
regarding the impact of the unprecedented wave of
forced displacement on women and girls. In that
regard, it calls for the engagement of women in the
design and implementation of humanitarian action
and early recovery, while taking into account the
increasing needs for sustained donor support to
host countries and communities to appropriately
support women’s self-reliance and resilience, ensure
a strengthened humanitarian-developed nexus and
improve coordination with peacebuilding and human
rights efforts.
We also call for greater efforts to promote and
respect the human rights of women and girls as, well as
to strengthen all efforts to effectively address genderbased violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence. For too long, sexual violence against women

S/PV.7793

and girls has been committed on a systematic and
widespread scale as a crime against humanity, or even
a weapon of war. We stress the importance of fighting
impunity and ensuring accountability under national
or international jurisdictions. The perpetrators of such
crimes must be brought to justice.
As a group of countries promoting human security,
the Human Security Network would like to emphasize
that the personal security of women is essential
for human security. Women’s empowerment and
participation are the cornerstones of any prevention and
protection response.
The economic, political and social empowerment
of women and girls reduces their vulnerability and
enhances their ability to protect themselves and
exercise their rights. In that regard, we need to ensure
that women and girls’ interests are fully respected
and systematically integrated in the context of peace
processes. Strategies for the effective integration of
gender perspectives should therefore be pursued to
promote women’s empowerment and participation.
Allow me now to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the observer European Union and that made by the
representative of Liechtenstein on behalf of Slovenia,
Austria and Switzerland.
As was reiterated many times after last year’s
review, it is high time to begin showing tangible
results and bring the women and peace and security
agenda closer to women who can make a difference.
All stakeholders have to cooperate and harmonize their
efforts in order to avoid duplication, on the one hand,
and gaps, on the other. In that regard, Slovenia welcomes
the establishment of the women and peace and security
focal points network and the Council’s Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security.
Slovenia pays particular attention to awarenessraising and training on women and peace and security,
including within our national armed forces. It is
important that everyone involved in peace and security
processes be aware of the roles women play and the
advantages they bring to peace-related activites. The
experience of the Slovenian armed gorces is that higher
numbers of women in crisis management processes and
peacekeeping missions ensure better quality mediation,
in particular in the context of local communities and

16-3413145/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

25/10/2016

especially among socially underprivileged groups in
crisis areas, including local women. Raising awareness
and education on the comprehensive implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda has been
integrated into different educational programmes
and has become an important component of training
systems in the Slovenian armed forces.

which provides a clear road map for the implementation
of the women and peace and security framework. We
commend the work of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security and we are convinced
that its establishment will contribute to further
enhance coordination for gender mainstreaming in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.

To conclude, Slovenia agrees with the report of
the Secretary-General that prioritizing gender equality
and women’s empowerment in peace and security
settings must remain a continued effort. We all must
strive to remove obstacles to women’s participation,
in particular in efforts to prevent and combat sexualand gender-based violence and harmful practices that
impede women from enjoying human rights on an equal
footing with other members of society.

In terms of our institutional involvement, we
have appointed a focal point on women and peace and
security. Poland participated in the founding meeting of
the women and peace and security focal points network,
which took place here in New York. We commend Spain,
Canada, Chile, Japan, Namibia and the United Arab
Emirates for their timely initiative. We look forward
to upcoming meetings of the network, which we are
sure will provide a platform for the exchange of good
practices in the area of women and peace and security.
We are also working on our national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which will
enable us to better comply with our obligations under
the women and peace and security agenda.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): Let me
begin by thanking the Russian delegation for organizing
this timely debate.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
take this opportunity to share with the Security Council
some additional remarks in my national capacity.
In the year after the comprehensive reviews of
United Nations peace operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), concrete commitments were made to advance
women’s rights, in particular in terms of their political
participation and leadership in conflict and postconflict situations. Yet there is still a lot to be done to
strengthen women’s roles in conflict prevention, peace
negotiations and peacemaking processes.
Since it is a primary responsibility of Member States
to implement the commitments and obligations under
the women and peace and security agenda into national
policies and legislative framework, let me reassure
the Council that Poland remains committed to the
promotion of women’s meaningful participation in all
stages of peace processes in its three dimensions — the
political, institutional and financial.
As far as political engagement is concerned,
Poland has been participating in Security Council open
debates on women and peace and security and we have
co-sponsored many of the resolutions related to the
issue, including the most recent resolution 2242 (2015),
46/90

Last but not least, we have also decided to earmark
a minimum of 15 per cent of all our future funding
for the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund for gender
responsive policies, including those addressing the
special needs of women in post-conflict situations. We
believe that a predictable funding mechanism is vital
for the effective implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Apart from Member States responsibilities to
advance the women and peace and security agenda,
we must also acknowledge the role of the civil
society organizations, including women human
rights defenders and women-led non-governmental
organizations, as they play a crucial role at all levels
of conflict prevention, decision-making, mediation and
post-conflict resolution. We are convinced that close
collaboration between Governments and civil society
can significantly scale up the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
Let me conclude by highlighting the fact that
women are among the most vulnerable victims in war
and conflict situations, yet they are also often the ones
that trigger peace mechanisms. As the examples from
Liberia or Colombia show, women’s movements are
major agents of change in contributing to international
peace and security. It is our moral obligation to
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

enable their full participation in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Mr. Herrmann: The Holy See is pleased that the
Russian Federation presidency has chosen this topic for
an open debate in the Security Council, thereby bringing
it to the attention of the international community. The
Holy See has long advocated for increased involvement
by women in making, maintaining and building peace.
Therefore it appreciates the initiatives promoted by the
Security Council and Governments to raise awareness
and arrive at a fuller recognition of the vital role of
women in preventing the outbreak of war through
mediation and preventive diplomacy, in reconciling,
rehabilitating and rebuilding societies in post-war
situations and in avoiding relapses into armed conflict.
Women can, and should, play much greater roles in all
of those processes. Their special capacities to bring
order out of chaos, community out of division and peace
out of conflict, and their special gifts in educating
people to be more receptive and sensitive to the needs
of others, are essential to our goal to spare our world
from the scourges of war and to help to heal the wounds
of earlier and current violent conflicts.
In order to harness the special capacities of women
in peace and security, however, an international effort
should be made to enable them to succeed, something
that will be difficult to achieve if women still represent
a disproportionate number of the world’s disadvantaged.
The lack of access for women and girls to education,
particularly quality education, must be addressed. Sad
to say, as Pope Francis pointed out in his 25 September
2015 address to the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.3),
not everywhere are girls and women given full access
to education. Most of the time that results in their
being condemned to a second-class role within society
and in their being given no possibility of being heard.
Education is the great enabler for women, making it
possible for them to be able to contribute fully to the
promotion and consolidation of peace and harmony, not
only in the family but also in local communities and in
the entire world.
The Catholic Church has long placed great emphasis
on the absolute necessity of giving young women and
girls access to education. Today young women and girls
constitute the majority of students in many of the more

S/PV.7793

than 100,000 schools that the Catholic Church maintains
worldwide, from kindergartens to universities,
especially in regions where women and girls still suffer
discrimination. They learn the skills needed to become
well-trained educators and professionals, which will
help them to contribute to a secure and safe society.
The priority of ensuring a quality education for girls
and women is essential if we hope that they will
transmit to boys and men the necessary values to desist
from violence and conflict. The role and influence of
mothers are vital in the education of children and youth
in the values of peace, mutual respect, reconciliation
and healing. The peacemaking role of the mother in
the family is of the essence, not merely for a peaceful
and secure home but also for a peaceful and inclusive
safe society.
Setting up women to succeed in using their
talents for making, maintaining and building peace
also requires combating poverty and ensuring access
to other fundamental resources. In both urban and
rural areas, it is far more common for women to lack
access to basic services, including health care and
social protections. In vast areas of the world, the lack
of a consistent and nutritious food programme, clean
water and sanitation services, as well as the lack of
employment opportunities and decent pay, continue to
undermine women’s ability to play their role in the life
of their families and society as a whole.
Helping women to bring healing to the world by
addressing the causes and consequences of war and
violence also means protecting them in that vital
mission. The nearly 50 conflicts raging in various parts
of the world today call upon us to concentrate our efforts
on the plight of women and girls in violent situations.
Women who have fallen victim to violence must be
helped to overcome the stigma and shame to which they
are being subjected in some societies, and they must be
allowed to seek justice. It is so much more difficult for
women to sustain their families and care for their family
members who have been maimed by violence if their
own wounds are not being treated and the injustices
that they have suffered are not being remedied. With
so much money available for weapons, cannot the
world spare resources to compensate for the loss of life
and limb in the families and homes of those innocent
victims, so as to help them overcome the ravages of
conflict and enable them to become peacemakers?
The fact that women suffer disproportionately from
conflicts and wars, which they have not caused, creates

16-3413147/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

a false impression that women are solely victims and
not also peacemakers. It is high time — indeed, high
time is long past — that that flawed image be laid to
rest. The one sure way of achieving that is to harness to
the fullest extent the active role of women in all phases
of conflict prevention, mediation, conflict resolution
and post-conflict peacebuilding. Without the input and
specific skills of women, a deep understanding of the
causes of conflicts and of the most effective solutions to
end them and to build peace may never be fully attained.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
would like to thank the Russian delegation for
convening today’s debate. We would also like to thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UNWomen, and Ms. Rita Lopidia, Executive Director of
EVE Organization for Women Development, for their
briefings and their presence today.
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to add the following observations in my
national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to
Ms. Fatoumata Siré Diakité, late President and founder
of the Association for the Progress and Defence of
Women in Mali, who passed away on 14 October. She
was recognized as Woman of the Year in Mali in 2015
and was honoured by numerous awards. Ms. Diakité
opened the way for Mali to recognize the rights of
women in every domain — the fight against female
genital mutilation, child marriages and gender-based
violence. That woman serves as a model who can
inspire all of us.
An open debate (see S/PV.7533)was held a year
ago on the occasion of the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). It was the most
well-attended debate in the history of the Security
Council, with 113 speakers over a two-day period. The
vast majority of Member States co-sponsored resolution
2242 (2015). That overwhelming participation clearly
shows the importance that Member States attach
to the women and peace and security agenda. It is
indeed a matter that concerns us all. Our priority can
now be summed up in three words: implementation,
implementation, implementation.
48/90

25/10/2016

Today’s debate focuses quite rightly on progress
achieved in implementing the commitments undertaken
by Member States, regional organizations and the
United Nations in the high-level review of women and
peace and security in October 2015. Since the outset,
Belgium has strongly endorsed the women and peace
and security agenda. Currently, at the national level,
all Belgian stakeholders are focusing their efforts on
implementing our second national plan of action for
the agenda. We are also in the process of drafting our
third plan, in which we will give particular attention
to women’s key role in preventing violent extremism.
We are ready to share our experience in this field and
welcome with interest all the experiences and best
practices that our partners are willing to share.
At the international level, Belgium works closely
with multilateral organizations, such as UN-Women, to
strengthen national capacities for the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. In our
current National Action Plan, we have identified
three priority partner countries — Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and Mali — to which
we provide financial assistance for the financing of
specific projects. In Mali, together with UN-Women,
Belgium co-chairs the donor group devoted to the issue
of gender equality and has contributed €1.5 million
to the programme to support the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the peace process. In
Afghanistan, Belgium has supported the UN-Women
country programme with a contribution of €3 million.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Belgium
has contributed €2 million for the implementation of
the UN-Women programme entitled “Support for the
law and the participation of Congolese women in the
context of resolution 1325 (2000)”.
At the invitation of Spain, Belgium became a
founding member of the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network. We thank that country for its
initiative in that regard. We also wish to salute Spain
and the United Kingdom as co-chairs of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security for
their invaluable contributions, and we are pleased
to see that group of experts pursue its work on a
consolidated basis.
The Russian presidency has also asked us to think
about next steps in promoting the women and peace
and security agenda. I would like to make three very
concrete recommendations:
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

First, we urgently need to increase the active
participation and representation of women in all
political, justice and peace processes. Indeed, many
studies have shown that women’s participation increases
the effectiveness of humanitarian aid, the credibility
and quality of peacekeeping operations, the speed of
economic recovery in post-conflict situations and the
sustainability of peace agreements.
Secondly, in the fight against sexual violence
in conflict situations, the fight against impunity
is of paramount importance. This year is the tenth
anniversary of the Brussels Call to Action to Address
Sexual Violence in Conflict and Beyond. In the outcome
document of that international symposium, held in June
2006, participants committed themselves to
“intensify
international,
regional
and
national efforts to end impunity for perpetrators
by strengthening the legal and judicial systems
and by enacting and enforcing legislation, and
provide national justice systems with the necessary
resources to prosecute cases of sexual and genderbased violence”.
Belgium supports that appeal with determination
and actively contributes to current efforts to pursue
the so-called Islamic State — also known as
Da’esh — for its crimes, especially those committed
against the Yazidi community.
Thirdly and finally, the women and peace and
security agenda should be integrated into the thematic
work of the Security Council on counter-terrorism,
even when it comes to countries where groups such as
Boko Haram or the so-called Islamic State are active,
and into country strategies in line with commitments
made in resolution 2242 (2015).
In conclusion, I would like to invite all participants to
attend an event tomorrow morning entitled “From Local
Action to Global Change — Bottom-up Approaches on
Resolution 1325 (2000) from Iraq, Libya and Kenya”,
co-chaired by Costa Rica and my country, Belgium,
and organized by the WO=MEN, Women Peacemakers
Programme, PAX and Cordaid associations, It will
provide an important opportunity to illustrate the
important role of civil society in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.

S/PV.7793

Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke
in Spanish) Costa Rica congratulates the Council
presidency for convening today’s debate to analyse
the progress in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda a year after the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). That resolution represented a major change
in the inclusion of women in the context of peace and
security, promoting their direct involvement and their
active and meaningful participation in addressing the
disproportionate impact of conflict and violence on
women. In that way, they are recognized not as victims
but as agents of change, where empowered women, on
an equal footing with their male counterparts, are the
basis of peaceful and inclusive societies. We welcome
the briefing by the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the Secretary-General’s statement.
Although the positive effect that women generate in
negotiations in peace, conflict resolution, post-conflict
and humanitarian assistance processes has been
recognized, there is still resistance to the adequate and
meaningful integration of women in those processes.
That resistance lies partly in the high cost of political
will and partly in structural obstacles, as evidenced in
the large gap that persists in the presence of women
in leadership positions in entities dedicated to peace
and security activities. For example, during 2015, fewer
than 10 per cent of the management positions in peace
and security activities at the United Nations were held
by women.
Gender balance in senior-level management is
desirable and necessary. Only 22 per cent of the UnderSecretaries-General today are women. It is clear
therefore that previous commitments to gender parity
have failed the compliance test. We therefore call on
the permanent and elected members of the Security
Council to support without restrictions the commitment
made by the Secretary-General-elect to achieve gender
parity at all levels of appointment at the United Nations,
for which he will present and implement a road map
with clear benchmarks and deadlines, starting with the
selection of senior staff.
Integrating the women and peace and security
agenda throughout the work of the Security Council
should be a priority. It is noteworthy that, in response
to the recommendations outlined in resolution 2242
(2015), several initiatives have been launched, for
example, the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security. They have not ignored the need

16-3413149/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

to fight terrorism in order thereby to improve the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in every context.
Similarly, we consider it valuable to have gender
perspectives in various areas of action within peace and
security processes, such as in commissions of inquiry,
mediation processes and mechanisms of transitional
justice. Building partnerships with such organizations
as UN-Women, so as to benefit from their experience
and views on those various efforts, is another way to
integrate a gender perspective into all aspects of the
peace and security agenda. Let us welcome also the
systematic inclusion of women-protection advisers in
the strategic planning processes for political missions
and peacekeeping operations, the training of teams
of experts on the rule of law and sexual violence in
conflict, as well as working with associations supported
by UN-Women, such as Justice Rapid Response, which
has facilitated the recruitment and inclusion of female
gender advisers in commissions of inquiry on cases
relating to sexual violence and abuse crimes.
The incidence and widespread use of sexual
violence as a tactic of terror and a weapon of war are
heartbreaking. We urge that such acts be sanctioned
with firm penalties and that impunity be completely
eliminated, including, when necessary, through
referral of cases to the International Criminal Court.
We consider such acts of violence to constitute crimes
against humanity, and we maintain a position of zero
tolerance when it comes to cases of sexual violence
and abuse.
The fundamental point remains to get women
into leadership positions, where they can be involved
in decisions and provide a gender perspective at all
levels of participation and in all activities related to the
peace and security agenda. That should also be linked
with efforts to protect human rights and development.
We must not forget that resolution 1325 (2000) was
conceived as a human rights mandate.
Ensuring equal opportunities and the economic,
social and political empowerment of women is an
imperative, if women and girls are to assume, with
all the tools they need, the desired transcendental and
transformative role in their communities during and
following conflicts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
50/90

25/10/2016

Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for convening
this debate. It provides us with an opportunity to take
stock of our progress and the challenges that face us
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. There is indeed much to review: eight
resolutions, 63 national action plans and initiatives at
the international, regional and national levels, which
are too numerous to list. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/822) shows that the women and peace
and security agenda has fundamentally changed the
way in which we approach issues of peace and security.
Ireland fully supports the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and, in my
national capacity, I would like to focus on how the
implementation and mainstreaming of the women and
peace and security agenda have led and can further
lead to paradigm shifts in four crucial areas. The first
area is migration. Last month, we adopted the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (General
Assembly resolution 71/1). It confirms that our response
to refugee and migrant flows must go beyond border
security, camps and asylum processes. It highlights the
particular risks faced by women migrants and women
refugees, including sexual violence and trafficking.
Moreover, it recognizes the role of women in peace and
reconciliation processes and in developing solutions.
Those are intrinsic elements of the women and peace
and security agenda. Their inclusion in the Declaration
is a major achievement. We urge Member States and
other partners, including the Security Council, to
maintain momentum by ensuring that women and peace
and security priorities are now mainstreamed through
our collective response to this global phenomenon.
The second is conflict prevention and peacebuilding
initiatives. We are moving closer to plugging what former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan termed the “gaping hole”
in the United Nations machinery for sustaining peace.
Much more remains to be done. Resolution 2282 (2016)
and General Assembly resolution 70/262, adopted in
April, provide us with a robust policy framework for
enhancing the United Nations work in the areas of
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. The women and
peace and security agenda, however, provides us with
a tool for implementation. We have plainly seen that
when women participate in society and their voices
are heard, there is a higher chance of achieving and
sustaining peace or preventing the outbreak of conflict
in the first instance.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

The Peacebuilding Fund has met the SecretaryGeneral’s gender target of 15 per cent and is pioneering
the mainstreaming of the women and peace and security
agenda in peacebuilding. Last month, Ireland pledged
more than $3 million to the Peacebuilding Fund over
three years. We urge the States Members of the United
Nations and the Security Council to support the work
of the Fund and the Peacebuilding Commission as
part of a wider move to harness the women and peace
and security agenda as a driver of conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. Thirdly, women-and-peace-andsecurity mainstreaming has also driven changes in
mediation and peace processes. A formula for lasting
peace cannot be reached by excluding half of society.
That has been shown by the Global Study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and is also
rooted in fundamental logic.
Thankfully, we are advancing in that regard. Since
2012, all United Nations mediation-support teams have
included women. We have best practices, including
Colombia, from which to draw. Nevertheless, the
report of the Secretary-General shows mixed progress
regarding the inclusion of women in peace processes.
Through our experience of reconciliation on our own
island and our consistent engagement with the United
Nations Mediation Support Unit, Ireland can attest
to the crucial need for the participation of women
in mediation and peace processes. We call for the
redoubling of efforts on the part of special envoys and
representatives, with support from Security Council
member States and regional partners, so as to ensure
that next year’s report of the Secretary-General can
point to clear progress in that regard.
Fourthly, the women and peace and security agenda
is leading to a sea change in the peacekeeping paradigm.
For Ireland, we do not have to look any further than
home to see that. Resolution 1325 (2000) was transposed
directly by our defence forces into an action plan for
women and peace and security. That plan supports our
national action plan on women and peace and security,
which is now in its second phase. It means that women
and peace and security priorities are included in almost
every stage of Ireland’s overseas engagements, from
pre-deployment training to the planning, execution and
reporting of operations. Initiatives to target women in
our 2016 army recruitment drives have been held up as
best practices. We are also pleased to announce that the
recent deployment of Lieutenant Colonel Mary Carroll
to head the Irish contingent of the United Nations

S/PV.7793

Disengagement Observer Force represents the first
woman commander of a mixed gender infantry unit in
a United Nations mission.
Those are only four areas in which the women and
peace and security agenda has catalysed change and
can continue to do so. There are many more, including
disarmament, international criminal justice and the
prevention and countering of violent extremism. It
would be remiss not to focus lastly and briefly on those
of us charged with living the changes that we have made.
First, with regard to the United Nations
system — more work is needed to advance the Global
Study’s recommendation that a gender perspective
should be mainstreamed throughout the United Nations
response to conflict emergencies. The recent adoption
by the Peacebuilding Commission of a gender strategy is
an example of a best practice that we can all learn from.
Secondly, with regard to regional and subregional
organizations, in May, Ireland was pleased to host the
inaugural workshop on the regional acceleration of
resolution 1325 (2000). It brought together regional
organizations working on peacekeeping. Such work
must form part of a larger effort to support and learn
from women and peace and security initiatives at the
regional level.
Thirdly, with regard to Member States, 63 national
action plans mean 63 opportunities to identify lessons
learned, which could serve to spark new initiatives. We
look forward to participating actively in the national
women and peace and security focal points network
launched by Spain in September.
Finally and crucially, with regard to civil
society organizations, those on the front lines of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda are often those most in need of support.
Ireland has contributed almost $500,000 to the Global
Acceleration Instrument for Women and Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action since its launch last
February, and we encourage other donors to support
this civil society organization-driven fund. When we
speak at next year’s debate, we hope to be able to point
to even greater progress within the frameworks of
peace and security, all with the women and peace and
security agenda at the core.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.

16-3413151/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for organizing today’s open debate on women and
peace and security, one year after the high-level review
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I would now like to
make a few remarks in my national capacity.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women for their tireless
efforts in promoting the role of women in peacebuilding
and the gender dimension of conflict resolution.
Last year, resolution 2242 (2015) recognized the
need for greater integration of the agenda of resolution
1325 (2000) into the Council’s work. In that regard,
Romania welcomes the creation of the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security. Data show
that when women are included in peace processes,
there is a 20 per cent increase in the probability of an
agreement lasting at least two years and a 35 per cent
increase in the probability of an agreement lasting at
least 15 years. The building of peace is a continuous
process that requires broad popular support and the
participation of all layers of society. Every generation
has to rediscover the value of peace and build on
previous generations’ achievements in preserving it.
Peace is built every day by teachers in schools, by youth
on sports fields and by employees in their workplaces.
Resolution 1325 (2000) contributed to adapting
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to new
challenges. Consequently, at the end of an extensive
intergovernmental process, a new concept — that
of sustaining peace — was endorsed by the States
Members of the United Nations and formalized by
two identical resolutions adopted on 27 April 2016:
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262. Sustaining peace is
understood both as a goal and as a process related to the
prevention, stabilization and post-conflict construction
and development. Evidence has shown the nexus
between gender mainstreaming, sustaining peace and
civic engagement. For example, seven out of 10 peace
agreements signed in 2015 included gender-specific
provisions. Women are now deployed in all areas of
peacekeeping and special political missions as part of
the missions’ police, military and civilian personnel.
More security personnel have been trained to prevent
and respond to sexual and gender-based violence.
52/90

25/10/2016

The Romanian Ministry of Defence has adopted
a national plan applicable until 2024, aimed at
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda. It promotes fair and balanced access for men
and women, whether military or civilian personnel,
to operational, executive and leadership posts at all
hierarchical levels. The selection of candidates is a
process evaluating professional skills, with no gender
specification. A focal point on gender is appointed
within all Romanian military units. As a result, we
have women who have reached the rank of General,
and there is an increased number of military female
staff participating in international missions. Gender
equality, tolerance, non-discrimination and interdiction
of sexual harassment and gender violence are reflected
in all military education programmes in Romania.
Romania continues to deploy mixed-gender teams,
especially within the civil and military cooperation
units in Afghanistan. Currently, 15 per cent of
Romanian police officers deployed in United Nations
missions are women.
Finally, as one participant in the consultations
held during the preparation of the global study said,
women and peace and security is an agenda that speaks
about preventing war, not about making war safer for
women. Therefore, we praise women’s leadership and
the critical role women play in preventing conflict and
sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, an informal network of 51 interested Member
States chaired by Canada, representing all five regional
groups of the United Nations. One year after the highlevel review on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the Group reaffirms its unwavering support for
the Council’s work on this critical agenda.
The Group welcomes the establishment of the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security as an outcome of resolution 2242 (2015) to
facilitate a more systematic approach to the agenda
in the Council and enable greater oversight and
coordination of implementation efforts. We strongly
encourage the Informal Expert Group to include in its
work the regular participation of civil society and to
share its conclusions with all Member States.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

Recognizing that Member States and regional
organizations are influential actors in the
implementation of all women and peace and security
resolutions, the Group emphasizes the importance of
national action plans, with appropriate resourcing,
monitoring and civil-society consultation. The Group
welcomes the establishment, led by Spain, of the women
and peace and security national focal point network,
which will periodically share and exchange lessons
learned and best practices. The Group also welcomes
the establishment of the Global Acceleration Instrument
as one avenue to attract resources, coordinate responses
and accelerate implementation.
Noting the impact of inclusion, especially women’s
participation, on the durability of peace agreements,
the Group stresses the importance of the meaningful
participation of women at all stages of the peace
processes and the elimination of barriers to their
participation, as well as the mainstreaming of genderspecific language and the human rights of women in
peace agreements. The Group also encourages the
United Nations to include the women and peace and
security agenda more systematically in its work on
preventive diplomacy.
The Group emphasizes the indispensable role
played by women in United Nations peacekeeping
and underscores that their participation at all levels is
key to the operational effectiveness of missions. The
Group calls for the increased participation of women in
peacekeeping at all levels, the integration of the human
rights of women and a gender perspective into all
aspects of peacekeeping, and the timely and appropriate
resourcing and staffing of gender advisers at United
Nations Headquarters and missions. The Group also
calls for the full implementation of the commitments
made at the United Nations peacekeeping defence
ministerial held in London in September.
The Group expresses its profound concern
regarding the impact of the unprecedented wave of
forced displacement on women and girls. In this
regard, it calls for the more systematic engagement
of women and girls in the design and implementation
of humanitarian assistance and early recovery
programmes. In line with humanitarian principles,
the Group further calls for the promotion of access to
medical, legal, psychosocial and livelihood services to
displaced persons, including sexual and reproductive
health services, without discrimination.

S/PV.7793

The Group condemns in the strongest terms incidents
of sexual violence in all conflicts, including the ongoing
trafficking, rape and enslavement of Yazidi women
and girls by Da’esh; the abduction and sexual abuse of
women and schoolgirls by Boko Haram in Nigeria; and
the ongoing use of sexual violence as a weapon of war
in conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan, among many others. Such genderbased violence is a grave violation and abuse of human
rights and international humanitarian law, and remains
a barrier to the full achievement of gender equality,
peace and development. We call for accountability for
such crimes, including through the implementation of
the international protocol on the documentation and
investigation of sexual violence in conflict, as well as
greater support for survivors. Furthermore, the Group
deplores the fact that the stigmatization of survivors
exacerbates their marginalization and is a barrier to
their full recovery.
Lastly, the Group of Friends condemns in the
strongest terms cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
in peacekeeping operations, and it reaffirms its full
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy of the United
Nations with regard to all civilian, military and police
personnel. We call on the international community to
redouble its efforts to combat this scourge and welcome
the recent efforts undertaken by Member States and the
Secretary-General to prevent sexual exploitation and
abuse, to pursue accountability for perpetrators and to
provide support to victims. In this regard, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2272 (2016), the appointment
of the Special Coordinator on Improving the United
Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
and the establishment of the Trust Fund in Support of
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to make some additional points as
Canada’s representative.
First, Canada supports the important work of UNWomen and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Secondly, the advancement of gender equality and
the socioeconomic empowerment of women and girls
are critical to all peace and development goals.
Thirdly, the United Nations and its Member States
must do more to integrate women and peace and
security issues in peace operations by ending sexual

16-3413153/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

25/10/2016

violence and abuse by peacekeeping personnel and by
devoting more resources to gender adviser positions.

benefit of every single woman in need of help — invest
and collaborate more.

Fourthly, we must take a broad approach to ending
gender inequality by involving men and boys as well
as women and girls in the joint creation of a truly
inclusive space.

Estonia invests both domestically and globally in
achieving gender equality. At home, we have adopted
national action plans and development strategies aimed
at tackling issues such as stereotyping, violence and
inaccessible victim-support services. Mrs. Kaljulaid,
our newly elected President, is hopefully a testament
to the fact that Estonians can reach the highest ranks
regardless of their gender. However, we continue to
encourage women’s participation in all spheres of
society, governance and industry. In the military, for
example, where the majority of participants are male,
we hope to triple the number of females in the next
two years.

And finally, Canada is implementing this agenda
domestically by renewing our action plan on women
and peace and security; ensuring the meaningful
participation of women in our peace operations;
incorporating a gender-based approach into military
operations; and providing support to survivors of
sexual violence in conflict zones.
Canada remains ready to work together to further
advance the important resolution 1325 (2000) agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): On behalf of Estonia, I
would like to thank all speakers today; a special thank
you goes to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for this year’s report on women and peace and security
(S/2016/822).
We align ourselves with the statement of the
European Union and of the Group of Friends of
Women and Peace and Security, and we reiterate our
commitment to and support for protecting women’s and
girls’ rights globally.
The fundamental lesson that this report teaches us
is the sheer level of detail that is required in order to
address the issue of women’s rights violations, so that
no one gets left behind. Every topic diverges into a
number of smaller issues; for example, violence against
women breaks down into matters such as stereotyping,
conflict-zone violence, sexual violence and extremist
violence. If we focus only on sexual violence, for
instance, we start looking at questions of identification,
prevention, detection and victim support. From
victim support, we derive different types of services,
whether it be creating awareness, promoting access or
supplying psychological and physical specialists. This
overall process is a fragile transition that begins with
the facts, figures and estimates we read on paper, and
narrows down to the actual care and support each and
every woman receives personally. Every detail in that
transition will correspond to a certain woman living in
the world. When a detail is forgotten, a woman may be,
too. We, as Member States, must do two things for the
54/90

Internationally, we remain committed to promoting
the potential of information and communications
technologies (ICT) and innovation for helping to
protect women’s and girls’ rights. ICT can give access
to voting and education, detect and collect data, offer
victim-support services, and function as a platform
for free speech and global communication. The list
goes on. We must establish more ICT mechanisms
with that goal in mind. In that regard, I would like to
commend UN-Women for collaborating with us in the
area of ICT, as well as for incorporating technology
into their own programmes and supporting a number of
related measures.
That brings me to the subject of collaboration. While
intergovernmental cooperation is extremely significant,
everyone should be heard from, and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and civil society have the ability
to provide new insights and data that might otherwise
be missed. There can be no doubt that that helps our
joint efforts to ensure that every detail is accounted for
and that no one is left behind. I would therefore like to
stress that representatives of civil society and NGOs
should be given larger platforms and more access to
United Nations meetings and conferences.
As the Secretary-General’s report noted, last year
saw a record number of speakers — 113 — in the debate
on this subject (see S/PV.7533). That is no surprise,
since we believe that everyone should have a say in
this global challenge, whether reflective or predictive,
factual or emotional, pessimistic or positive. It is only
when we hear every detail that we can try to solve
every problem.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his statement, as well as to Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women for her
valuable contribution.
The adoption on 31 October 2000 of resolution
1325 (2000) remains a significant milestone in the
progressive march for women’ rights and equality the
world over, since it represents new progress in our
efforts to ensure for women a significant and necessary
voice in the area of peace and security.
South Africa strongly believes in the involvement
and empowerment of women in every aspect of
peace, security and development. That finds a robust
reflection in the fact that democratic South Africa has
one of the largest contingents of women peacekeepers
deployed throughout the African continent. Women’s
participation in peacekeeping and peacemaking
efforts is recognized as a contributing factor to the
effectiveness and long-term success of United Nations
deployments. The recognition of the importance of
the role of women in the context of peace operations
is a strong incentive to building women’s capacities
within the peacekeeping landscape. It also contributes
to the accessibility and credibility of United Nations
deployments in local communities.
In that regard, South Africa has been developing the
training programmes needed to equip our peacekeepers
to deal with the unique circumstances that may develop
during peace operations. In 2015, the South African
Government, in partnership with UN-Women, launched
a training course tailored for female military officers
stationed at the South African Army School’s Peace
Mission Training Centre in Pretoria. A second training
course, co-facilitated by South Africa and Kenya, will
take place in Kenya in November. The South African
Department of International Relations and Cooperation,
in collaboration with the Government of Norway, has
established an initiative for training and creating a
network of mediators, with the ultimate objective of
broadening the inclusion of women’s mediation efforts
all over the world. UN-Women and the United Nations
Department of Political Affairs have also participated
in that training programme, and the African Union has
included it in its own work.

S/PV.7793

South Africa supports efforts to mainstream
women’s involvement in peace and security, which can be
achieved through further coordination and cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations. That,
we believe, can help to formalize the training of women
mediators and ensure their effective mainstreaming
into United Nations peacebuilding efforts. South Africa
would like to encourage the United Nations to develop
a database of women mediators that could ensure their
meaningful participation in peacebuilding delegations.
That would be in addition to cooperation between
Member States on training courses designed to help
build women’s capacities in various specialized areas
of the peace and security environment.
South Africa reaffirms its strong commitment to
the full and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the subsequent related resolutions, as
ground-breaking commitments to the advancement of
the agenda on women and peace and security. Women
and girls continue to be disproportionately affected
by conflict situations, especially where sexual abuse
and violence are concerned. That reality underpins the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000), which addresses
sexual violence in conflict and forms an integral part
of the women and peace and security agenda. We stress
that Member States have a fundamental responsibility
to prosecute the perpetrators of human rights abuses,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
those relating to sexual violence against women
and girls. My delegation would like to emphasize its
appreciation for the active role and full participation in
monitoring the implementation of those resolutions by
the Executive Director for UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
Resolution 2242 (2015) gives further impetus to the
mandate established by resolution 1325 (2000). Over the
past year, we have seen greater engagement on the part
of the Council on matters relating to women and peace
and security, including through the work of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. But
we believe that more can be done to implement the
recommendations of resolution 2242 (2015), including
by interacting with women on the ground who are
directly affected by conflict. The meeting, co-hosted
by UN-Women and Norway and held on the margins
of the general debate of the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session, which explored the impact of

16-3413155/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

25/10/2016

violent extremism on women and children, was notable
in that regard.

slavery, rape and other forms of violence by extremists
and terrorists groups, such as Da’esh and Boko Haram.

In conclusion, South Africa looks forward to
further cooperation and to sharing experiences with
Member States, as well as with the Department of
Political Affairs, UN-Women and other partners. That
will enable us to improve our incorporation of gender
perspectives and the concerns of women and girls into
our efforts, with the goal of enhancing sustainable
peace and security in all conflict situations.

The international community should make clear
in every instance that there will never be any leniency
for those who subject women and girls to the most
inhumane acts of corporal and mental violence. Iran
strongly condemns the barbaric acts of terrorist and
violent extremists groups, as well as indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, including women and children.
In this regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
decision to include women’s participation, leadership
and empowerment as keys drivers in his Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking the Russian presidency for
convening today’s open debate. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women for their valuable
contributions to our debate on women and peace
and security.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action remind us
of the fact that there is a strong and direct relationship
between sustainable peace and security and sustainable
development, as well as of the fact that women and girls
must be at the forefront of programmes designed to help
us attain sustainable development, peace and security.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security also focuses on the
specific impact of armed conflict on women; the
positive role they can play in conflict prevention and
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding; as well
as the important roles women can play to keep and
strengthen peace and security at local, regional and
international levels.
Current crises and situations, especially in the
Middle East, have taken new and abhorrent forms and
dimensions and constitute unprecedented challenges
to the stability of our region. Women are among the
main victims of these situations, grappling with the
scourge of violent extremism and terrorism. The spread
of violent extremism and takfiri ideology, which have
no respect for women, threatens in an unprecedented
way the life and rights of women and girls in our
region. Women and girls have suffered the most and
been targeted for systematic sexual exploitation and
56/90

The systematic violations of the legitimate human
rights of the Palestinian people, including Palestinian
women, under the brutal occupation of the Israeli
regime and the atrocious illegal blockade on the Gaza
Strip constitute a massive deprivation of the rights of
Palestinian civilians and women and are certainly the
most blatant form of terrorism against a whole nation
imposed by a regime. It is also very unfortunate that
women and girls have also fallen victim to air strikes in
Yemen. As confirmed reports indicate, the unjustified
invasion of Yemen by a Saudi-led coalition has led to
the death of almost 10,000 people and the injury of
more than 17,000 civilians, including at least 1,677
women and 2,260 children.
In closing, let me stress that my delegation believes
that organizing debates like today’s in the Council
should not undermine the work of the most relevant
bodies in considering women-related issues in the
United Nations system, namely, the Commission on the
Status of Women, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first thank the
Russian Federation for convening this open debate.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
I thank His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and others for giving
constructive insights into the progress and challenges
of the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. Indonesia remains committed to
working with Member States, the United Nations and
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

other relevant actors to empower women and girls
as agents for change for peace and security around
the world.
Conflict is painful. It is disfiguring and debilitating
to anybody’s sense of humanity. Women who live in
the midst of conflict are given no choice but to take
charge when they lose their father, brother or husband.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a call to give notice to the
important role of women as peace-brokers and catalysts
for change. Foremost, it takes notice of women’s
resilience, despite the odds they face in conflict.
Through the four pillars of resolution 1325 (2011),
women were recognized as actors, not bystanders,
in conflict management, conflict resolution and
sustainable peace. Resolution 2242 (2015), which was
adopted last year, provides recommendations to better
implement the agenda. Moving forward, there are some
pertinent points to consider.
First, peace is very challenging to establish in
the aftermath of war. While the war may have ceased
externally, often times it rages on internally in the
hearts and minds of those affected. Difficulties and
complexities in the aftermath of conflict could drag
countries and societies back into conflict.
Secondly, investing in the prevention of conflict
has become a necessity in today’s world, which is
increasingly prone to open conflicts. We need to
promote the culture of peace and tolerance, and support
global development that is sustainable and inclusive,
particularly in conflict prone regions.
Thirdly, it is important to acknowledge the role
of women, mothers and family in the prevention of
radicalism and extremism and we need to work together
to empower them.
Fourthly, it is important to ensure that the work of
the Security Council in women and peace and security
complement the work of other relevant bodies and
agencies within the United Nations system. We need
to strengthen interaction and information flows across
the entire system. Coordination among United Nations
bodies should respect and make full use of their
respective mandates and competencies, particularly
those whose work is relevant in promoting women’s
empowerment and gender equalities in all sectors,
including the prevention of gender-based violence in
conflict situations.

S/PV.7793

Sexual violence conducted by members of
peacekeepers has been a particular concern. As an
agent of peace, every peacekeeper should be held to the
highest ethical and moral standards. Along this line,
Indonesia supports the work of United Nations agencies
in promoting zero tolerance of sexual violence and
abuse in conflict. We urge United Nations agencies to
strengthen their work with Member States in promoting
global initiatives to protect women and children in
armed conflict, such as the Preventing Sexual Violence
in Conflict initiative.
Fifthly, we need to strengthen the contribution of
Member States in peacekeeping missions. Indonesian
military and police forces are currently in 10 United
Nations operations with close to 3,000 personnel in
total, many of whom are female peacekeepers, who
have expertise in conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Indonesia’s Peacekeeping Training Centre has also
incorporated gender perspectives into its programme
so as to equip them in the field.
The participation of women and girls in
peacebuilding is a must and a prerequisite for sustainable
peace. We need to address the problem of ensuring
predictable and sustainable funding for women and
peace and security. Setting specific numerical targets,
such as allocating 15 per cent of peacebuilding funds
to projects whose principal objective is to address
women’s specific needs and advance gender equality, is
a step in the right direction.
Finally, as a candidate for non-permanent
membership of the Security Council for 2019-2020,
we are determined to be a true partner for peace and
a promoter of women’s empowerment and gender
equality worldwide.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mrs. Chatardová (Czech Republic): Sixteen years
ago, resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirmed the importance
of the equal participation and full involvement of
women in all efforts to maintain and promote peace and
security. We agree with a statement in the global study
that in an era when armed extremist groups place the
subordination of women at the top of their agenda, our
response should be unwavering support for empowering
girls and women.
The Czech Republic seeks to strengthen the position
of women in society through development cooperation

16-3413157/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

and humanitarian aid. That goal is enshrined, inter alia,
in our multilateral foreign development cooperation
strategy for the period 2013-2017. In order to fulfil
those priorities, the Czech Republic cooperates with
relevant United Nations agencies, particularly the
United Nations Population Fund, UN-Women, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS. In the field of humanitarian aid, the Czech
Republic pays special attention to victims of genderbased violence. The gender perspective also continues
to be taken into account a cross-cutting target within
projects in countries like Iraq, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, Syria and Ukraine.
At Jordan’s request, the Czech Republic became the
lead nation of a partner cooperation and implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) programme, focused on
training female Jordanian soldiers in explosive ordnance
disposal. Gender mainstreaming is part and parcel of
the cross-cutting principles of the Czech Republic’s
transition promotion programme. In 2016, projects
were launched in Serbia, Zimbabwe and Palestine.
We firmly believe that girls and women are not just
survivors and victims of war; they are also leaders and
peace builders. Conflict through a woman’s eyes brings
an invaluable perspective, one which has often been
ignored in our history. That is one of the reasons why
the Czech Republic negotiated a resolution on equal
political participation on four occasions in Geneva.
Women, however, are still underrepresented in
decision-making positions in the Czech Republic. That
is why, in July, the Government adopted an action plan
for the balanced representation of women and men in
decision-making positions for the years 2016-2018. In
June 2015, the Czech Ministry of Defence adopted its
own action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
By the end of 2016, the Czech Republic will adopt a
national action plan on women and peace and security
for the years 2017-20.
Let me conclude by quoting the Secretary General:
“Justice for women takes more than new laws and new
funding. Ultimately, we need new mindsets.” Having
said that, let me express our readiness to promote and
support the full implementation of the agenda on women
and peace and security domestically as well as abroad.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
58/90

25/10/2016

Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia is appalled by
the continuing use of violence against women and
girls, including sexual violence in conflict and the
targeting of women and girls by extremist groups. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/822) is clear that,
despite progress made on the women and peace and
security agenda, there remain many gaps that require
immediate action.
Human rights violations against women and girls
have continued unabated. The international community
must do everything it can to stop that trend. That is why
Australia has provided $6 million to the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence
against Women and is researching the role women
play in combatting extremism so that we can better
understand how to tap into the valuable experiences of
women to strengthen our approaches.
By harnessing the expertise of civil society
organizations on the ground we can be more effective
in our efforts to remove barriers and create meaningful
opportunities for women to engage equally in all stages
of peace processes. Civil society groups represent
those whose lived experience is most relevant. In most
instances, they existed before the conflict and they
will exist after it. That is why Australia, working with
partners, established the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women and Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action (GAI). The GAI helps women’s civil society
organizations to contribute to conflict prevention,
crisis response, and peacebuilding. We encourage other
Member States to support that practical mechanism.
At last year’s high-level review (see S/PV.7533),
Australia reaffirmed its commitment and set out its
actions to progress the agenda on women and peace and
security. In that vein, Australia last week announced
further humanitarian and stabilization assistance
for Iraq following commencement of the operation
to retake the city of Mosul. That assistance includes
particular support to the women and girls of Mosul for
reproductive and sexual health. In addition, Australia
recently committed $220 million in response to the
Syria crisis, including dedicated components to address
the unique needs of women and girls.
Australia reiterates its support for increasing the
participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, particularly in staff officer and military
observer roles, as outlined in the London communiqué
16-34131

25/10/2016

of the United Nations
ministerial meeting.

Women and peace and security
peacekeeping

S/PV.7793

defence

that we will be able to deploy a female military
contingent by 2021.

I cannot conclude without again voicing our
deep concern about sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeepers. We welcome initiatives aimed at
prevention, survivor assistance and accountability,
and stress again that there is no excuse for these
actions, nor excuse for inaction in addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse. We know that to sustain peace
we must include women; not just in our words, but in
our actions. And we must accelerate and strengthen
practical efforts to place women front and centre in the
peace and security agenda.

Our peacekeepers know that they must take decisive
action to prevent and combat sexual and gender-based
violence, as part of their broader mandate on the
protection of civilians. We unequivocally condemn
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers, and have
demonstrated our resolve to cooperate in implementing
the comprehensive measures outlined in the Secretary
General’s enhanced programme of action to combat
these scourges.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Russian presidency for convening
this open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.
Having played a catalytic role in the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) during Bangladesh’s
membership in the Security Council in 2000-2001,
it has been particularly encouraging for us to see the
unprecedented level of interest generated in the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
last year. In the aftermath of the adoption of resolution
2242 (2015), the issue of developing a national action
plan has once again featured prominently in our
policy discourse. Following preliminary discussions
with UN-Women and other international partners,
our Government is now exploring the opportunity to
convene dialogues with a cross section of women and
their representative organizations. We have agreed to
join the Spanish initiative to establish the network of
national focal points.
As part of our contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping, we remain committed to enhancing
the role and participation of women, including in our
national contingents. So far, Bangladesh has had 1,047
women peacekeepers participating in various missions,
including 774 police personnel. We are currently in
the process of detailing two female military observers,
and look forward to deploying women contingent
commanders in the near future. We remain confident

Bangladesh welcomes the adoption of the gender
strategy by the Peacebuilding Commission, and has
been particularly supportive of further strengthening
women’s participation and leadership in this year’s
resolutions on peacebuilding architecture and
mediation. We are relieved to learn about the mediated
release and rescue of a number of women and girls held
hostage by certain international and regional terrorist
groups. We urge the Council to continue efforts to
secure the freedom of the remaining women and girls,
as their continued captivity and degrading treatment
are an affront to us all.
We acknowledge the recent trend of increased
women’s representation in various peace negotiations,
and in increasing gender-specific provisions in peace
agreements. In our national context, in the aftermath
of a peace accord signed with a local insurgent group
in 1997, we saw how women played a critical role in
advancing the accord’s implementation, preventing
relapse into conflict, and building awareness and
resilience against gender-based violence.
In recognition of the differential impact of armed
conflicts and proliferation of small arms on women and
girls, Bangladesh has decided this year to co-sponsor
a draft resolution entitled “Women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control”.
Our Government has made it a priority to
further mainstream women’s participation in our
multidimensional efforts to combat terrorism and
prevent violent extremism. Our Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, has made an appeal to mothers to work as
sentinels within their families and has urged female
teachers, elected representatives and women working
at the grass-roots level to actively contribute towards
a whole-of-society response against violent extremism
and radicalization. We remain determined to forge
ahead with our women’s development and empowerment

16-3413159/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

efforts to defeat the violent extremists and terrorists in
one of their fundamental pursuits.
The inherent resilience of our women gives us the
conviction that women themselves have the capacity to
act as agents of change in the face of the humanitarian
consequences from which they disproportionately
suffer in different situations. We feel encouraged to
see that notion gaining traction in the humanitarian
discourse. The mandate of the Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women and Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action has the potential to support a
further demonstration to that effect in response to
specific needs in conflict and post-conflict settings.
To conclude, Bangladesh underscores the
importance of the increased, sustained and coordinated
mobilization of finances, including through earmarking,
for giving real effect to the women and peace and
security agenda in its various dimensions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Medan (Croatia): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Russian presidency for convening an open debate
on this crucial topic.
Croatia aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security,
respectively. Allow me to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
There is a strong correlation between gender
equality, peace and development. Gender equality is
the only effective way to achieve sustainable peace and
development. Not only women, but societies in general
benefit from women’s increased participation in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security set out a visionary agenda for achieving
gender equality as a prerequisite for peaceful, inclusive
and just societies.
Nearly 16 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the international community has
undertaken substantial efforts to implement it, and
undeniable progress has been made, including action
plans, guidelines, programmes and training. Awareness
has been raised of the need to include women in
conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding and
decision-making. However, the high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000) mandated under resolution
60/90

25/10/2016

2122 (2013), which took place in October 2015, has
shown that the protection of women in armed conflict,
parallel to the enhancement of their contribution to
peace processes and in rebuilding their communities,
continues to be a crucial challenge.
As underlined in the global study, women’s
participation in decision-making in the sphere of
peace and security worldwide remains unacceptably
low, while the extent of sexual violence against
women and girls in conflict situations continues to
be devastating. What we need now is to translate the
existing commitments into concrete actions that would
bring tangible benefits for the advancement of women
and girls in their political and economic empowerment,
as well as the full realization of their human rights in
times of both conflict and peace.
Member States have the primary responsibility
to ensure that global commitments and obligations
concerning women and peace and security are
integrated into domestic policies and laws. In that
regard, more cooperation between Member States
would certainly advance the women and peace and
security agenda and improve its implementation. That
is why Croatia strongly supports the establishment
of the Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender
Equality under the aegis of the Office of the Focal Point
for Women in the United Nations. We are convinced
that the Network can greatly assist Member States and
regional organizations in improving and strengthening
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, thereby complementing other existing
regional and United Nations initiatives, such as those of
the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security
in New York and Geneva, different regional task forces
and civil society.
Croatia’s continued engagement in the area of
women and peace and security rests on our firm
belief that the full realization of women’s rights is
an indispensable basis for safeguarding basic human
rights and achieving lasting peace and security. Croatia
has therefore taken steps to integrate the gender
perspective into the national foreign and security
policy through its national policy for the promotion of
gender equality and its first national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). One of the
most important results of the first national action plan
cycle has been an increased level of awareness of the
role of women in the area of peace and security and
the more effective integration of the gender perspective
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

into our foreign and security policy and actions. In the
national security sector, the gender perspective has
also been strengthened with an increased number of
women involved in the activities of the security system,
including intelligence agencies and their increased
presence at the decision-making level.
The national action plan has also contributed to
the appropriate, gender-integrated training of troops to
be deployed to peacekeeping missions and operations
and to an increased number of female members of
the Croatian armed forces and police involved in
international peacekeeping and civilian missions. Under
the action plan, Croatia is also undertaking efforts to
provide gender-sensitive development assistance, such
as assistance for women and girls in Afghanistan in the
areas of education, women’s reproductive health and
small businesses.
Croatia is currently in the process of developing
its second national action plan, which is expected to
be adopted by the end of the year. It will cover both
our domestic and international activities by setting
out and strengthening specific measures in the area of
prevention and protection, as well as the representation
of women in decision-making and processes concerning
security and peacebuilding.
As a country having recently experienced war and
acquired post-conflict management experience, we
are particularly interested in sharing our experiences
and lessons learned as a contribution to wider, global
efforts in preventing and combating sexual violence
in war and conflict. As a member of the group of
global champions of the Preventing Sexual Violence
in Combat initiative, Croatia will spare no effort in
preventing and combating sexual violence in war and
conflicts, and will continue to give its firm support to
all areas of the women and peace and security agenda.
We strongly believe that, if peace and security are to
be sustained, women must be empowered, their voices
heard and their participation ensured.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Gatto (Italy): I would like to thank the
Russian presidency for organizing this important
debate on women and peace and security.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and the statement made
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the

S/PV.7793

Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
Furthermore, we fully support the statement made by
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
in the light of our cooperation related to the upcoming
split mandate in the Security Council. As a member of
the Security Council for the split term in 2017 and 2018,
Italy, together with the Netherlands, will continue its
sustained efforts to put gender at the heart of peace and
security issues and encourage other countries to join us.
There is clear evidence that no sustainable and lasting
peace is possible without women’s active involvement
in peace processes. That is why Italy is at the forefront
in supporting the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and enthusiastically co-sponsored resolution
2242 (2015), which encompasses concrete steps to
further promote the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), especially in the area of introducing new
working methods for more focused attention of the
Security Council on the issue.
Despite all the achievements of the women and
peace and security agenda over the past 16 years,
much remains to be done. It is inconceivable that half
of our societies continue to be excluded from efforts
to bring, restore and maintain peace and stability, and
that half of our communities should continue to bear
disproportionately the cost of conflict. If we are to
move further away from words and towards actions,
the promotion of women in peace and security must
be achieved in the areas of prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding agendas, in general and throughout
the United Nations. The following are several
concrete examples.
Nearly half of all peace agreements say nothing
about women’s rights or needs. In the majority of peace
processes, the presence of women is still treated as
an afterthought, although to date it has been proven
as a fact that involving women in conflict prevention
and resolution increases our chances of success. That
is why we are implementing the commitments made
at the peacekeeping defence ministerial in London in
September, which recognized the indispensable role of
women in peacekeeping and in conflict resolution as
a whole. Italy is particularly interested in increasing
the participation of women in uniformed roles,
including police roles, and in promoting the integration
of women’s needs and gender perspectives into all
aspects of peacekeeping and in efforts towards conflict
prevention and resolution. In this period, Italy has

16-3413161/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

committed to supporting the initiative of UN-Women
on the role of women in mediation.
Secondly, women and girls are increasingly victims
of multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination
and violence. Such risks increase in emergencies,
conflicts and post-conflicts situations. The women
and peace and security agenda seeks to address such
risks, giving the issue of sexual violence in conflicts
the centrality it deserves, alongside the economic
and political empowerment of women and their vital
role in peacebuilding. Italy is strongly committed
to preventing and responding to sexual and genderbased crimes in conflict. We are especially active in
training Blue Helmets on those issues, and we fully
support international initiatives for preventing sexual
violence in conflict at both the political and at the
operational level.
Thirdly, we believe that special attention to a
comprehensive strategy is needed to prevent the
radicalization of women and girls in order to ensure a
viable alternative to nihilists and extremists, which has
a dramatic impact on all our communities.
Let me conclude by saying that these are important
priorities for Italy and that we are cognizant that
efforts are needed in all countries, not just developing
or conflict-ridden ones. That is why we are currently
reviewing the third iteration of our of action plan
on women and peace and security with a view to
promoting the paradigm of the empowerment of women
as agents for change. At the same time, we are aware
that especially fragile States can greatly benefit from a
joint effort to shape national-level policy-\making and
to generate strategic cross-national partnerships for
gender equality. That approach is at the core of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which recognizes
the need to build peaceful, just and inclusive societies
that are based on respect for human rights for all.
We look forward to working with all States,
members and non-members of the Security Council,
the United Nations and regional organizations to turn
that agenda into reality.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First, allow me to commend the Russian Federation
for convening this open debate on the occasion of the
sixteenth anniversary of the women and peace and
62/90

25/10/2016

security agenda. This is an opportunity to underscore
the commitment of Member States to empowering
women and to facilitating their participation in conflictprevention, peacebuilding and in decision-making on
matters relating to peace and security. I would like
to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and Ms. Rita Lopidia, on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, for their statements.
A year ago the Security Council adopted resolution
2242 (2015). As Guatemala was one of the 72 sponsors
of the resolution, we are happy to inform the Council
that pursuant to the resolution, the Government of
Guatemala has established an inter-agency panel
on women, peace and security in order to improve
governmental coordination for the establishment
of a national plan of action, which is expected to be
completed this year.
The appropriate implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) requires the unwavering political will
of all competent Government authorities, requiring
the allocation of clearly earmarked resources both in
national budgets and in the contributions of international
donors. Governments and civil society should work
together and complement each other’s efforts.
We reiterate that the prevention and protection
of women against gender violence and sexual abuse
require the involvement of all, including men and
boys. We strongly condemn cases of sexual violence
and the fact that it continues to be used as a tactic of
intimidation or terrorism. We also condemn violence
and sexual abuse in peacekeeping operations. We
demand the implementation of the zero-tolerance
policy. Security forces entrusted with ensuring the
security and integrity of women as an important aspect
of peace and security must be made to understand that.
Guatemala is striving to combat impunity and to
bring the perpetrators of sexual abuse to justice. In that
regard, early this year we brought to justice two soldiers
who were responsible for the sexual enslavement of 15
Quechi women in the military base of Sepur Zarco.
Although it took 32 years to bring this case to trial,
we believe that it is worth mentioning because access
to justice should be guaranteed for all Guatemalans.
However, we must improve access to justice and
strengthen the participation of women in the process of
drafting national legislation.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

We welcome the fact that the women and peace and
security agenda is being addressed in a cross-cutting
fashion, in coordination with the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund. It is also worth noting the establishment of the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security and of the national focal point network for
women and peace and security on 23 September under
the leadership of Spain.
Moreover, we acknowledge the contribution
of mechanisms, such as the Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women and Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action, together with additional existing
mechanisms, as a way not only to raise resources, but
to coordinate responses and accelerate implementation.
The participation of women is essential to ensuring
operational effectiveness and ensure sustainable peace.
The concept of sustainable peace is very important,
as Ambassador Rosenthal mentions in his report
(S/2015/490).
The Rome Statute, which is the international
legal framework on gender-based crimes, is the most
progressive to date. It is important to incorporate it into
national legislation so that States have a comprehensive
framework for investigations into international crimes of
sexual and gender-based violence, targeted proccedings
to support victims and witnesses, programmes to
inform women of the laws that concern them, resources
to monitor the implementation of laws that take the
gender perspective into account, and provisions for the
compensation of victims. All of those components are
essential to ensuring that women have access to justice.
Guatemala has always supported that agenda
and eiterates that women play an essential role in
preventing and resolving conflicts, promoting justice,
fostering reconciliation, supporting disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration, and rebuilding
national institutions. Women are the critical link in
development as they are the centre of the family and the
source of its values, customs and the identity of each
child. All these are essential pillars for consolidating
lasting peace. It is essential that women be involved in
decision-making at all levels.
In conclusion, we urge all Member States
represented here to take this unique opportunity
to move towards a much stronger and substantive
commitment to gender equality so as to ensure that the

S/PV.7793

empowerment of women and girls becomes one of the
cornerstones of peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking the Russian Federation for organizing
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Executive-Director of UN-Women and Ms. Lopidia for
their briefings.
Many positive steps have been taken to implement
the resolutions on women and peace and security.
However, despite those efforts, women are still a
minority in peace and security negotiations and in
peacekeeping operations. Our challenge remains
to fully implement the eight Council resolutions on
women and peace and security, including the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). Women are proven agents of
change and should be able to do even more. Today’s
conflicts continue to have a tragic feature in common.
Women and girls suffer their impact disproportionately
more because they are also targets of specific forms
of violence and abuse, including sexual violence and
exploitation. Efforts to resolve conflicts and address
their root causes should aim to empower all those who
have suffered from them, especially women.
Brazil was honoured to participate in the
foundational meeting of the women and peace and
security national focal points network that took place
at the margins of the General Assembly recent general
debate. As discussed at that meeting and underlined in
the global study for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), Member States and regional organizations
remain the most influential actors regarding the women
and peace and security agenda. We commend Spain for
its leadership in the creation of the network.
Women should play a crucial role in bolstering
conflict prevention. In the short-term, they can lead
efforts aimed at promoting pre-emptive dialogue and
early warning systems. In the long-term, they can
provide a more comprehensive understanding of the
causes and contribute to solutions to conflict. It is also
important to explore the synergies between the women
and peace and security agenda and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, particularly regarding
the implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 5, without losing sight of their specificities
and the integrity and universality of the Sustainable
Development Goals.

16-3413163/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

Over the past few years, the women and peace and
security agenda has been integrated into the political
mainstream of the United Nations. United Nations
entities, including UN-Women, the Committee on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women and the Commision on the Status of Women,
have contributed in that regard. Likewise, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and several rapporteurs of the
Human Rights Council have diligently worked to
strengthen that vital agenda. It would be inconceivable
today to establish a peacekeeping operation without
deploying gender advisers, without including a mandate
to protect women or without training peacekeepers to
prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuse, as
highlighted by many countries in September during the
peacekeeping defence ministerial in London.
The complex humanitarian crises arising from
conflicts highlight the plight of women and girls who
have been subject to various forms of sexual violence and
forced abandonment of their homes and communities.
They have become refugees and internally displaced
persons. In that context, we should ensure that we give
particular attention to women and girls who belong
to more vulnerable groups, including indigenous or
older women, those with disabilities and members of
ethnic or religious minorities. Brazil remains strongly
engaged in the advancement of gender equality and
women empowerment issues at all levels and areas of
work of the United Nations.
Protection and empowerment are inseparable
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.
At the international level, that includes formulating and
implementing the mandates of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, conducting peace
negotiations and handling peacebuilding, recovery
and humanitarian initiatives. At the domestic level,
Governments should be ready to redesign and improve
gender-sensitive policies.
Brazil has made considerable progress in the past
decade and remains a vocal advocate and staunch
supporter of United Nations efforts to advance the
women and peace and security agenda. Our SouthSouth cooperation is closely aligned with that agenda.
We have, for instance, supported projects to assist
victims of sexual and gender-based violence in GuineaBissau, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Haiti. The Brazilian Peace Operations Joint Training
Centre in Rio de Janeiro regularly holds workshops and
64/90

25/10/2016

courses to train peacekeepers on gender issues and the
protection of women. Rigorous standards regarding the
conduct and discipline of personnel are upheld.
We are confident that our national efforts will
positively influence all of our activities in the
international arena. We are also finalizing our national
action plan on women and peace and security. It will
comprise measures, such as fostering the participation of
women in peace missions, that will further enhance the
relationship between troops and civilians, particularly
women and girls, in peace operations and provide
humanitarian assistance and technical cooperation to
post-conflict countries concerning gender issues. That
initiative will strengthen and build upon the provisions
of our national policy plan on women, which already
embraces several recommendations contained in
resolution 1325 (2000).
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and that delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women
and Peace and Security.
About a year ago, we met in this Chamber for
the high-level review on women and peace and
security (see S/PV.7533). On that occasion, a record
number of speakers in the history of the Council
voiced their support for the agenda built on resolution
1325 (2000). However, despite some progress, huge
implementation gaps remain, as today’s briefings
have clearly demonstrated. I would like to particularly
thank Rita Lopidia from EVE, who spoke about the
difficult situation of women in South Sudan in a very
impressive manner.
I will keep my remarks short and operational. After
all, the shortcomings in the implementation of the
women and peace and security framework are due not
to a lack of words, but to a lack of action.
How can we do better here in New York? A year
ago, the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015) gave the
Council a clear mandate to be more inclusive and to
involve civil society in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. The Council
needs to live up to that commitment and should open
its country-specific considerations for briefings
by civil society whenever possible. Germany sees
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

the establishment of the Council’s Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security as a major
institutional milestone. Within less than a year of its
existence, the Expert Group has already assessed four
country situations, in close collaboration with United
Nations field missions on the ground. We now need to
ensure that the excellent outcomes of the Group reach
the Council more frequently and directly.
How can we improve the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at the regional level? The
Council has rightly called upon regional organizations
to partake in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. As part of our Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
chairmanship, Germany has heeded that call and
has appointed a Special Representative of the OSCE
Chairpersonship-in-Office on Gender Issues. Next
month we will host a meeting in Berlin on women and
peace and security that will discuss ways to accelerate
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) both
within the OSCE framework and beyond.
Where do we stand on the implementation on
the national level? Germany is currently revising its
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). We
look forward to exchanging our lessons learned with
partners, not just here in New York, but also at the
capital level. Germany has also taken an active role in
the setup of the focal points network founded by Spain.
We are proud to host the 2018 meeting of the network
in Berlin. We are currently working with UN-Women,
the African Union (AU) and the AU Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security, Bineta Diop, to explore ways to
facilitate the exchange of experiences between African
women leaders.
We encourage the next Secretary-General to
continue to treat the women and peace and security
agenda as a high priority. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) remains a cross-cutting task
for the entire United Nations system, not just the
Security Council. We see the women and peace and
security agenda and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as interlinked. That means that we need
to approach their implementation in tandem.

S/PV.7793

Ms. Shuurman: Gender equality is not optional.
It is essential. Why? Because it allows us to respond
better and smarter to the many complex security
challenges that we face today. Gender equality is
about our credibility and our capability. It is about the
resilience of our societies, the readiness of our forces
and the effectiveness of our operations. That is what
NATO has learned from more than a decade and a half
of implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
At its Summit in July, NATO endorsed a new
action plan on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, and 55 allies and partner
nations associated themselves with the plan. We now
host what could well be the largest global coalition on
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We continue to
build our coalition inside and out. Last week, NATO
broke new ground when we hosted our first ever civil
society advisory panel. This is about cementing our
dialogue — the dialogue between NATO and those
representatives of civil society who work on conflict
prevention and resolution and women’s empowerment.
If peace is to be sustainable, we must be inclusive.
We still have a long way to go, but NATO is doing a
great deal, and we keep things as practical as possible.
We continue to learn from our operations, missions,
training and exercises. Gender perspectives are now
at the centre of NATO defence planning and reporting
processes. NATO supports the implementation of
resolution 2242 (2015) by financing research on the
role of gender in countering violent extremism. NATO
strategic commands are now implementing the military
guidelines on preventing and responding to conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence. Sexual
violence scars families, rips societies apart and slows
down peacekeeping and conflict resolution processes.
It affects the success of NATO missions. We cannot
be bystanders. We need to look at ourselves, too, by
raising awareness of NATO codes of conduct and other
tools designed to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse.

Those present can count on Germany’s support
in taking practical and specific steps to transform the
women and peace and security framework into action.

We can do better, however. Just 10 per cent of NATO
armed forces are women; of those deployed in operations,
it is just 5.5 per cent. We understand that improving this
ratio will improve effectiveness, and we urge Member
States to do their part. We support the United Nations
pledge in London to double the proportion of women in
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
representative of NATO.

Again, we need to lead by example. The gender
balance in the NATO leadership is now improving,

16-3413165/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

25/10/2016

after years of stagnation. Last week, we proudly
welcomed the first female NATO Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Rose Gottemoeller. In June, our first
female four-star, American Admiral Michelle Howard,
assumed command of the NATO Joint Force Command,
Naples. The NATO Defence College in Rome will be
led by a woman, too — Canadian Lieutenant-General
Christine Whitecross. We know that we need to
keep up this momentum, and we will, because equal
participation is not a favour to women. It is a hard-core
security requirement. It is essential to the resilience of
our societies, to the effectiveness of our forces and to a
modern, ready and responsive Alliance. But above all,
it is fundamental to achieving lasting peace.

not only a right, but also, given the disproportionate
impact of conflict on their lives, an obligation. They
can make an undeniably valuable contribution to
peace negotiations. It is therefore necessary to change
the paradigm so as to change the status quo and give
women more power so as to shake up the established
order. Indeed, the participation of women in negotiating
processes increases the chances of a settlement of
conflict and the sustainability of peace. That fact was
confirmed by a global study undertaken by UN-Women
in 2015, which revealed that the presence of women
in peace negotiations promoted the sustainability of
peace agreements, and that 35 per cent of agreements
negotiated by women lasted more than 15 years.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.

Morocco has adopted a voluntary, proactive policy
to entrench the principles of gender equality, which is
now enshrined in my country’s Constitution. In addition
to legislative texts, Morocco has committed itself to
significant legal and institutional reforms to promote a
culture of gender equality and the gender perspective.
It is in that context that in 2012 Morocco launched, in
partnership with Spain, an initiative on the promotion
of the role women in the mediation process in the
Mediterranean. That initiative has enabled us to give
mediation training to a number of Mediterranean women
so as to ensure that they are available to the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.

Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Russian Federation for organizing this debate.
The historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 16
years ago represented international recognition of the
role played by women in matters of peace and security,
not only as victims but also as agents of change and
essential players in the restoration, maintenance and
building of peace. A number of resolutions followed,
enshrinomg greater political recognition of the question
of women and peace and security with precise and
clear provisions regarding the need to ensure the fair
representation of women and men in peace processes
and to improve the physical and legal protection of
women and girls.
Despite signs of progress, we are forced to note
that the overall result is far from being satisfactory.
Evaluations of the achievements of the 15 past years
clearly show that the participation of women in
negotiation processes has remained low. Between
1992 and 2011, only 9 per cent of negotiators were
women. Only 27 per cent of peace agreements signed
between 2000 and 2015 referred to women’s gender
equality and the needs of women. Women make up just
3 per cent of the positions of authority throughout the
world. According to the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, today only 2 per cent
of foreign funds invested in reviving the economies
of post-conflict countries are allocated to promoting
the equality of women, their empowerment or the
satisfaction of their specific needs for a period of time.
And yet, women constitute half of the world’s
population. Their involvement in peacebuilding remains
66/90

In addition, on 7 September Morocco organized
an international conference on the topic of women and
peace and security. The conference contributed to the
international debate on the role of women in peace
processes and the implementation of national plans of
action to promote collective action on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). It was an occasion to reaffirm
the international community’s consensus on the need to
strengthen the participation of women in negotiations
and agreements concerning the settlement of conflicts
and peacebuilding, as well as to renew the commitment
of the United Nations to the question of the inclusion
of women and gender equality in all strategies aimed
at restoring peace and preventing conflict. A number
of questions were debated at the conference, including
the role of women in mediation and conflict-prevention
processes, the role of women in deradicalization,
lessons learned and best practices in the prevention of
sexual violence in conflict.
At the conference, my country announced the
creation in Rabat of an independent regional centre
dedicated to studying the role of women in peacekeeping
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

operations and their contribution to the achievement
of sustainable development. The centre could serve
as a space for reflection, a reservoir of ideas and a
source of independent thought regarding the role and
place of women in peacekeeping operations, as well as
peacebuilding in conflict zones. It is in keeping with
the priorities of the Security Council. in terms of the
promotion and empowerment of women, gender equality,
the building of peace and international security, the
dissemination of the culture of peace, ensuring access
to justice and the protection of civil rights.
An essential element of the women and peace and
security programme is conflict prevention. Women’s
perpectives in dealing with social tensions; their
awareness of threats to personal, familial and community
threats; their knowledge of the flow and circulation of
small arms and light weapons, particularly within their
communities; and their interpretation of extremism in
local discourse all contribute to the creation of primary
mechanisms for rapid response, early warning and
intelligence of imminent conflicts that may be rarely
understood or heeded by local security authorities.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam) (spoke in
Russian): Viet Nam thanks the Russian presidency
for convening today’s very important open debate,
as it gives States Members of the United Nations an
opportunity to take up the women and peace and
security agenda.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/822) and his briefing. I also thank the
Executive Director of UN-Women for her briefing
and insights.
Viet Nam associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Thailand on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Viet Nam welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report.
We particularly applaud the increased participation of
women and the inclusion of the gender perspective in
all areas, from conflict prevention to peacebuilding
and from peace processes to reconstruction efforts.
Viet Nam is also pleased to see the added impetus
that last year’s high-level review provided for the

S/PV.7793

implementation of commitments under the women
and peace and security agenda. Viet Nam believes that
implementation lies first and foremost with States,
but real success can be assured only by establishing
partnerships, especially with a better-coordinated and
well-resourced United Nations.
Yet Viet Nam remains gravely concerned about
the continuing violence targeting women and girls,
especially those displaced by conflicts. Viet Nam
condemns all acts of violence and abuse against women
and girls. We call for strengthened efforts by the United
Nations and Member States in addressing this issue. We
urge the United Nations to strictly implement its zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
Peace can be sustained only if conflicts can be
prevented and addressed at their roots. Viet Nam
welcomes a sharper focus on conflict prevention,
including peaceful dispute settlement and preventive
diplomacy. Efforts should also focus on the
socioeconomic
development
and
post-conflict
peacebuilding, recovery and reconstruction, as affirmed
in resolution 1889 (2009), introduced by Viet Nam and
unanimously adopted by the Security Council in 2009.
For its part, Viet Nam fully recognizes the crucial
role of women in conflict prevention and settlement,
State-building, sustaining peace and socioeconomic
development. For centuries, Vietnamese women not
only fought valiantly for the country’s freedom and
independence but also worked hard and contributed
significantly to the recovery and development of the
country towards stability, sustainable development
and international integration. Today, as part of
our commitment to United Nations peacekeeping,
Vietnamese women officers are taking part in
training and making the necessary preparations to
be deployed in the near future in United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Paul Bekkers, Director of the Office of the
Secretary General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Bekkers: I am very honoured to be here at
Security Council this afternoon.
One of the greatest challenges of modern times
is the normalization of violence at all levels — be it
local, regional, national or international — as it poses a
real threat to the lives of women and children. Indeed,

16-3413167/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

attacks on women and girls, as well as the horror of
sexual slavery, are sometimes part of the strategies used
by combatants and violent extremist groups to achieve
their ends. This morning we heard several dreadful
examples of this fact.
Like you, Mr. President, we believe that this must
stop, and resolution 1325 (2000) is part of the solution.
I therefore thank you, Sir, for bringing us together
today. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/822) and the Executive Director of UN-Women
for her briefing.
The Secretary-General mentioned this morning
that progress has been made. That may be true, but
it is disappointing that implementation continues to
lag. The Secretary-General mentioned that there is
growing awareness, but that there is also a huge lack of
funding for initiatives relating to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Our support for implementation
must go beyond rhetoric. We need to walk the talk.
The women and peace and security agenda plays a
central role in the work of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which is the
largest regional security organization under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Our efforts
to prevent conflicts and resolve disputes peacefully
are underpinned by our strong commitment to gender
equality. Gender equality is a fundamental principle
that cuts across the full gamut of security issues that
the OSCE addresses.
The OSCE acknowledges the clear evidence that
the participation of women in all phases of the conflict
cycle — from conflict prevention and crisis management
to conflict resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation
and reconciliation — is critical to the success and
sustainability of peace processes and peacebuilding.
Various speakers have shared much evidence on this
point with us today.
For us, the OSCE, there is still a long way to go,
but I would like to share a few of our achievements
thus far. At this point, I would like to acknowledge and
thank the representative of Germany for his comments
as Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE.
First of all, the 63 existing national action plans, 28
are from the OSCE region alone, and several more are in
the making. We continue to work with our participating
States to improve their plans or develop new ones.
68/90

25/10/2016

Secondly, we have established within the OSCE
a network of 60 gender focal points, covering our 17
field operations, three institutions and a secretariat to
support the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
by participating States and to develop our own internal
compliance, which is important to us.
Thirdly, reducing sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict also means addressing violence against
women and domestic violence in times of peace. That
is another focus of our work. For example, in July
we organized a conference on combating violence
against women where we exchanged good practices
and promoted the ratification of the Convention on
Preventing and Combating Violence against Women
and Domestic Violence.
Fourthly, I would like to mention that the OSCE
also recognizes the important role women can play
in preventing radicalization and violent extremism.
Accordingly, next month we will convene a conference
on this topic that will bring together policymakers,
experts and activists from across the OSCE region.
I would like to stress that, in everything we do, we
strive to strengthen our cooperation and engagement
with other international organizations and civilsociety organizations. For example, we have developed
close cooperation with UN- Women in Ukraine on
the implementation of the new Ukrainian national
action plan.
I have just mentioned some of our achievements,
but we still have a long way to go. We are aware that
we need to look inward as well. We need to create a
better gender balance in our own OSCE structures, in
particular in the politico-military dimension.
Before I conclude, I would like to commend the
Spanish initiative to set up the women and peace and
security national focal point network. We look forward
to engaging with this forum.
You may rest assured, Mr. President, as may all
others present, that the OSCE remains committed to
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with
a view to countering the normalization of violence,
promoting peace and security, eradicating gender-based
violence and improving the participation of women. We
rely on the support of the Security Council as we strive
to work in close cooperation with all stakeholders.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the delegation of
the European Union (EU). I would like to make the
following comments in my national capacity.
We welcome this annual debate of the Security
Council on women and peace and security and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
welcome the report (S/2016/822) of the SecretaryGeneral.
One of my country’s persistent concerns relates
to the implementation of this resolution in conflictaffected territories. We all know that 20 per cent of
my country’s territory remains under illegal foreign
military occupation and that hundreds of thousands
of Georgian internally displaced persons and refugees
who are victims of ethnic cleansing are denied the
right to return to their homes, while the fundamental
rights of women and girls inside the occupied Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali regions in South Ossetia continue to
be neglected.
My Government spares no effort to develop and
implement higher standards for the full protection of
women’s rights. We fully recognize the benefits of
enhancing women’s leadership and participation in
decision-making in conflict resolution, prevention and
management processes. Our strong commitment is well
reflected our the national action plan on women and
peace and security, and Georgia was one of the first
countries to adopt a separate policy document on this
very important topic.
Georgia shares the view that effective conflict
prevention must start from an understanding of the
broad and deep insecurity that permeates women’s lives
prior to conflict and the ways that pre-conflict structural
inequality can facilitate violence and insecurity, as
stated in the global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). At the same time, we need to
address the current challenges in peacekeeping in a
comprehensive and transparent way that acknowledges
the centrality of the protection of civilians. Georgia is
fully committed to a zero-tolerance policy against sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping and to ensuring
the full accountability of perpetrators, by responding to
alleged crimes in a survivor-centred manner.
It was precisely with that approach that the
Georgian Government and the Georgian armed forces
reacted immediately to the allegations voiced by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in

S/PV.7793

January with regard to the sexual abuse cases involving
minors by members of foreign military forces in
the Central African Republic. Having condemned
any violence against local civilian populations, the
Georgian Government created an ad hoc inter-agency
investigation team, involving not only the representative
of the Office of the Prosecutor and the Minister of
Defence, but also experts on human rights and child
protection services, as well as psychologists.
The team established direct communication and
worked closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the Executive Director of
UNICEF, the European Union Military Committee, as
well as the Legal Director of Médecins sans frontières.
Georgia officially requested the engagement of all
the relevant parties in the investigation process by
assigning respective points of contact on the ground.
In June 2016, the team travelled to Bangui for the on
site phase of the investigation, conducting inquiries and
interviews with alleged victims in close cooperation
with the EU, MINUSCA and UNICEF. United Nations
agencies acknowledged that the team was highly
professional and exemplary.
Materials collected during the visit to the Central
African Republic are being carefully studied. So far,
preliminary investigation data reveal no sign of Georgian
soldiers’ involvement in the crimes committed. Should
the results of the investigation prove them innocent,
Georgia would appreciate acknowledgement by the
relevant United Nations bodies.
We hope that the measures undertaken by my
Government that I mentioned will serve as an example
of best practice when it comes to a prompt and effective
response to cases of allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We also encourage other countries to do
the same as, we believe that only through such an
approach can we produce a sustained change in dealing
with the scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse in
conflict situations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Ms. Azucena (Philippines): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate as we mark one year since the

16-3413169/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

high-level review on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. The
Philippines takes this opportunity once again to renew
its commitment to effectively implement this initiative
and its support for the Security Council’s important
work on this matter. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Women and our
civil society partners for their informative briefings.
The Philippines aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, delivered earlier today by my colleague from
Thailand, and with the statement made on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
As the first country in Asia to develop a national
action plan, in 2010, the Philippines has been steadily
implementing the provisions of its plan on a national
scale. Our six-year national action plan has four
interrelated and complementary purposes, with
corresponding outcomes, indicators, time frames
and key implementers. The Philippines national
action plan rests on four pillars; first, protection and
prevention to ensure the protection of women’s human
rights; secondly, empowerment and participation
to empower women and ensure their active and
meaningful participation in the areas of peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and post-conflict reconstructio; thirdly, promotion and
mainstreaming to promote and mainstream gender
perspectives in all aspects of conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding; and, fourthly,
capacity development and monitoring and reporting
to institutionalize a system to monitor, evaluate and
report on the implementation of the national action plan
in order to enhance accountability for the successful
implementation and achievement of its goals.
Since the Philippines formulated the national action
plan it has focused on the localization of the four pillars
of the plan. There are now 41 provinces within conflict
zones that have developed their ow local action plans.
Identifying their own specific concerns and prioritizing
them has made the national action plan relevant to such
local areas. The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the
Peace Process, the co-Chair of the steering committee
of the national action plan, is committed to engaging
more local Government units to formulate their own
local action plans. The Philippines believes that States
can benefit from each other’s national experiences in
enriching their own programmes. It is in that context
that the Philippines was happy to sign up to the women
70/90

25/10/2016

and peace and security focal points network, which
was launched here in New York last September. We
thank the Government of Spain for that initiative. We
discovered that some States found our experience in
the partnership between Government and civil society
particularly useful. We believe that the focal point
network will make this sharing of experiences more
efficient and timely, and we look forward to taking
advantage of this tool.
I am also proud to announce that the Philippines is
represented in the roster of Justice Rapid Response by
three Filipino professionals, who can be requested by
the international community to investigate, analyse and
report on situations where serious human rights and
international criminal violations have been reported.
The Philippines is happy for the opportunity to
contribute its talents to the work of the women and peace
and security agenda through Justice Rapid Response.
As we now go forward in the process of negotiating
a peace agreement with the Communist Party of the
Philippines and its Front and armed group and in
implementing the peace agreement signed with two Moro
Liberation Fronts, the Philippines is committed, more
than ever, to working towards the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). Our Government recognizes
that that landmark international instrument is there for
Governments like ours to adhere to. Certainly, there
is a need for women to be protected as the victims
of violence and war but, as stated in resolution 1325
(2000), we further recognize that women’s leadership is
critical to finding enduring solutions to destructive and
dehumanizing conflicts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Gambia.
Mr. Tangara (Gambia): The Islamic Republic of
the Gambia would like to align itself with the statement
made on behalf of the African Union.
At the outset, I wish to congratulate the Russian
Federation for being at the helm of the Security Council
for the month of October. I commend the President for
the able manner in which he has conducted the affairs
and proceedings of our meeting and for including the
issue of women and peace and security on the agenda
of the Security Council. It is an issue to which my
delegation attaches great importance. I also thank the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UNWomen for the very exhaustive briefings they presented.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

As a country in which women represent 51 per
cent of the population, the Islamic Republic of the
Gambia welcomes this debate on women and peace
and security. Over the years, we have come to recognize
the importance of women in peacebuilding and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, yet we have not been
able to give women the requisite power or even status
to play a role in the achievement of peace and security.
We recognize the gallant efforts of the United
Nations as exemplified in many resolutions, especially
resolution 1325 (2000), which enjoins us all to involve
women in peacekeeping, the prevention of conflict
and post-conflict reconstruction. Unfortunately, time
and circumstances have shown that lack of political
will, intolerance leading to conflicts, and archaic laws
continue to serve as obstacles to the full participation
of women in the quest for peace and security.
The only effective way to facilitate the direct
involvement of women in efforts aimed at creating a
culture of peace in the world is to ensure that women
have access and a voice at the table where policies
and programmes are articulated. In almost all cases,
women in peacekeeping operations are relegated to
secondary roles. Yet there are many roles, especially
in the negotiating process, in which women can play an
effective role and make effective contributions.
As a start, we should encourage the appointment of
more women to key and pivotal positions in peacekeeping
operations. We note the positive move in Darfur, where
the Commissioner of Police is a woman. In Abidjan, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General is also
a woman. There are other such appointments, but more
needs to be done.
We cannot speak of peace without taking concrete
steps to outlaw violence against women. It is sad,
indeed tragic, that women and girls are still subjected
to rape and other forms of violence. Women are the
soft targets in any conflict, and now we are witnessing
the alarming rate at which the rape of women is being
used as a weapon of war. This atrocity must stop, and
we wish to add our voice in condemning it as a gross
violation of human rights.
Rape, with all the pain and indignities it entails,
should not only be condemned but also prosecuted.
It should be prosecuted as a human rights violation
punishable by stiff penalties. Rape in war zones should
be made a crime against humanity and prosecuted by
all countries. Those who use rape and violence against

S/PV.7793

women should have no place to hide, and we should
articulate international laws that will give all countries
the right to prosecute the perpetrators of this horrible
act if they enter our jurisdictions.
I also wish to underscore the importance of
education in our quest to further peace and security.
Our experience in the Gambia is that when given
opportunities, women constitute a formidable force
capable of transforming a nation. That is why we in the
Gambia regard women as agents of change and progress.
The world will benefit from the vast knowledge and
experience of women if we empower them in the context
of the peacekeeping operations of the United Nations.
As pillars of our societies and natural pacifiers, women,
along with men, can be valuable agents that can change
the world.
We have made some progress, but much remains
to be done. There is a need to work on breaking down
the barriers of age-old prejudices against women.
Traditional society’s entrenched notions about women
must be eradicated through education and persuasion.
We call on all national Governments and the United
Nations to adopt a policy of affirmative action that will
bring women into the mainstream of activities. What
is at stake is crucial, because the continued exclusion
of women from the peace and security processes will
render our efforts invalid.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Timor-Leste.
Ms. Pires (Timor-Leste): My delegation
congratulates the Russian Federation for having
convened this annual open debate on women and peace
and security: implementing the common agenda.
We wish also to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
(S/2016/822), the Executive Director of UN-Women for
her comprehensive and informative remarks, and the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for its contribution.
Important steps have been taken to further
implement the women and peace and security agenda
since the last debate on this issue (see S/PV.7704),
including increased gender provisions in signed peace
agreements. While we are encouraged by these good
practices, including those that were part of the process
leading to the Colombia peace accord, and commend
the Secretary-General and the United Nations system

16-3413171/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

25/10/2016

on the important steps taken to press for, facilitate and
support the inclusion of women in peace negotiations,
we cannot be complacent with respect to the progress
made but must continue in our resolve towards the full
implementation of the agenda.

organizations, and accountability will be ensured
through a monitoring committee that will be made
up of Members of Parliament and non-governmental
organizations. We are grateful to UN-Women for all of
its support in the process to date.

When we look at the world’s trouble spots, we
can see that women and children continue to suffer
disproportionately in times of conflict and in postconflict situations. The peace and security challenges
have not lessened and in some cases have been
exacerbated and have grown in complexity, bringing
great suffering to those affected, in particular women
and children.

We are confident that as Timorese women participate
in and benefit from such activities, our society will
be more inclusive, our people will be empowered to
participate in and contribute to development, and
Timor-Leste will ultimately become stronger.

Violence against women and children, including
sexual violence, is devastating and has life-long effects.
It must be strongly condemned and those responsible
held accountable so as to break the continuum of
violence. This, of course, includes any cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse perpetrated by some United
Nations peacekeepers. Funds are needed to also ensure
that survivors can be supported in beginning the
difficult task of dealing with their experiences and
reconstructing their lives.
Timor-Leste is fully committed to the empowerment
and the advancement of women and gender equality.
Earlier this year, on 26 April, the Council of Ministers
adopted a five-year national action plan on women and
peace and security. During its recent launch, our Prime
Minister highlighted the need for women to actively
participate in decision-making and expressed the hope
that the plan would increase the participation of women,
working together with men for the development of
the country.
Timor-Leste’s national action plan is the product
of a comprehensive and inclusive process and sets
out the actions to be taken with respect to four key
pillars, namely, participation, prevention, protection
and peacebuilding. The plan promotes and guarantees
women’s participation in all decision-making positions
and processes, including in the defence and security
sectors, peacebuilding and development. It proposes
concrete actions to review and change laws, policies
and programmes aimed at the promotion of women and
girls’ right to a life in peace and security, and at ensuring
their equal and active participation and leadership in
peacebuilding, State-building and development.
The implementation of the plan will involve a
whole-of-Government approach as well as civil-society
72/90

We have today, through our national action
plans on resolution 1325 (2000); the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development; the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women and its
general recommendation No. 30, on women in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations; and the
recommendations of the three reviews that took place
last year, a comprehensive framework on furthering the
women and peace and security agenda.
We are confident that with political will, we all can
continue to strive to move forward.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start by saying how pleased I am to be able to
participate in this debate on women and peace and
security. I wish also to thank the two briefers for their
presentations and also to welcome the efforts made by the
Secretary-General within the framework of this issue.
We also reiterate our support for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015).
Sudanese women have always been essential
partners in preparing and participating in parliamentary
and presidential elections, including those held this
past year. Today, 30 per cent of our parliamentarians
are women. Women hold important positions in
Government. They are and have always been essential
partners within the framework of the national dialogue
launched in 2014 by the President of the Republic, the
results of which we celebrated on 10 October. Women
make up 66 per cent of the civil servants of the Sudan.
We can therefore rightly state that women in the Sudan
serve as an example, as they have enjoyed all of their
rights for almost 60 years.
As one example, Sudanese women enjoyed the
right to vote and to run for office back in 1955, well
before women in many other countries around the
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

world, including those of the other continents. Women
also participate in and are members of our security and
police forces. They are legal practitioners and work in
the diplomatic services. We consider their participation
in civil society to be essential. Women’s associations
have contributed to expanding women’s participation in
many fields, thereby strengthening the implementation
of international strategies and policies, including in the
context of relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Sudan continues to abide by its commitments
in that area. Indeed, we have adopted a strategy for
women covering close to a quarter of a century, from
2003 to 2027. We have adopted a national strategy to
combat violence against women, a national policy to
empower women, a national demographic policy, a
national plan for Sudanese women, and a national law
against human trafficking, including of women and
girls. In the framework of lessons learned, I refer to two
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
which guarantees the rights of women in all executive,
legislative and judicial bodies and incorporates all
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), concerning
women and peace and security. The resolution calls
for the strengthening of women’s participation in
peacekeeping operations and all efforts aimed at
establishing and building peace.
Strengthening
women’s
participation
in
decision-making is necessary to achieve inclusive and
sustainable development. The protection of women
also requires our attention, especially in the case of
conflict or natural disaster. Anything that impacts
women also impacts children. There can be no lasting
military solution to an armed conflict. The use of force
is always a temporary measure dictated by the need to
defend oneself, civilians or territorial integrity and to
maintain law and order, but in the end there is always a
need to achieve a negotiated solution.
The earlier that is accomplished, the better. Early
conflict settlement spares and saves a great many lives.
When such an agreement is concluded, all parties,
domestic and foreign, must refrain from undermining
it. The United Nations must adopt that principle and
tolerate no exceptions in that regard, in the context of
peacekeeping operations. We condemn all forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse carried out by United
Nations peacekeepers, and support the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy.

S/PV.7793

We also condemn the intolerance and violent
extremism that are a source of concern for the whole
world today, especially given the increase in the number
and power of extremist groups that are attacking the
principles of peace, justice, human dignity, in complete
contravention to the basic tenets of the United Nations,
as well as development efforts and human rights
principles. The United Nations must confront those
threats and take all necessary measures to protect
women and children. We are gratified to learn of the
Secretary-General’s contribution in that field.
In keeping with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, we call for the adoption of a comprehensive
approach that takes the women and peace and security
agenda into account in the resolution and settlement
of conflicts, the need for capacity-building and the
strengthening of technical assistance and cooperation
with countries, given the fact that gaps and inequalities
in development efforts are among the main causes
of conflict. We call for the lifting of constraints on
national efforts, including unilateral sanctions, and
of foreign debt and sanctions imposed on countries
affected by conflict.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me at the very outset
thank and congratulate the Russian delegation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. My delegation also thanks
you the Russian presidency for convening the Security
Council open debate on implementing the common
agenda in relation to the agenda item “Women and
peace and security”.
Our special thanks go to the Secretary-General for
his annual report (S/2016/822) and to Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women
and Ms. Rita Lopidia, Executive Director of the EVE
Organization for Women Development, South Sudan,
on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.
Botswana welcomes the annual open debate on
women and peace and security, as convened by this
body since 2000. Through these debates, Member
States and civil society organizations have been given
the opportunity to discuss various themes aimed at
enhancing women’s participation in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and decision-making in matters related
to international peace and security.

16-3413173/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

We consider today’s open debate to be of the utmost
importance to assessing the progress made following the
2015 global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), the 2015 report of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security (S/2015/716), and
the adoption of the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women and Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action. In that regard, Botswana welcomes the adoption
of the Global Acceleration Instrument, which aims at
accelerating the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda by building capacity and increasing
funding for women’s participation, leadership and
empowerment, as well as humanitarian action.
We are pleased that although the Global
Acceleration Instrument is still in its infancy, women
mediators in some conflict-affected countries have been
involved in conflict prevention and resolution efforts.
The outcomes of such efforts have been encouraging.
Given the positive outcomes of the Global Acceleration
Instrument, we appeal to Member States and civil
society organizations to support that noble initiative.
Botswana is deeply concerned that women continue
to bear the brunt of armed conflicts, domestic violence,
sexual abuse and rape and humanitarian crises. In that
regard, it is imperative that we build the capacity of
women to prevent violence, conflict and extremism and
enhance their capacities to respond to humanitarian
crises and emergencies. We are also concerned that
the participation of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, peacemaking and peacebuilding remains
low at the national, regional and international levels,
although studies show that women’s involvement
would significantly contribute to sustainable peace
and stability.
Botswana supports the global efforts aimed
at addressing challenges to the women and peace
and security agenda, including increasing women’s
representation, leadership and empowerment in all
facets of peacebuilding, security and humanitarian
action. We also recognize the critical importance
of gender equality and mainstreaming in national
development plans and in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In conclusion, we applaud the efforts made by
the Security Council since 2000 to regularly convene
these open debates, which place women and peace
and security matters at the top of the global agenda.
We therefore call for the rigorous implementation
74/90

25/10/2016

and monitoring of the commitments made during the
open debates.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): We too thank the Russian
presidency for organizing this open debate. We welcome
the continuing attention paid to the women and peace
and security agenda in the Chamber and thank the
Secretary-General for his recent report (S/2016/822).
We consider resolution 1325 (2000) to be an important
milestone in terms of addressing the impact of armed
conflict on women. Resolution 2242 (2015), adopted
last year, was also a timely step forward.
Unfortunately, today the severe effects of conflicts
in various regions on women and girls still constitute
a significant challenge that needs to be addressed by
the international community. Furthermore, our world
is now facing the largest humanitarian crisis since
the Second World War, with an increasing influx of
displaced populations due to protracted conflicts and
lack of security. That causes even further difficulties
to vulnerable groups, including women and girls.
Yet, it was promising to see that gender equality
and women and girls’ empowerment emerged as an
overarching theme of the commitments made at the
World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul in May. It will
be equally important to transform such commitments
into action.
The horrific acts perpetrated against women
and girls by terrorist organizations, such as Da’esh
and Boko Haram, require a comprehensive approach
to eliminating the root causes of the problem. That
approach should include women’s equal and full
participation as active agents in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
Member States should vigorously pursue and ensure
women’s equal participation and full involvement in
all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace
and security. Our recent history om conflict settlement
includes success stories of women who have played a
crucial role to that end.
On the other hand, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000), all actors should take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse,
in situations of armed conflict. Coordinated and
consolidated efforts are also necessary to prevent women
and girls from becoming victims of human trafficking.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7793

Turkey actively promotes the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in international platforms such
as the United Nations, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and NATO. Furthermore,
we support the empowerment and well-being of women
and girls in various emergency, conflict or post-conflict
situations through our comprehensive development
assistance programme. The projects we carry out in
Afghanistan and Somalia, particularly in the fields of
education and health care, are concrete examples of our
efforts to that end.

We underscore the significant value of resolution
1325 (2000), which was adopted unanimously in 2000,
as the first instrument to establish the relationship
between the experiences of women in conflict and
the international peace and security agenda, thereby
focusing attention on their disproportionate impact on
women. Today more than ever before, that resolution
and subsequent Security Council resolutions are of
great relevance, given the increasing violence against
women and girls carried out by extremist groups that
threaten their rights, dignity, integrity and lives.

Turkey also exerts every effort to provide security
and safety to Syrian women and girls who have fled
the conflict in Syria. Today, Turkey hosts more than
2.7 million Syrians. We have provided Syrians with
temporary protection status and enabled their access to
the Turkish health system. So far, more than 170,000
Syrian babies have been born in medical facilities
inside the temporary protection centres in Turkey. In
those centres, we have taken steps to enable a gendersensitive sheltering mechanism.

The increasing role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in United Nations
peacekeeping operations was enshrined in resolution
2242 (2015), which further encouraged women to take
on greater leadership roles and promote their rights
and called for efforts to turn plans made on paper
into action, as we have heard this morning from the
Executive Director of UN-Women.

Multiple initiatives and programmes have been
established to ensure prevention, participation,
protection and education for women and girls. As an
example, between 2013 and 2015 Turkey’s humanitarian
aid programme on eliminating and responding to
gender-based violence for Syrian women and girls was
conducted by the Ministry of Family and Social Policies,
in cooperation with the United Nations Population
Fund. Similar programmes regarding Syrian women
and girls in Turkey will continue in the coming period.
We believe that women and girls will have an important
role to play in rebuilding Syria’s future.
Lastly, I would like to mention that in Turkey,
deliberations and efforts are under way towards
drafting a national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Mrs. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to begin by expressing our appreciation to the
Russian presidency for its initiative of convening this
timely open debate on women and peace and security.
Panama endorses the statement delivered by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

We welcome the recommendations contained
in the September report (A/71/398) of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences, and the Secretary-General’s call for the
implementation of a zero-tolerance policy in response
to instances of misconduct, in particular comprehensive
proposals on prevention, enforcement and remedial
measures to promote greater accountability, including
his commitment to make public misconduct by United
Nations staff. Today’s multiple briefings, in particular
the testimony of civil society representative Ms. Rita
Lopidia, demonstrate that, unfortunately, the impact of
armed conflict on women is disproportionately greater
and thereby makes them more vulnerable and lacking
sufficient protection.
Panama is firmly committed to promoting and
protecting women’s human rights. That is why we attach
particular interest to the initiatives of UN-Women, of
which my country is a member of the Executive Board,
and to the Justice Rapid Response mechanism and the
alliance of women seeking accountability for sexual and
gender-based violence. The 2015 global review of the
women and peace and security agenda highlighted the
need to incorporate a more significant role of women in
the fight against terrorism and radicalization, in which
gender equality is assuming greater prominence for the
fight against that scourge.
Violent extremism has intensified and degenerated
into the worst forms of violence against women,

16-3413175/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

including sexual violence used as a weapon of war,
thereby returning us to a time that we thought had
been overcome by humankind. States must therefore
strengthen collective efforts, including national plans
and strategies to promote the increased participation of
women in all stages of the peacebuilding process, as
well as in post-conflict reconstruction.
I stress the significance of Spain’s initiative to
create a network of focal point groups on women and
peace and security in September, which focuses on
the urgent and crucial question of promoting women’s
leadership role and rights. The role that women can and
should play in conflict prevention and resolution and
decision-making processes aimed at sustainable peace
is fundamental. That is why it is essential to empower
women globally and continuously, as recommended in
the report of the Secretary-General.
Women’s inclusion and equality are essential
elements of the equation in achieving the development
we want. We need to end the exclusion of 50 per cent
of the world’s population and recognize the active, vital
role of women as agents of change, whose participation
at all levels is an undeniably positive element favouring
peaceful and constructive action.

25/10/2016

We also align ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of resolution 1325 (2010).
The women and peace and security agenda is
a priority of Chile’s multilateral foreign policy. We
therefore promote strengthening cooperation at regional
and global levels and establishing public policies at
country level. In the global context, we would like to
point out our co-sponsorship of Spain’s initiative to
create a network of national focal points on women
and peace and security. As a founding member of the
network, Chile reaffirms its commitment to continue
supporting and developing women’s participation in
decision-making in all spheres.
Accordingly, Chile is currently implementing its
second national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)
under the coordination of a tripartite inter-ministerial
network to promote gender mainstreaming in all
predeployment training for peacekeeping personnel
from our country. The inter-ministerial bureau will
soon be joined by citizen observer, whose task will be
to monitor the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in Chile, with the participation of various stakeholders
including civil society.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.

Furthermore, Chile is committed to increasing
women’s participation in various United Nations
missions. We are convinced of their contribution and
undeniable role in establishing effective ties in restoring
the confidence of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations. This year we have deployed a
senior officer in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and 11 Chilean women will participate as
observers in the United Nations Mission in Colombia.
As of 2017, women’s access will be ensured to all
military professions. That will be extended in 2018
to include the navy and the air force. That will enable
Chilean women to be deployed in various areas of
peacekeeping missions.

Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the initiative of the Russian Federation
in convening this open debate on woman and peace
and security.

At the regional level we highlight Chile and
Argentina’s bilateral plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) through the Joint Peace Force of
the Southern Cross.

We acknowledge and express our appreciation
for the briefings by the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women, as well as the
statement made by the representative of Slovenia on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

In another area, Chile appreciates the
recommendations concerning the global study on
resolution 1325 (2000) set out in the latest report
(S/2016/822) of the Secretary-General. We emphasize
the importance of enhancing the participation and

The equal participation of 100 per cent of our
population in every single step towards lasting peace
and security will ultimately free up human potential to
resolve the issues we face — all we need is the will to
act. Given the current situation of ever-increasing global
challenges, it is unacceptable to continue debating
questions involving women’s rights as leaders, or to
hold high-ranking positions or to equitably participate
at all levels of political, social or economic life.
Finally, the measures we take and implement today
to defend the rights of women and girls will be steps
towards saving humankind. That is in our hands.

76/90

16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

leadership of women as a central aspect of peace and
security initiatives.
We should not just think about the numerical
increase of women in peace operations, but should
also include a gender perspective in the planning and
conduct of missions. As noted by the Secretary-General
in his report, the participation of women should not be
limited to certain phases; it is necessary throughout the
conflict cycle to achieve sustainable peace.
Finally, women are agents of change and contribute
to building more just and egalitarian societies. We
must thererfore take advantage of their rich potential.
As noted by the Secretary-General last year during
his visit to Chile, empowering women and girls is the
smartest investment that the international community
can make to ensure a future of justice and peace for all.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mrs. Louise Sharene Bailey, Chargé d’Affaires
of the Permanent Observer Mission of the African
Union to the United Nations.
Mrs. Bailey: First and foremost, the African
Union (AU) wishes to congratulate the President on his
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, as well as to thank him for
convening this open debate on the theme “Women
and peace and security: implementing the common
agenda” as we celebrate the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful and comprehensive report (S/2016/822)
and to commend the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the Executive Director of EVE Organization for
Women Development, South Sudan, for their valuable
contributions to today’s open debate.
In the same context as this debate, last Thursday
the African Union Commission held its annual open
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council on the status of women and children in
conflict, under the theme “the role of the media in
enhancing accountability on women, peace and security
commitments in Africa”.
On the margins of the twenty-seventh African
Union Summit, held in Kigali in July, the African
Union launched the first report on the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda in Africa.
That was primarily the result of consultative meetings
with AU States members and regional economic

S/PV.7793

communities that have developed national action plans
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). So far,
19 countries and two regional economic communities
in Africa have developed action plans.
Further to that report, the Commission embarked
upon a continental results framework that will facilitate
monitoring and reporting on the women and peace and
security agenda item on a regular basis. Throughout
the consultations conducted by the Special Envoy
of the African Union Chairperson on women, peace
and security, Her Excellency Ms. Bineta Diop, with
AU member States, women’s groups, partner United
Nations agencies and other development partners,
there was consensus that instruments do exist but that
delivery on commitments is lacking.
Sixteen years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), in an endeavour to consolidate and accelerate
the gains made by the continent in the participation of
women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, the
African Union Commission is undertaking a number of
activities guided by aspiration 6 of Agenda 2063, which
stipulates, inter alia, that Africa will be a continent
where women are empowered and play their rightful
role in all spheres of life. One of the critical spheres
is the area of peace and security as a sine qua non in
Africa’s stability and development. The undertakings
include the following.
The first entails establishing a network of African
women mediators to contribute to the search for a
peaceful resolution of conflicts on the continent and to
support communities in their peacebuilding efforts.
The second area of focus deals with changing
the narratives on women to recognize their role in
peacebuilding, through mobilization of a network of
journalists, reporters and bloggers who are committed
to reporting in a gender-responsive manner on issues
of women and peace and security — not just by telling
stories of victimization but also those of women’s
leadership and of women as positive agents for social
change and economic transformation.
The third effort involves mobilizing and supporting
member States and regional economic communities
to develop action plans on the women and peace and
security agenda. The Republic of Namibia and the
Southern African Development Community region are
presently undergoing the process, with the support of
the Office of the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission.

16-3413177/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

The fourth area entails launching a network of
centres of excellence in various regions of the continent
to work on women and peace and security issues,
with a view to sustainable and broad strengthening of
women’s capacities in peacebuilding, thus ensuring the
availability of women’s expertise in that area.
The fifth action pertains to training military
personnel on the rights of women, in line with the
AU zero-tolerance policy on sexual and gender-based
violence. Countries like Senegal have already embarked
on such training.
It would be remiss of me not to take the opportunity
at this juncture to salute and appreciate the support of
dependable partners in assisting the African Union
Commission in carrying out those activities to sustain
the contribution of women in peace and security.
Without being exhaustive, I wish to mention the support
of UN-Women, the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa, the United Nations Development Programme
Regional Service Centre for Africa and the countries of
Norway, Spain, Germany and the United Kingdom for
their invaluable contributions.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the African Union
Commission’s commitment and action towards the
advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda. An annual report will be submitted to the
African Union Peace and Security Council, and
subsequently shared with the United Nations Security
Council. For the African Union Commission, the Africa
we want is an Africa where all daughters and sons
of the continent are equal, enjoy the same rights and
obligations and participate equally in building a stable
and just society. Women must be fully part and parcel of
that endeavour and of Africa’s transformative agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate on the critical issue of
women and peace and security. Since the high-level
review of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
last year, we have seen some meaningful progress in
many areas. The Republic of Korea would like to take
this opportunity to express its appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, his Special Envoys and UNWomen for their tireless dedication to those advances.
78/90

25/10/2016

However, despite the progress we have achieved,
we still face daunting challenges. There remains a wide
gap between our expectations and the reality on the
ground. Civilians, especially women and girls, continue
to be caught up in armed conflicts around the world.
Acts of sexual violence committed by non-State actors
are particularly alarming. Bearing in mind our shared
concerns, I would like to make a few observations,
among others, on this important issue.
First, we must continue our efforts to integrate
gender perspectives as we develop strategies for all
stages of the conflict-solution process. In that vein, we
recognize the increased number of female mediators
and delegates in peace agreement negotiations, which
has led to an increase in the number of agreements
with gender-specific provisions. In fact, seven out of 10
peace agreements signed in 2015 had such provisions.
We also encourage the ongoing efforts to increase
the number of women among military and police
personnel deployed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The increased participation of women in the
field, coupled with more gender advisers deployed to
support related Secretariat efforts, will further promote
a gender-responsive environment in peacekeeping.
At the same time, it is also noteworthy that the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) met the target of allocating
at least 15 per cent of its resources to projects designed
to advance gender equality and the empower women.
Secondly, we need to further pursue accountability,
which is key to the protection of women and girls in
armed conflict. We commend the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which has continued to assist many Governments in
strengthening the capacity of national justice systems,
including in the areas of criminal investigations,
prosecution and reparations for survivors.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
appointment of a Special Coordinator on Improving
United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse, as well as the additional measures taken to
strengthen accountability and assist victims. We believe
that more determined actions need to be taken.
Thirdly, we would like to emphasize the
indispensable role of national Governments in upholding
the women and peace and security agenda. We welcome
the fact that more countries are implementing national
action plans, which contribute to strengthening national
ability to implement the women and peace and security
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

agenda by enhancing societal awareness of the issue.
We must pay more attention to building the capacity
and awareness of national Governments in conflict
and post-conflict settings in order to pursue women’s
equality and active participation through an enhanced
partnership with all stakeholders.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea, as a strong
supporter of this agenda, reaffirms its commitment to
international efforts to accelerate the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
women and peace and security and for highlighting this
priority issue. I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your successful presidency
of the Security Council this month. We join others
in thanking the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her briefing and
offer our continuing support to UN-Women in its role
in advancing this agenda. We would like to reiterate her
call for efforts to achieve gender parity in the United
Nations. We look forward to working with the SecretaryGeneral-designate on this critical agenda item.
In addition, we would like to thank Ms. Rita Lopidia
for sharing her expertise on the important role of women
in all phases of the peace process in South Sudan.
As a member of the Group of Friends on Women
and Peace and Security, the United Arab Emirate’s
would also like to endorse the Group’s joint statement.
One year has passed since we marked the 15-year
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2242 (2015),
co-sponsored by nearly 70 Member States. As a
co-sponsor of the resolution and a strong advocate of
the women and peace and security agenda, the United
Arab Emirates is committed to building a strong
framework for action to achieve the full implementation
of the agenda.
In following up last year’s commitments, the task at
hand is a challenging one in view of the global threats
to peace and security. Terrorism and extremism are
real threats, and violations of women’s rights, as well
as sexual violence against women, are intrinsically
linked with the strategic objectives and ideologies of
extremist groups. United Nations-led investigations

S/PV.7793

have uncovered the use of sexual and gender-based
crimes by Da’esh and Boko Haram as tactics of those
terrorist and extremist groups. We have all seen the
widespread targeting of women and girls in conflict
zones, which represents a fundamental push-back
against women’s rights. The scale and protracted
nature of the forced displacement crisis are growing,
with 12.4 million new cases of displacement driven by
conflict and persecution in 2015 alone. That brings the
total number of people in dire need of protection and
assistance as a consequence of forced displacement to
65.2 million, 50 per cent of whom are women and girls.
We know that the global landscape is challenging,
but the international community has made tangible
gains in the past year, in partnership with United
Nations. First, the women and peace and security
national focal point network, spearheaded by Spain,
will drive the coordination and implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda at the national
level. As a founding member of that network, the United
Arab Emirates is committed to translating the women
and peace and security agenda domestically.
Secondly, the League of Arab States and UNWomen hosted a ministerial conference in Cairo
last month on women achieving peace and security
in the Arab Region. That conference facilitated the
implementation of the regional strategy and action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000) and adopted a number of
resolutions on financing and monitoring mechanisms
in order to enhance accountability and ensure serious
commitment to achieving the goals of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Thirdly, the Security Council now hosts the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, led
by the United Kingdom and Spain, which focuses on
country-specific situations in order to mainstream
gender considerations. But it is not enough to merely
turn the tide. As an international community, and
particularly at the United Nations, we are attempting to
shift how the system operates in order to place greater
focus on conflict prevention and sustaining peace at the
policy level. That is something that we will continue to
strive to achieve as an international player committed
to the full realization of the women and peace and
security agenda.
One of the founding principles of the United
Arab Emirates is the full, meaningful and continually
improving participation of women in every aspect

16-3413179/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

of our society. In recognition of that core belief, the
United Arab Emirates foreign policy strategy now
includes women’s empowerment and protection as
priority themes. In recognition of the key role that
UN-Women plays in advancing gender equality and
women’s empowerment, the United Arab Emirates and
UN-Women opened a UN-Women Liaison Office in
Abu Dhabi just last week. The Office will enhance and
strengthen collaboration to advance gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls — a core
part of any women and peace and security agenda in
the region.
As a sponsor of resolution 2242 (2015), the United
Arab Emirates recognizes the need to integrate gender
analysis into the drivers of radicalization for women,
while also considering the impacts of counter-terrorism
strategies on women’s human rights and women’s
organizations. This requires a strong research base,
so that our policies are data-driven and effective. The
United Arab Emirates is contributing to that research
base by supporting the UN-Women global programme
on women and peace and security in order to promote
conflict resilient societies through prevention efforts
that facilitate women’s participation, leadership and the
protection of their rights. The global programme will
further gender-sensitive research and data collection to
reveal the drivers of extremist violence and the impacts
of counter-terrorism strategies on women’s rights and
women’s organizations.
The United Arab Emirates is also committed
to combating extremism through the Sawab Centre,
an online messaging and engagement programme,
developed in partnership with the United States, in
support of the Global Coalition against Da’esh. Sawab
uses direct online engagement to counter terrorist
propaganda rapidly and effectively, including the
messages used to recruit foreign fighters, raise funds
for illicit activities and intimidate and terrorize local
populations. In November 2015, Sawab launched a
campaign entitled “Da’esh denies her dignity” to
coincide with the International Day for the Elimination
of Violence Against Women. The campaign told the
stories of five women who escaped Da’esh through
video testimonials and visual depictions of their
treatment. Two of those women are Yazidi and describe
how they were treated as less than human, beaten, and
sold in slave markets over and over again.
Resolution 2242 (2015) makes the critical link
between the women and peace and security agenda and
80/90

25/10/2016

humanitarian action, recognizing the impact of forced
displacement on women and girls, while emphasizing
their roles as first-line responders and the necessity
of engaging women in the design, delivery and
implementation of humanitarian responses. The United
Arab Emirates is doing its part to address the global
humanitarian crisis, in which women, children and
adolescents are often hit the first and hardest, and helped
last, and 50 per cent of preventable maternal, under-five,
and newborn deaths occur in humanitarian settings.
The United Arab Emirates continues to be a
steadfast advocate of the Every Woman Every Child
Everywhere platform. That platform recognizes the
disproportionate impact that humanitarian and fragile
settings have on women, children and adolescents, and
the role that women and young people play as front-line
responders. They are not only key for the survival and
well-being of children, families and communities, but
also to build resilience and facilitate the transition from
crises to development.
The women and peace and security agenda is key
to achieving sustainable peace and driving operational
effectiveness. With that in mind, I would like to make
three recommendations.
First, we must bring women’s participation and
leadership to the core of peace and security efforts.
Women are transformative agents of change. By
removing obstacles and incentivizing the effective
participation of women in peace and security, we can
strengthen the sustainability and inclusiveness of our
peace and security efforts. That includes increasing
the leadership of women at senior decision-making
levels here at the United Nations. Secondly, we must
prioritize the protection of women’s and girls’ rights
during and after conflict. Thirdly, we must address
the humanitarian crisis with the understanding
that women are best placed to advise and lead on
humanitarian responses.
The United Arab Emirates is committed to
prioritizing gender equality and women’s empowerment
in peace and security settings. We will continue
to advocate for the full, effective, and meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of leadership
and decision-making, and working towards the full
realization of the women and peace and security agenda.
Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Russian Federation
on assuming the presidency of the Council this month
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

and for the transparent manner in which it conducts
the work of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank New Zealand for its tremendous efforts during its
presidency of the Council last month.
Iraq is one of the earliest countries to being
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. Notwithstanding the challenges
and difficulties that the country faces and the terrorist
attacks of Da’esh, Iraq is developing an effective
national action plan to implement the resolution. A
special operations room has been established in the
Prime Minister’s Office to implement resolution-related
plans, as well as the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
Iraq is working to ensure women’s participation in
public life and raises awareness among the population
about women’s social, economic and political rights,
promotes gender equality through an equal opportunities
policy and encourages women to take up posts and
participate in decision-making processes. Women
taking up high-ranking positions has increased since
2003. We now have 83 women parliamentarians, three
women ambassadors and 86 judges and Iraqi women
are now the presidents and deans of 75 universities
and colleges and cabinet ministers in an Iraqi State
inhabited by 7 million people. Sustainable development
can be achieved only when there is an environment of
peace and security.
Iraq is witnessing the most violent terrorist attacks
in the world perpetrated by lethal terrorist groups. The
people in the areas under the control of such gangs have
experienced the most savage and horrendous criminal
practices committed against, in particular, women
and children. Such gangs and groups have kidnapped
a huge number of Yazidi women and people from
other ethnicities of all ages in Iraq, whohave been sold
as chattel in the areas between Iraq and Syria. Their
dignities have been humiliated. They have been raped,
enslaved and tortured psychologically, physically
and sexually. We therefore call on the international
community to make further efforts to support Iraq,
free these women, return them to their families and
reintegrate them into society.
My Government, in coordination with international
organizations, is monitoring and addressing violations
taking place during counterterrorism operations. It is
training women and involving them in all steps of the
war against terrorism. Collective efforts undertaken

S/PV.7793

by the Government of Iraq and the United Nations led
to the signing of a joint statement by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura,
on 23 September, on the sidelines of the high-level
meetings of the General Assembly.
The advancement of women is a huge step towards
achieving peace and security. Iraq is continuously
cooperating with international organizations to
promote women’s advancement, to expand women’s
role and empowerment, and to enable women to assume
their role in society. The Government is cooperating
with the Gender Unit of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq to enhance the role of women in
national reconciliation and to raise awareness about the
importance of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by thanking the Russian Federation for
its efforts in the framework of its presidency of the
Security Council this month. I wish you, Sir, every
possible success at the head of the Council. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
report (S/2016/822). We welcome the recommendations
contained therein.
We reaffirm the importance of women’s full
participation in efforts to achieve peace and security
and the ensuring that the necessary resources and funds
are available to implement these programmes. We are
here today to assess the efforts of the international
community, in terms not only of the settlement of
conflict, but also of the empowerment of women in
the context of forging of lasting peace. We are also
here to assess women’s role in peace negotiations, the
prevention of conflict, humanitarian assistance and the
fight against extremism.
We are pursuing our efforts to strengthen the
participation of women in decision-making and have
made qualitative progress, as reflected in the results
of the most recent parliamentary elections, which were
held in September. The number of women in Parliament
has increased from 12 to 24 per cent and 18 per cent of
our magistrates are now women. There are also a great
many Jordanian women who hold high positions.

16-3413181/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

Jordan is a pioneer regionally and internationally
in its contributions to peace and security. We are a
troop-contributing country and participate in dialogue
and mediation efforts. Jordan is one of the largest
contributors of troops to the United Nations. We also
contribute police to peacekeeping missions, including
21 Jordanian women, and the number of women
participating in such missions will grow. This clearly
underscores the importance we attach to strengthening
the role of women in peacekeeping operations.
We would like to stress the importance of adopting
and taking this aspect into account in peacekeeping
operations. Jordan continues to suffer from an
unprecedented flow of refugees, including Syrian
refugees, but despite the social, economic and security
burden that this places on us and the chronic lack of
water and electricity, Jordan is committed to sparing no
effort to provide protection and basic services to Syrian
refugees, including female refugees, who constitute
51 per cent of refugees in the Kingdom. This is in
keeping with the priorities for women and peace and
security and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
As members know, the Security Council recently
adopted resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and
security, following the call of his Royal Highness Prince
Al-Hussein bin Abdullah II in favour of a strengthening
of the participation of youth in peace efforts. Youth
are drivers of peace and they contribute to the fight
against violent extremism and their participation in
decision-making must be strengthened.
The Government of Jordan has committed itself to
drafting a national plan for women and peace and security
and to accelerating its adoption. Indeed, we firmly
believe that the main victims of conflict are women and
girls. Women play an essential role in forging peace,
and peace cannot be established in societies without the
serious and concrete participation of women. Similarly,
we cannot implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development without empowering women and girls,
achieving gender equality and, of course, eradicating
all forms of discrimination.
The Jordanian National Commission for Women,
in cooperation with UN-Women and other bodies,
has organized participative consultations, bringing
together all relevant stakeholders and actors, including
communities hosting refugees. These consultations have
underscored the need to strengthen the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations and to enhance the
82/90

25/10/2016

training provided and to fight against violence against
women, which is often rooted in social causes.
Official bodies, civil society and international
organizations all provide various forms of assistance
in Jordan with the objective of eliminating the
violence and discrimination aimed at marginalized
and discriminated populations. A great many projects
managed by women deployed in refugee camps
and communities hosting refugees also enjoy our
support. Jordan is working alongside the international
community to counter extremism by all means and to
fight against the exploitation of women and girls by
Da’esh and other similar organizations.
In conclusion, Jordan will continue to work at all
levels to strengthen the United Nations programme
on women and peace and security in order to provide
a better future to refugee women and girls. The
international community must also mitigate the
suffering of women and girls under Israeli occupation,
including those detained in Israeli prisons. Their rights
must be upheld. We must also work hand in hand to
build peace in post-conflict situations and to eradicate
the causes of conflict. Women play a very important
role in that regard.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
expressing our appreciation to the Russian presidency
for convening this meeting. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
representative of civil society for their briefings on
this theme.
Ethiopia welcomes the progress made in
mainstreaming a gender perspective in the work
of the Security Council since the adoption of the
groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security. The
establishment of the women and peace and security
normative framework to protect women affected by
conflict and enhance their effective participation at
all levels in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
and peacekeeping efforts is indeed a step in the
right direction.
Nevertheless,
we
recognize
the
existing
implementation gaps in the women and peace and
security normative architecture identified in the report
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

and through the global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Without any doubt, more needs
to be done to advance the women and peace and security
agenda. In that regard, we note with great concern the
heightened risk of violence or threats to the physical
safety of women and their exposure to sexual abuse or
harassment in conflict and post-conflict situations.
We believe that the sustained engagement of the
Council, without encroaching on the mandate of other
United Nations bodies, including the General Assembly,
is critical in pushing forward the women and peace and
security agenda. In that regard, the efforts of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
established pursuant to the 2015 high-level review,
aimed at ensuring the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and other subsequent resolutions, continue
to be very important. Most important, mainstreaming
the women and peace and security agenda requires
effective coordination and consistent engagement
among the relevant stakeholders, including among
UN-Women, Special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and troop- and police contributing countries, among
many others. In that vein, a coordinated reporting
mechanism could also be envisaged to monitor the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and highlight the protection challenges, with a
view to providing the necessary assistance to conflictaffected countries.
As a major troop- and police-contributing country,
Ethiopia has been working towards increasing the
participation of women. We are particularly proud
that Ethiopia is one of the leading contributors of
female peacekeepers. We will continue to enhance the
participation of our women in the military, police and
civilian components.
I wish to conclude my remarks by reaffirming our
commitment to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian) I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mikayilli (Azerbaijan): We would like to
express our appreciation to the Russian presidency for
convening this open debate and to thank all the briefers
for their valuable contributions.
The consequences of armed conflict and violence,
as well as the erosion of respect for international

S/PV.7793

humanitarian and international human rights law,
continue to have a devastating impact on millions of
women and girls across the globe. We are deeply alarmed
by the current displacement crisis and the wide range
of violations that displaced people are facing. Effective
protection measures in situations of displacement
are required. In that context, the importance of
gender-responsive approaches to refugee and migrant
movements, as advocated by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2016/822), cannot be overemphasized.
The growing spread of violent extremism and
terrorism also causes unspeakable suffering to women
and girls. As it was highlighted during the Security
Council open debate (see S/PV.7704) on conflict related
sexual violence held in June, sexual violence is now
also used as a tactic of terrorism. Moreover, restricting
women’s rights in conflict settings through the
misappropriation of religion has become widespread
and is a very dangerous development. It is therefore
crucial to integrate the gender perspective while
putting in place strategies to counter terrorism and
violent extremism.
Access to education in crisis situations is vital not
only in addressing the gender gap in school enrolment,
but also for the empowerment of women and girls. We
are encouraged by the commitment set out in the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (General
Assembly resolution 71/1) to provide all children with
education within a few months of their arrival.
We strongly condemn all acts of violence against
women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
Parties to conflict should respect their obligations
under international humanitarian and international
human rights law and bring the perpetrators to justice
to combat impunity and ensure accountability. In the
same vein, we support ongoing measures to prevent
and address cases of sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the contribution that landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) has made to an increased
recognition of the plight of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. In particular, the inclusion
of the protection of civilians in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations; the incorporation of womenand peace- and security-related provisions to peace
agreements; the appointment of women as mediators,
special representatives, special envoys and heads of
missions; the increase in the number of female military

16-3413183/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

and police personnel in United Nations missions; the
establishment of the post of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict; the adoption of national action plans on
women and peace and security; and the mainstreaming
of gender equality and women’s empowerment in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can all
be highlighted.
The suffering of millions of women and girls cannot
be alleviated without putting an end to armed conflicts.
That is a reality that we are facing in Azerbaijan every
day. As it is well-documented by the United Nations
and the Security Council, Armenia has unleashed a war
and used force against Azerbaijan, occupied almost one
fifth of its territory, carried out ethnic cleansing and
committed other serious crimes during the conflict.
Hundreds of thousands of Azerbaijani forcibly displaced
persons are still deprived of the right to return to their
homes. Regular ceasefire violations and attacks on
Azerbaijani towns and villages have recently become
more frequent and violent, resulting in the killing or
injuring of many Azerbaijani civilians. The most
recent large-scale attack by the Armenian armed forces
took place in April and claimed the lives of innocent
civilians within the population of Azerbaijan. The
April escalation was a vivid reminder that the status
quo is dangerous and has the potential to re-escalate at
any time, with unpredictable consequences.
In that regard, we fully support the call of the
Secretary-General to redouble efforts to prevent and
resolve conflicts, allowing for the realization of a more
peaceful world.
The President (spoke in Russian) I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I would
like to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for conveying today’s open debate and to thank
today’s briefers.
Portugal is encouraged by several very positive
developments with regard to the women and peace
and security agenda, such as the fact that the issue is a
consistent feature in Security Council resolutions and
peacekeeping mandates, as well as the fact that gendersensitive reporting is now understood as a fundamental
element for a thorough understanding of the gender
dimensions of conflict and that reinforced efforts are
necessary to shape adequate responses at the local and
international levels. Today more women are included in
84/90

25/10/2016

peace talks, more peace agreements contain provisions
in support of women’s human rights and more securitysector personnel are trained to prevent and respond to
sexual and gender-based violence.
However, since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the peace and security context and
the nature of conflict have evolved — at times
dramatically — characterized by entrenched cycles of
conflict and fragility, daily violations of human rights
and humanitarian law, growing humanitarian crises,
mass-scale displacement of persons and refugees, and
new threats, such as increasing violent extremism and
terrorism, which disproportionately affect women
and girls.
The women and peace and security agenda is a
critical, yet underutilized, tool for preventing conflict
and shaping more effective responses to today’s
complex crises. That is why it is now more than ever
essential to sustain and develop the progress already
achieved and maintain the commitment to the agenda
by Member States, regional organizations and the
entire United Nations system. In that regard, Portugal
welcomes the settomg up of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, established pursuant
to the 2015 high-level review, as a key step in the
implementation of resolution 2242 (2015) with a view
to strengthen oversight and coordination on the women
and peace and security agenda. We would also like to
commend Spain for its initiative in the establishment of
the national focal point network for women and peace
and security, which constitutes an important platform
for sharing good practices, and with which Portugal is
pleased to be associated.
Portugal has been a firm and consistent supporter of
the women and peace and security agenda. We adopted
our first national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in 2009, and a second one in
2014, which is in force until 2018. We consider it critical
to ensure the active and meaningful participation of
women and girls in all aspects and stages of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict
processes. We will continue to promote the women and
peace and security agenda and to raise awareness on
the importance of establishing national actions plans on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all the
relevant international forums we belong to, including
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and NATO.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

Portugal also reiterates its pledge to continue
conducting training programmes for national personnel
and members of the armed and security forces
assigned to international peacekeeping missions on
gender equality and violence against women and girls,
including sexual violence, gender-based violence and
trafficking in human beings.
I would also like to point out the important role of
civil society organizations in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. They are
often essential elements in preventing and reporting
crimes committed against women, young women and
girls and in alerting the international community to
such crimes. Working in close collaboration with civil
society organizations therefore becomes indispensable
to enhance the results.
In conclusion, 16 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we must redouble our efforts
in consolidating and reinforcing the implementation of
this agenda. Ensuring a gender perspective and women
and girls’ participation in all stages of peace processes,
including in prevention and disarmament, protection
in displacement settings, peacekeeping, policy-making
and reconstruction, strengthens the protection efforts
by United Nations peacekeepers, contributes positively
to the achievement of sustainable peace, accelerates
economic recovery and development and helps counter
violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir, I would
like to begin by commending your country, the Russian
Federation, on its accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and to commend you
on the great acumen with which you are conducting the
Council’s work in October. I would also like to pay welldeserved tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to
whom my country is very grateful for his outstanding
ongoing efforts to ensure that peace returns to my
country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also
take this opportunity to thank Ms. Zainab Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her noteworthy
commitments in fighting sexual violence in my country.
I would also like to express gratitude to Ms. MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, for her

S/PV.7793

support to the women of my country. I also thank
Ms. Rita Lopidia Executive Director and Co-founder
of EVE Organization for Women Development, for her
enlightening briefing.
My country endorses the statement delivered by the
observer of the African Union.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has
been affected by many years of armed conflict with
very adverse consequences, in particular on women and
children, is firmly committed to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. Adopted on 31 October 2000 — the first
Council resolution to emphasize the fight against the
impact of war — resolution 1325 (2000) called for
promoting women’s contributions to conflict resolution
and to negotiations with a view to the maintenance of
peace and security.
It was in 1966, 50 years ago now, that for the first
time a woman was elevated to the rank of minister in
my country. That was the beginning of a process of
liberating Congolese women from the traditional yoke
in order that they could participate in decision-making
positions. That process culminated with the
promulgation of the 2006 Constitution by the President
of the Republic and Head of State, His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange.
This open debate gives us an opportunity to
take stock of the progress made since our country
endorsed resolution 1325 (2000). By way of example,
I would mention the following achievements: the
participation of women in all peace negotiations at
national and international levels; the integration of
the gender dimension in all areas of national life
via the promulgation of a law on promoting and and
upholding women’s right to equal representation and on
guaranteeing a gender balance in our institutions; and
reforms of the police and the armed forces, including
the setting up of specialized units responsible for
fighting sexual violence.
We have also reviewed our family code, which in the
past had discriminated against women and young girls,
in favour of giving rights to both. Our President recently
promulgated the code. We are currently reviewing our
national strategy against gender-based sexual violence,
with the involvement of all the relevant stakeholders.
We drafted and published a national action plan,
adopted by the Government in October 2010, which we
are reviewing at this time. Every year on 31 October,

16-3413185/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

we evaluate the activities undertaken to implement
the action plan — a day set aside to commemorate the
resolution, with the collaboration of civil society and
development partners. Finally, we have put in place
a number of structural mechanisms — for example,
setting up national, provincial and local steering
committees and a permanent national secretariat — to
facilitate the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in all 26 provinces of our country.
Notwithstanding that progress, the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) still faces major challenges,
such as illiteracy, early marriage and inadequate
human, material and financial resources. Aware of
those difficulties, my Government, through its Ministry
on Women, Family and Children, has made a strong
commitment, with the support of technical and financial
development partners, to bolster synergy among all
stakeholders to effectively implement resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2242 (2015), which aim to increase women’s
prominence in the peace processes of our respective
countries. The challenge is to promote the rights of
women and young girls and to encourage all initiatives
that will help to achieve the expected results set forth in
resolution 1325 (2000).
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to contribute to this open debate on
the sixteenth anniversary of the women amd peace
and security agenda and one year after the global
study on resolution 1325 (2000). It is also noteworthy
that this debate comes one year after the international
community adopted the most comprehensive universal
agenda for sustainable development, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. This debate provides a
valuable opportunity for us to take stock of how far we
have come in our implementation efforts, particularly
as it relates to Goal 5, on women’s empowerment and
gender equality, as well as Goal 16 which speaks to
peaceful and inclusive societies, which mirror the
subject of this debate. We have, after all, committed to
leaving no one behind.
My delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on the topic, and
we echo his words as stated in the report:
“The women and peace and security agenda
is a critical, yet underutilized tool for preventing
86/90

25/10/2016

conflict and shaping more effective responses to
today’s complex crises.” (S/2016/822, para. 4)
In that respect, we are reminded that the paramount
importance of the United Nations lies in the maintenance
of international peace and security. As the nature of
threats to international security continues to evolve in
complexity, my delegation submits that the primary
objective of our Organization would be elusive without
the full and effective integration of women into all
spheres of conflict resolution, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding processes. Trinidad and Tobago is fully
committed to the goal of gender equality. For us, the
empowerment of women is an integral part of national
development and an essential pillar in the maintenance
of sustainable peace.
Trinidad and Tobago is steadfast in its
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2010, my
country introduced, and has been the main sponsor
since then, of the first General Assembly resolution
entitled “Women, disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control” (General Assembly resolution 69/61). It
must be highlighted that the catalyst for the resolution
on women and disarmament in 2010 was the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. Since its introduction, the
resolution has received the support of a majority of
Member States and is currently being considered again
in the First Committee. The resolution transcends the
notion of women as victims of armed conflict and
armed violence and recognizes women as empowered
and indispensable actors in decision-making efforts to
address the issue of disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control. Trinidad and Tobago is pleased that the
language contained in the current and last versions of
the resolution on women and disarmament is reflective
of the Arms Trade Treaty and its provisions on genderbased violence and violence against women and girls.
At the national level, the equal rights of women and
men are guaranteed under the Constitution of Trinidad
and Tobago. Equal opportunities exist for women’s
participation at the decision-making level in matters
regarding peace and security. That is underscored by
the recruitment and ascendency of women to senior
ranks of the security sector in Trinidad and Tobago.
At the regional level, we have also worked with the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs on
initiatives to strengthen the participatory role played by
Latin America and the Caribbean in combating illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

Trinidad and Tobago continues to host a number of
initiatives, in conjunction the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean, to provide
disarmament and arms control training to security
personnel, including women. My country pledges
its commitment to continue to work with the United
Nations in advancing and empowering women at the
global level. Consequently, Trinidad and Tobago was
elected to the Executive Board of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women in April. We are eager to begin our mandate in
January 2017 and to join international efforts to promote
the advancement of women and girls everywhere.
Trinidad and Tobago takes the opportunity
to reaffirm its continued commitment to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): At the outset, my
delegation extends to the Russian presidency our great
appreciation for convening this open debate on the very
important theme of women and peace and security.
My delegation appreciates the efforts made by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, in promoting the
mainstreaming of gender equality and empowerment.
We welcome the briefing he gave this morning, as
well as that delivered by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka. We also take note of the briefing made Ms. Rita
Lopidia, Executive Director of the EVE Organization
for Women Development in South Sudan.
Uganda joins other Member States in reiterating
the concerns the international community continues
to have in the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Women continue to face numerous
challenges, but most specifically their plight is even
more debilitating during conflicts and wars. More often
than not, they are not the causes but mere victims and
bear the greatest brunt of the excesses of such conflicts.
Women and girls have endured some of the greatest acts
of humiliation by being subjected to such degrading acts
as rape and other forms of sexual violence and abuse
during conflicts. In most instances, sexual exploitation,
violence and abuse are even used as weapons of war.

S/PV.7793

United Nations reports are awash with many such acts
in many conflicts and war situations all over the world,
including in Africa. Conflicts and wars have registered
many widows and orphans, the most vulnerable of
whom are girls. In the same vein, women continue to be
sidelined and marginalized in conflict management and
resolution, peacemaking, peacebuilding, peacekeeping
and peace support operations.
We commend the United Nations for some deliberate
actions taken so far to address those challenges and for
the implementation of some aspects of resolution 1325
(2000). However, a lot of work still needs to be done. We
therefore call for the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We note with appreciation
the recognition of the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2016/822) of Uganda as an outstanding example
of a country that has demonstrated that women are
making a remarkable difference as agents of change.
In local districts under the localization programme,
Uganda, facilitated by the Global Network of Women
Peacebuilders, has adopted local action plans that
have resulted in a decrease in sexual and genderbased violence.
The question of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations must be seriously addressed
and those who commit such crimes should be held to
account for their actions. Uganda is exemplary in that
respect. Not long ago, some Uganda People’s Defence
Force members serving in the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia were identified for
transgressions and were duly tried before a court of
law, both in the Mission area and at home. Those found
culpable were severely punished for their actions.
In order to address the question of gender balance
and gender mainstreaming in a holistic manner,
Uganda has made tremendous strides in empowering
women and girls through not only the provision of
universal primary and secondary education, but also
the introduction of affirmative action in admissions
to tertiary institutions in the country. That has
greatly enabled more women to acquire the necessary
education that empowers them with the required skills
and knowledge to compete with men in various aspects
of life, both internally and globally.
In politics and governance, more women have been
able to be elected to the national legislature and other
Government legislative institutions due to the deliberate
Government policy of affirmative action of reserving

16-3413187/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

certain positions for women alone, in addition to their
ability to compete with men in other positions. More
female members have also been appointed to the national
Cabinet in Government. The Government of Uganda is
committed to continue exploring more opportunities in
the effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We wish to call upon the United Nations to involve
more women in preventive diplomacy, negotiations and
mediation to promote gender balance in these areas.
Last but not least is the question of gender
budgeting that must take into account the special needs
of women in the domain of peacekeeping and support
operations. Working together through and within the
United Nations system, we should continue to promote
the equal and effective participation of women in all
efforts aimed at the promotion of peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement made by the observer of
the European Union. Allow me to make the following
additional points.
First, women’s networks play an important early
warning and preventive role. These include women’s
situation rooms in Africa, which the African Union
(AU) has declared a best practice to prevent conflict;
the Au initiative to build a dedicated roster of women
mediators; and the creation of the Nordic Women’s
Mediators’ Network. Existing good practices should
be emulated and encouraged. We call on the United
Nations to consider developing a dedicated roster of
women mediators to reinforce inclusive, multi-track
prevention and mediation processes, and on countries
to submit more women mediator candidacies to United
Nations rosters.
Secondly, women suffer disproportionately from the
effects of armed violence in conflicts. They are killed,
robbed, raped, trafficked and forced into prostitution at
gunpoint. Women also bear the brunt of armed violence
as single heads of households and caregivers. Their
needs as ex-combatants and former child soldiers differ
from those of their male counterparts.
The Arms Trade Treaty has had an important
impact on highlighting the gender dimension of arms
control and disarmament. As reflected in resolution
2220 (2015), my delegation urges further strengthening
of the gender dimension in tackling the issue of small
88/90

25/10/2016

arms and light weapons. Ensuring women’s full and
meaningful participation in efforts to combat and
eradicate the illicit transfer and misuse of small arms
and light weapons must remain a priority. NATO
and Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council guidelines
on implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, regarding small arms and
light weapons and mine action is a good example in
that respect. We also support the Secretary-General’s
call to strengthen gender-responsive approaches to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, further integrating the gender
dimension into relevant processes.
Thirdly, although human rights violations targeting
women increasingly figure in sanctions regimes, only
five of these, as noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/822), explicitly include as designation
criteria acts involving sexual violence or violations
targeting women. We stress the need to reinforce the
gender expertise of relevant expert groups, further
enhance sanctions regimes’ cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and expand the designation
criteria in sanctions regimes where sexual and genderbased crimes and specific attacks against women are
persistently perpetrated.
Fourthly, communication can be a powerful tool
for promoting the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. The ways in which women
are depicted in the media can have a profound effect
on societal attitudes, perceptions of gender roles, and
the effective tackling of stereotypes that constrain and
limit women’s role and opportunities in all spheres
of life.
However, according to the Global Media
Monitoring Project 2015, women are the central focus
of just 10 per cent of news stories, mostly as victims.
Only 4 per cent of media stories clearly challenge
gender stereotypes. Improving women’s chances to
have their side of the story told as media protagonists
and media makers, through better education and access
to information, media, literacy, social, organizational
and communication skills should be part and parcel of
all United Nations-led operations and programmes on
the ground. This would, inter alia, allow us to better
challenge constraining inhibitions, inspire courage,
affirm the right of women to take the lead and offer
inspiring real-life role models to other women and girls
16-34131

25/10/2016

Women and peace and security

who are still struggling to have their rights and human
dignity taken into account.
Female journalists may offer particular insights
into the plight of women in conflict zones by accessing
women where access may not be possible to their male
counterparts due to prevailing restrictions and social
norms. Female journalists also produce more stories
centered on women than their male counterparts. As
such, they become important conduits for the women
and peace and security agenda. But women journalists
themselves often face serious risks as they seek to tell
the stories of conflict and transformation. A shocking
70 per cent of women journalists killed worldwide
are murdered. Besides physical attacks, intimidation,
harassment and rape, they are subjected to aggressive
targeted trolling and sexualized attacks online.
Resolution 2222 (2015), adopted under Lithuanian
presidency in May 2015, points to the specific risks
faced by women journalists. These need to be adequately
addressed, including through a much stronger focus on
tackling impunity.
Finally, let me reiterate Lithuania’s strong
commitment to furthering the women and peace and
security agenda through concrete action. We are
currently renewing our resolution 1325 (2000) national
action plan and enhancing relevant cooperation with
our eastern partnership neighbours, including Ukraine,
where Russia-sponsored war in the east of the country
has severely affected women’s personal safety and their
human rights. Lithuania is taking steps to increase
the involvement of women in peace operations in the
civilian and military fields. Last year, a third of our
personnel deployed to civilian missions abroad were
women.
As a founding member of the women and peace and
security national focal point network, Lithuania will
continue to engage actively in its work as well as on the
broader women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Allow me to congratulate the
Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. We thank
you for organizing this open debate on women and
peace and security.

S/PV.7793

Cambodia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations this morning.
In the twenty-first century, it is more evident than
ever that women play an integral part in our global
efforts in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peace negotiations, peacebuilding and providing
humanitarian response. This is reflected in the resolution
1325 (2000), supported by the reports of the SecretaryGeneral and other United Nations resolutions.
Women are an integral part of global society and
therefore should be no longer overlooked. We are
currently witnessing changes in how peace is defined.
Peace does not mean only the absence of war, but can also
be sustained through a more inclusive political process
that includes the upholding of justice, reconciliation
and the promotion of human rights. In this regard, it
is worth looking at the analysis and recommendations
in the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).
Women represent a strong link in the chain that
supports the most vulnerable members of society.
Women’s perseverance and kind virtues take their
role beyond the home as they play an important role in
peacebuilding processes. It is unfortunate that women
and girls have been recent targets in many areas of
conflict. The more we lack key female participation,
the more our chances to sustain peace are diminished.
Therefore, it is mandatory for the United Nations to
look into the overall aspects of peacebuilding, including
female key players. The significance of these criteria
mean that their adoption should be a prerequisite for the
implementation of the common agenda on women and
peace and security.
In the President’s concept paper (S/2016/871, annex),
we are asked to share experiences and information
regarding the efforts of Member States and relevant
entities in response to the 2015 high-level review and
global study. In light of this, I wish to highlight the
following points from the perspective of Cambodia.
Member States with women having suffered from
violence must be given the right support for their basic
needs so that women and their dependent children can
be reintegrated into the society, with consideration for
increased investment in the educational needs of girls
and women. Health-wise, specific physical, mental and
psychological health services should be provided to

16-3413189/90

S/PV.7793

Women and peace and security

violence-stricken women so as to restore their dignity
and establish a collective memory.
In recognizing women as the backbone of the
country, it is important to build and strengthen
international norms conducive to giving women equal
rights in order to encourage their full participation in
all spheres of activities, including political, economic,
social and cultural pursuits through the integration
of international legal instruments by the respective
Member States.
In order to enhance our efforts to end gender-based
discrimination, stronger national and regional legal
instruments should be strengthened so as to provide
a greater number of high-level posts for women.
Empowering and protection are not only in the interests
of women themselves, but also in the interests of the
common good. Cambodia has therefore ensured a
greater number of women are employed in positions

90/90

25/10/2016

of influence, particularly in the civil service and State
institutions, with a shift from 20 to 50 per cent in
female employment in those areas in 2016. Cambodia
has also pursued ways to increase its female recruits, as
we recognize that their professional skills and talents
can benefit peace processes in the world, and we are
increasing their participation, thereby advocating equal
participation, in international forums. Since 2006 we
have deployed 142 women out of our 3,800 Cambodian
United Nations peacekeepers.
In conclusion, Cambodia strongly commits to
increasing momentum in the area of gender equality,
empowering women and realizing their rights. We are
continuing to work closely with the relevant ministries,
civil society organizations and the private sector, as
well as with our development partners.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

16-34131
