United Nations

S/PV.6131

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6131st meeting
Thursday, 28 May 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Kimura
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Africa (14 to 21 May 2009)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-35198 (E)

*0935198*

S/PV.6131

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Africa
(14 to 21 May 2009)
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At today’s meeting, the Council will hear
briefings by the four ambassadors who led the Security
Council mission to Africa: His Excellency Sir John
Sawers, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, and His Excellency Mr. Ruhakana Rugunda,
Permanent Representative of Uganda, who together
headed the mission to Ethiopia in connection with the
African Union and to the Great Lakes region in
connection with Rwanda; His Excellency Mr. JeanMaurice Ripert, Permanent Representative of France,
who led the mission to the Great Lakes region in
connection with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; and Her Excellency Ms. Susan Rice,
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, who led the mission to Liberia.
I would like to welcome the return of the
members of the Council and the Secretariat who took
part in the mission to Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruhakana Rugunda, in
his capacity as joint leader of the mission to Ethiopia
in connection with the African Union.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): It is a pleasure for me to
report on the leg of the Security Council mission to
Africa that covered the meetings at the African Union
Commission in Addis Ababa. It was a pleasure for me
to co-lead that segment with my colleague,
Ambassador John Sawers, Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom.
The visit by members of the Security Council to
the African Union (AU) in Addis Ababa was within the
framework of cooperation between the Security
Council and the African Union under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The meeting, which
was the third between the two bodies, reviewed the

2

situation in Sudan and Somalia, the resurgence of
unconstitutional changes of government and the
financing of peacekeeping operations in Africa. The
meeting was co-chaired by the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the AU, who is also the
Chairperson of the AU Peace and Security Council; my
colleague, the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom; and myself.
On the situation in the Sudan, the meeting noted
that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), as a hybrid mission
between the African Union and the United Nations,
was a concrete expression of the commitment of the
two organizations to work closely together. The
members of the Council expressed concern at the
humanitarian situation in the Sudan. It was noted that
the Sudan was now entering a critical phase, with
elections planned for 2010 and a referendum for 2011.
As such, the Sudanese parties should be strongly
encouraged to overcome any obstacles to the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.
On Somalia, the meeting noted that, while there
had been some progress on the political front, the
security situation remained precarious. The meeting
reaffirmed that the Djibouti Agreement represented the
basis for the resolution of the conflict in Somalia and
stressed the importance of broad-based and
representative institutions established through a
political process that was ultimately inclusive of all.
The meeting commended the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for its contribution to peace and
security in Somalia and underscored the need for the
strengthening of AMISOM and the effective
development of the Transitional Federal Government’s
security forces.
Turning to the question of unconstitutional
changes of government in Africa, the meeting
welcomed the adoption by the Security Council of a
presidential statement (S/PRTST/2009/11) on 5 May
2009. The statement expresses concern about the
resurgence of unconstitutional changes of government
in a few African countries and welcomes the preventive
measures undertaken by the African Union and
subregional organizations against unconstitutional
changes of government.
On the financing of peacekeeping operations in
Africa, the members of the Council underlined the

09-35198

S/PV.6131

importance the Council attaches support for the
development of African capacity in peacekeeping, as
demonstrated by the support package being developed
for AMISOM. Both bodies look forward to the report
to be submitted by the Secretary-General in September
2009 in accordance with the Council’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/3) of 18 March 2009, as well
as to the AU’s input in that report.
While in Addis Ababa the members of the
Council also met with Mr. Ping, Chairperson of the
African Union, as well as with Ambassador Lamamra,
the Commissioner for Peace and Security. The
members of the Council also met with His Excellency
Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia, and
discussed the peace and security situation in the region.
In addition, the members of the Security Council also
met with former President Olusegun Obasanjo, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on the Great Lakes
region, with regard to the situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Great
Lakes region. I believe that my colleague the
Permanent Representative of France, who led the leg of
the mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
will say something about that.
The conclusion that can be drawn from the visit
to the AU is that the meetings between the two bodies
are useful in strengthening cooperation, in particular in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, including the
promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of
law and the constitutional order in Africa. In order to
facilitate closer cooperation and the desired
partnership, the two bodies should work closely
together to agree upon the optimal modalities for the
organization of their future consultations, including
their next consultative meeting, which is due to be held
in New York in 2010 on a date to be agreed upon.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Sir John Sawers in his capacity
as joint leader of the mission to the Great Lakes region,
in connection with the Council’s visit to Rwanda.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Ambassador
Rugunda has given a good account of our discussions
with the African Union (AU). As the co-leader of that
leg, I should like to add two thoughts.
First of all, the substance of our discussions with
the African Union, in particular on the situations in the
Sudan and Somalia, demonstrated the depth of the

09-35198

relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union and the ways in which it is becoming
more substantive. We are seeing the United Nations
and the AU working together to tackle the crises in
Darfur, where we have the first joint United NationsAU hybrid peacekeeping operation — which has its
problems, of which we are aware, but which shows the
United Nations and the AU working together — and in
Somalia, where the United Nations is funding logistical
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). Those issues are some of the most
pressing on the Council’s agenda. As Ambassador
Rugunda has said, it is important that we reflect on the
nature of our consultative exchanges with the African
Union Peace and Security Council, in order that we get
the most out of them, that the African Union partners
get the most out of them and that we can make the best
and most effective use of our joint operations and
policies and our work together.
We travelled to Rwanda following our meetings
in Ethiopia. Along with our visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, about which Ambassador
Ripert will report, I think that was the tenth visit of the
Security Council to the Great Lakes. That reflects the
level of attention that the Council gives to resolving
the ongoing problems in that region. It was, as ever,
invaluable to see at first hand the situations we are
dealing with.
There have of course been substantial changes
since the Council was in the region in June 2008. There
was relative calm at that time, a year ago. But that gave
way, in the early autumn, to a crisis in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which continued
until the end of the year. It was the decision in early
2009 by the Governments of both Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to work together to
address the shared problem of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and
the presence of other armed groups in the region that
helped to reshape the political landscape. Our visit
afforded us an opportunity to encourage both
Governments to continue to reinforce their
cooperation, as well as to see the effects of that
improved regional dynamic on the ground.
We were all moved by our visit to the Kigali
Genocide Museum, which gave us some sense of the
continued resonance of the horrific events of 1994 on
events today. We also made a brief but encouraging
visit to the Mutobo rehabilitation camp, where we met

3

S/PV.6131

several hundred former FDLR combatants, many of
whom had returned to Rwanda as a result of the joint
operations between the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. The excombatants gave the impression of being relieved to be
back home in Rwanda. Their stories of the
misinformation circulating in the Congolese bush and
their pleasant surprise at how positive their treatment
was underlined the need for renewed focus on our
efforts aimed at the demobilization and disarmament of
rebel groups.
The highlight of our time in Rwanda was the
frank and wide-ranging discussion with President
Kagame. The Council set out its strong support for the
rapprochement between his Government and that of
President Kabila. We also encouraged President
Kagame to further deepen the relationship, as we also
did later with President Kabila.
President Kagame was encouraged by the
progress made in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the past six months, and he hoped that the
political, military and economic cooperation with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would continue. In
President Kagame’s view, the joint operations that they
had carried out had had an impact on the root causes of
the problems in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. He supported that being maintained by regional
actors and the international community, although he
was not entirely confident that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) would be able to play the sort of
partnership role with the armed forces of that country
that the Rwandan forces had played.
Nonetheless, we came away optimistic that the
progress made in the normalization of relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda could be sustained. We now need to ensure
that the transformative potential of genuine
cooperation can be realized and that it can provide a
peace dividend for civilians across the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Jean-Maurice Ripert,
Permanent Representative of France, who led the
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Secretariat, the Security Council
team, Mr. Alan Doss, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, his deputies and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) in general, as well as President

4

Obasanjo’s team, for organizing the Great Lakes leg of
our visit. Given that a detailed account of all our visits
and meetings will be included in the report to be
distributed by the Council, I shall limit myself to a few
observations. In addition to our talks in Rwanda, to
which the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom referred earlier, the Council delegation met
with Mr. Obasanjo in Addis Ababa. That, too, has
already been mentioned.
In Goma, we heard briefings on the
reorganization of their forces by the leaders of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), officers
of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (FARDC), leaders of the Congolese National
Police, and representatives of non-governmental
organizations. We also met the Governor of North Kivu
and visited the HEAL Africa Hospital, which
specializes in treating victims of sexual violence,
before moving on to the MONUC camp in Kiwanja.
In Kinshasa, the Council delegation was received
by President Kabila, the Congolese Prime Minister,
accompanied by the top leaders of his Government, and
the Presidents of the Senate and the National
Assembly. We also met with members of Congolese
civil society. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and all the representatives of the
United Nations agencies briefed us on their strategic
working plan for MONUC’s activities over the next
few years and on the main activities of the United
Nations system as a whole.
From all these talks, the members of the
delegation learned the following fundamental lessons
concerning the situation on the ground.
First, the situation in the Great Lakes region has
improved considerably, particularly thanks to the
rapprochement between Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as has already been noted.
Presidents Kabila and Kagame both clearly expressed
their intentions to continue along that path. Among
other things, the Economic Community of the Great
Lake Countries should be reactivated in order to allow
the launch of regional economic projects. The Security
Council encouraged that intention. President Obasanjo
will pursue his good offices mission between the
regional capitals. Moreover, the Security Council
mission had the opportunity to express its unanimous
support for the initiatives he has already taken and his
outstanding work to promote convergence among the
various parties.

09-35198

S/PV.6131

Secondly, and more sadly, sexual violence
remains far too widespread. We were able to see the
pain it engenders during our visits to the female
victims at the HEAL Africa Hospital. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
taken some measures, including the adoption of a law
on sexual violence, the establishment of an agency to
combat all forms of violence, and the creation of funds
to help women and promote child protection. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
launched its fight against impunity, inter alia by
involving the International Criminal Court, and we
reaffirmed that it must remain a priority.
Armed groups and the FARDC must also cease
all their abuses against the population, in particular
sexual violence against women. Those who are guilty
of violence or recruit children must be arrested. We
conveyed that message very clearly to all the
authorities we met, at every level. In particular, highranking FARDC officers, be they long-time members
or newly integrated from rebel groups, must be
arrested, tried and imprisoned if they are perpetrators.
A new law on the police, which has been under
consideration for two years, must finally be adopted.
Having discussed the matter among ourselves, on
behalf of the Security Council I gave the highest
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo an
initial list of the names of five leaders of the FARDC
who have been convicted of sexual violence against a
number of women currently being treated at the HEAL
Africa Hospital. We asked the President and the Prime
Minister, with MONUC’s support, to arrest those five
officers and bring them to trial publicly so as to begin
restoring the confidence of the civil population.
Another element is security sector reform, which
is of great importance in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as it is in many post-conflict countries. In
order to attain peace, various armed groups have been
progressively integrated into the FARDC, but they are
very difficult to control. The soldiers are poorly paid,
when they are paid at all, poorly housed, poorly fed,
poorly equipped and poorly trained. And yet, all the
officers we met and MONUC assured us that when
Congolese soldiers are treated properly and led
effectively, they are very good fighters and fully
accomplish
their
missions
while
respecting
fundamental ethical criteria. We must therefore ensure
that they are paid on a regular basis.
There must also be a mechanism preventing those
responsible for serious rights violations from

09-35198

remaining in the armed forces, pursuant to the
provisions of the relevant resolution. The international
community must coordinate its assistance to the
Congolese authorities in carrying out a broad training
operation in the army and in reforming the police and
the justice system in depth. The Council also insisted
that Congolese democracy be further entrenched,
notably through the organization of local elections. We
understood that certain difficulties remain, in particular
concerning the law on apportionment of constituencies,
but that the elections should be held before next year.
MONUC remains indispensable on the ground.
President Kabila and the members of his Government
insisted that the reinforcements authorized under
resolution 1843 (2008) be dispatched rapidly in order
to support the FARDC in operations Kimia II and
Rudia II against the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda and the Lord’s Resistance Army,
respectively. Based on what we were told by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
3,000 additional troops authorized should be deployed
in June and July. Their contributors have already been
identified as Egypt and Jordan.
MONUC has taken serious steps to implement
resolution 1856 (2008). Our visit in particular to
Kiwanja, where massacres have taken place, allowed
us to take note of the measures adopted to better
protect civilians. We met a joint protection team, and
the officer in charge of the local MONUC unit briefed
us on new rapid-reaction mechanisms involving the
local population, thereby ensuring that MONUC and
FARDC forces can intervene in less than 10 minutes
once the alarum has been raised. Of course, that, for
now, is limited to a very small area.
MONUC’s mission is certainly very sensitive.
Protecting civilians and supporting the FARDC in its
fight against armed groups — which unfortunately
continue to target civilians — can sometimes be
counteractive. A strategic plan of action has been
prepared by MONUC, identifying prospects and the
conditions for a drawdown of MONUC in the medium
term. President Kabila explicitly asked for it. Once the
local elections are over, if the situation continues to
stabilize, we can start to consider a drawdown of
MONUC.
In conclusion, we noted in general that, over the
past few months, the situation has been moving in the
right direction. The Security Council will have to
remain fully mobilized to support those developments.
MONUC’s implementation of its strategic plan of

5

S/PV.6131

action and the development of operation Kimia II
require our attention.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Ms. Susan Rice, in her capacity as leader for
the mission to Liberia.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): It was
indeed an honour to lead the leg of the trip that went to
Liberia. I want to begin by expressing publicly our
gratitude to and admiration of Ellen Løj, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who, despite
the most adverse circumstances — including our whole
programme having to be scrapped at the last minute
due to thunderstorms — had in her pocket a very well
crafted plan B that enabled the Council mission
nonetheless to have a successful visit to Liberia.
The purpose of our visit was to help reaffirm the
Council’s support for the Government and people of
Liberia and for the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to promote peace and
security. We also sought to assess the capacity of
Liberia’s national security sector and to learn more
about efforts to combat gender-based violence.
We met with the United Nations country team on
the night of our arrival and the International Contact
Group on Liberia, a group of ambassadors and
representatives of international organizations who are
empowered to support the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in Liberia. The group warned that peace
and security in Liberia remain extremely fragile,
largely because of the country’s weak national security
institutions, and that the justice and corrections
systems are inadequate, all of which we had the
opportunity to witness for ourselves on the following
day.
On that next day, 20 May, we met with, in the
first instance, an inspiring group of women: the Indian
formed police unit, which is an all-female force that
consists of women who are simultaneously samurai —
who can use their bare hands to break bricks that are
burning — and beautiful dancers and artists. That was
quite impressive. This all-female police unit protects
key installations in Monrovia, conducts joint patrols
and mentors the unarmed Liberian National Police. The
high visibility of this Indian formed police unit, we
have learned, has helped motivate more Liberian
women to apply for law enforcement jobs. In sum, we
applauded that unique unit, and we hope that others
will be inspired by it, as we were.

6

We then visited the Monrovia Central Prison and
I think it is fair to say that we were shocked and
concerned by the state of the older male wards there,
which are remarkably congested, with limited sanitary
facilities, far too many inmates crammed into too few
spaces and not enough corrections officials. Several of
the prisoners told us about the extraordinary length of
their pre-trial detainment. And, according to Liberia’s
Minister of Justice, the prison does not always hold its
captives. Indeed, a few days before we arrived, there
was yet another jail break from that facility, involving
more than 100 prisoners.
We then visited a training centre for former
combatants, part of a United Nations-supported
reintegration programme. About 375 predominantly
female former combatants have benefited from this
programme, which includes vocational training, adult
literacy classes, business values training, computer
literacy and health and HIV education.
The Security Council mission also had the
opportunity to meet with representatives from the
international business community in Liberia. Those
individuals noted that a strong, stabilizing United
Nations presence had helped sway their decision to
invest in Liberia. We cautioned them not to grow too
dependant on UNMIL, since eventually, obviously, it
will have to be withdrawn. But it was interesting to
witness representatives of the business community
engaged in renewable energy technologies as well as in
traditional sectors such as rubber and mining.
We met with UNMIL, of course, and its senior
military and police commanders gave us a sober
assessment of the security situation in Liberia. They
characterized the overall situation as calm but
unpredictable. They noted that demonstrations often
turned violent. Crime, gangster activities, armed
robberies and sexual violence remain widespread, and
rape, as we heard repeatedly, is a particularly urgent
challenge, with most reported victims under the age of
14 and some victims under the age of 2. UNMIL noted
several potentially destabilizing events on the
horizon — including the anticipated release of the final
report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
June, the trial against former President Charles Taylor
and Liberia’s presidential and legislative elections in
2011 — that could stoke tensions and potentially be
exploited by spoilers. They also informed us that more
than 14,000 former Liberian soldiers and police
personnel had not found alternative livelihoods since
the end of the war.

09-35198

S/PV.6131

At the Police Training Academy, we witnessed
police recruits from the Emergency Response Unit
engage in hostage rescue and law enforcement
exercises. This Emergency Response Unit is meant to
be a mobile armed force — an elite force within the
police — to respond to large-scale internal security
incidents. But of the 500 officers planned for this
contingent only about 200 had been trained and vetted.
The United Nations commanders also noted that the
Armed Forces of Liberia, which comprise 2,000 vetted
personnel trained by the United States, are progressing
but are not expected to be fully operational until 2012.
Finally, towards the end of the day we met with
Liberia’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, or at
least three representatives of the Commission, who
explained that they had identified up to 100,000
alleged perpetrators of crimes during the conflict. They
had taken some 20,000 statements from witnesses and
were planning a national conference on reconciliation.
They warned of the potential for violence once their
report is released, but affirmed that despite the risk of
violence they would publicize their findings and
recommendations unvarnished. They also argued
against the easing of Security Council sanctions on
named individuals under the Liberian sanctions regime,
stressing that those individuals had been given the
opportunity, and had been encouraged, to come before
the Commission and share their experienced but had
refused to do so, and that the maintenance of those
sanctions was an important part of the effort to combat
impunity.
Of course, the highlight of our visit was our
meeting with President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and
members of her Cabinet. The President noted that the
past six years had brought continued progress towards
national recovery and a consolidated peace, but that the
country’s security situation remained fragile and its
challenges major. The President outlined the four
elements of Liberia’s poverty reduction strategy: peace
and security; economic development; governance and
the rule of law; and infrastructure and basic services.
Her Ministers discussed the tenuous security situation
and their efforts to establish viable national security
forces and to establish the rule of law. Finally, the
President also outlined the Government’s efforts to
reduce sexual violence against women and noted the
economic potential of the country in the mineral,
agricultural and forestry sectors.
In conclusion, we found that the Security
Council, having urged the Government of Liberia to
step up its efforts to assume full security

09-35198

responsibilities, had a substantial distance yet to go.
UNMIL’s presence remains of critical importance at
present, but the Government needs to be supported and
encouraged to take accelerated steps to build the
security capacity of its police and army so that UNMIL
can complete its mandate in a timely fashion.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Rice for her briefing, which, among other
things, aroused feelings of envy in those of us who
were not able to take part in the mission.
On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
appreciation to all of the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat who participated in the
mission, which was very ably led by Ambassadors
Rugunda, Sawers, Ripert and Rice, for the manner in
which they discharged their important responsibilities
on behalf of the Council.
Although there are no names on my list of
speakers, I see that Ambassador Urbina is insisting on
his right to take the floor, and I call upon him now.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
indicated in informal Council consultations, I should
like to make a brief statement.
The existence of unwritten standards whose
interpretation remains at the discretion of the
Secretariat does not contribute to orderliness or
productivity in the work of the Security Council. No
Member of the Organization is unaware of how Costa
Rica, as well as Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore and
Switzerland — the so-called Small Five group — have
worked to improve the Security Council and its
methods of work. The circumstances that compel me to
take the floor at this meeting relate to working
methods, transparency in the decisions that affect the
practical work of the Council and, in particular, the
legal equality of the rights and obligations of Council
members.
With regard to the recent Council mission to four
African countries, I wish to comment briefly on two
circumstances that, in our opinion, should be changed.
The first relates to the right that every delegation
should have to obtain the expertise it deems necessary
to better carry out its work in the Council, and the
second to the process of negotiating the terms of
reference of the mission. In both cases, I am sorry to
say, there are double standards vis-à-vis the members
of the Council: the permanent members on the one
hand and the elected members on the other.

7

S/PV.6131

I shall briefly describe the circumstances that
lead to that conclusion. With all due prior notice, my
delegation indicated to the Secretariat its interest in
taking an expert on the mission, fully paying all
expenses. Initially, the Secretariat replied that it could
not agree to that request because the presence of our
expert would diminish the space allocated to members
of the press. We considered that argument
unacceptable. The basic purpose of the Council
missions is to contribute to the work of the Council,
and it is the delegation that ensure the quality of the
Council’s work, not the press.
In a second instance, the same staff member also
rejected the inclusion of our expert and those of at least
two other delegations that wanted to take experts,
invoking an unwritten rule according to which only the
heads of delegation for each of the visited countries
would have the right to bring in experts and would, of
course, have to cover the costs involved.
Given the rationale provided for the second
response, my delegation and the other two interested
delegations agreed not to take our experts.
Nevertheless, to our surprise, during the mission to
Africa, we were able to note the presence of security
officers for a specific delegation. In order to avoid a
misunderstanding and unnecessary discussion, I would
like to say that my delegation understands the need for
some delegations to take security staff on Council
missions. Not only do we understand that necessity, but
we support the inclusion of such security personnel in
the travelling group. We also understand the need for
members of the media to accompany us. What we do
not understand is the exclusion of experts of missions
that work in the Council. What we find unacceptable is
the denial of room for experts while there seem to be
no apparent restrictions on security staff and
journalists, or worse yet, that they participate at the
discretion of the Secretariat. Again, the quality and the
work of the Council are ensured by the delegations, not
by security personnel or members of the press. All
discrimination in that respect should cease.
The second issue on which I would like to
comment has to do with the double standards, again,
applied by the Secretariat to the members of the
Council. As the Council knows, my delegation led the
mission to Haiti this year. The preparation for that
mission required intensive work by my delegation,
with unwavering support from the Secretariat, for
which we are grateful. They resulted in a transparent
process of early negotiation of the terms of reference,
which were agreed upon by all the delegations through

8

broad participation and with adequate time for
discussion. In our view, all missions of the Council
should be prepared in this fashion.
But that was not the case for Africa. For that
mission, some of the terms of reference were adopted
very shortly before the departure date and, although
most of the suggestions were ultimately accepted, the
process did not benefit from the transparency or the
necessary time for reflection enjoyed by the earlier
mission.
The two situations to which I have referred arose
because both were ruled by unwritten regulations that
can be interpreted arbitrarily, to say the least. That
should end. The Council should adopt clear standards
guiding everything related to Council missions. In
order to help the work of the Council and the
establishment of objective rules that will enable all of
us to grasp the situation, my delegation will address a
letter to the President of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions so
that the Working Group can prepare a set of standards
to be circulated to the members.
The President (spoke in Russian): As President
of the Council, I am obliged to note the following. First
of all, Ambassador Urbina felt it necessary to interpret
in his own way the results of the discussion of this
issue that took place very briefly during the Council’s
consultations. At that time, Ambassador Urbina agreed
to my conclusion that this issue needed to be discussed
further in preparing for forthcoming missions of the
Security Council.
Secondly, as President of the Council, I am
compelled to point out that the preparations for this
meeting did not involve an understanding that we
would discuss procedural issues for preparing Security
Council missions in a formal meeting of the Security
Council.
Thirdly, as President of the Security Council and
as the Permanent Representative of a permanent
member of the Council, I am compelled to express
regret that, in his remarks, Ambassador Urbina sought
to introduce some sort of artificial dividing line
between permanent members of the Security Council
and the elected members of the Security Council, and
between Member States and the Secretariat, with which
we cooperate very closely in preparing for missions of
the Security Council.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

09-35198
