United Nations

S/PV.9308

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9308th meeting
Monday, 24 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov/Mr. Nebenzia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Immongault
Mr. Mbomba
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Al Marar
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Effective multilateralism through the defence of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations
Letter dated 3 April 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/244)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11476 (E)
*2311476*

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

thousands have been injured. The violence must stop. It
risks a catastrophic conflagration within the Sudan that
could engulf the whole region and beyond.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

I strongly condemn the indiscriminate bombardment
of civilian areas, including health-care facilities. I call
on the parties to stop combat operations in densely
populated areas and to allow unhindered humanitarian
aid operations. Civilians must be able to access food,
water and other essential supplies and to evacuate from
combat zones.

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Effective multilateralism through the
defence of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations
Letter dated 3 April 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/244)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Canada, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico,
Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, the Republic
of Korea, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Türkiye,
Turkmenistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/244, which contains the text of a letter
dated 3 April 2023 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I warmly welcome the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now give
the floor.
The Secretary-General: Allow me to start my
remarks with a few words on the Sudan, where the
situation continues to worsen. Since the start of fighting
on 15 April, hundreds of people have been killed and
2/33

24/04/2023

I am in constant contact with the parties to the
conflict and have called on them to de-escalate tensions
and to return to the negotiating table. We will continue
our efforts with our partners to secure a permanent halt
to the fighting as soon as possible.
Working with humanitarian organizations on the
ground, we are reconfiguring our presence in the Sudan
to enable us to continue supporting the Sudanese people.
Let me be clear: the United Nations is not leaving the
Sudan. Our commitment is to the Sudanese people, in
support of their wishes for a peaceful and secure future.
We stand with them at this terrible time.
I have authorized the temporary relocation, both
inside and outside the Sudan, of some United Nations
personnel, many of them with their families. I call on all
Security Council members to exert maximum leverage
with the parties to end the violence, restore order and
return to the path of the democratic transition. We must
all do everything within our power to pull the Sudan
back from the edge of the abyss.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening the
Security Council today on the important issue of
effective multilateralism. Multilateral cooperation
is the beating heart of the United Nations, its raison
d’être and guiding vision. The establishment of the
United Nations, in 1945, represented humankind’s best
attempt to prevent any repetition of the horrors of two
world wars and the Holocaust. Over the past 78 years,
the multilateral system has held together and delivered
some notable successes.
The tools and mechanisms established by the
Charter of the United Nations have played their part
in averting a third world war. Peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy by the United Nations have
helped end conflicts around the world. United Nations
peacekeeping operations have helped societies move
away from conflict, saving perhaps millions of lives.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Our disarmament and non-proliferation efforts have
helped to confine nuclear weapons to a handful of States.
The United Nations was central to the decolonization
process and the independence of 80 former colonies
that are today Members of the United Nations. We have
helped to advance economic and social progress and
contributed to reducing poverty and hunger, eradicating
diseases and building recognition and respect for
fundamental human rights. The global humanitarian
system coordinated by the United Nations saves
millions of lives each year. Multilateral solutions to
global problems, from the ozone layer to the eradication
of polio, are tried, tested and proven to work.
None of that progress would have been possible
without countries standing together as a multilateral
human family, which makes today’s situation all
the more dangerous. We face unprecedented and
interlocking crises, but the multilateral system is under
greater strain than at any time since the creation of the
United Nations. Tensions between major Powers are
at a historic high, as are the risks of conflict through
misadventure or miscalculation.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, in violation of the
United Nations Charter and international law, is causing
massive suffering and devastation to the country and its
people and adding to the global economic dislocation
triggered by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Elsewhere conflicts grind on, from Myanmar to the
Sahel, from Somalia to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and beyond. The situation in the Sudan now
threatens to destabilize the entire region. While there
are some promising developments in Yemen and Libya,
more than 100 million people have fled their homes
to escape violence, conflict and persecution around
the world.
Effective multilateral responses are urgently needed
to prevent and resolve conflicts, manage economic
uncertainty, rescue the Sustainable Development
Goals and address challenges to the global norms
against the use and possession of nuclear weapons.
We are witnessing a deepening climate crisis, soaring
inequalities, a rising threat from terrorism, a global
pushback against human rights and gender equality,
and the unregulated development of dangerous
technologies. All those global challenges can be solved
only through respect for international law, adherence
to global commitments and the adoption of appropriate
frameworks of multilateral governance.

S/PV.9308

As difficult as the past year has been, I am heartened
that Members States have made progress in several
crucial areas. A binding treaty on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
was finalized. The twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, held in Sharm El-Sheikh, achieved
a breakthrough in addressing loss and damage caused
by climate change. The General Assembly recognized
the human right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment. Those developments are important, and
their effects could be far-reaching.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative and the memorandum
of understanding to facilitate the export of Russian
food and fertilizers are compelling examples of the
significance of multilateral cooperation facilitated
by the United Nations. They clearly demonstrate
that such cooperation is essential to creating greater
security and prosperity for all, and I urge their
continued implementation.
But we need to do better, go further and work
faster. That must start with countries recommitting
to their obligations under the United Nations Charter,
putting human rights and dignity first and prioritizing
the prevention of conflict and crises. The principles
enshrined in the Charter and reinforced in the
Declaration on Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States — respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all States,
non-interference in the affairs of other States, the
elimination of all forms of discrimination and the
peaceful settlement of disputes — are bulwarks against
uncertainty and fragmentation. They are the foundation
of all international cooperation to end conflicts, save
lives, protect human rights and promote social and
economic progress.
Secondly, I urge Member States to use the full range
of diplomatic tools that the United Nations Charter
provides for the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Those
include the use of my good offices to help resolve
disputes and secure peace.
Thirdly, effective multilateralism must include a
commitment to tackling new and emerging challenges
and filling in gaps in global governance to achieve the
promise of the Charter in the twenty-first century. That
is the driving force behind my report Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), including the proposed New
Agenda for Peace, which will offer a unifying vision

23-114763/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

anchored in trust, universality and solidarity. It will
address all forms and domains of threats, taking a
holistic view of the peace continuum, from prevention,
peacemaking and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
sustainable development. It will underline preventive
action as a priority at all levels. Our Common Agenda
envisions a multilateralism that is more inclusive,
with space for the contributions of all countries
and communities, and more networked, with strong
links among the United Nations family, international
financial institutions, regional organizations, trading
blocs and others.
Member States are in the lead on adapting
intergovernmental organs to meet changing needs. A
majority now acknowledge that the Security Council
itself would benefit from reforms that reflect today’s
geopolitical reality. The same is true of the Bretton
Woods institutions; they also do not reflect the reality
of today’s global economy. The High-level Advisory
Board on Effective Multilateralism, which I appointed
last year, has identified a number of transformational
shifts to address peace and security challenges,
growing economic inequalities, the triple planetary
crisis of climate-biodiversity-pollution and a widening
digital divide. I hope its report will make a significant
contribution to our collective reflection in the lead-up
to the Summit of the Future, to be held next year. I count
on members’ engagement and support in preparations
for the Summit.
Our institution was created for crisis. Throughout
its history, the United Nations has overcome seemingly
intractable conflicts and deep divisions. We must find a
way forward and act now, as we have done before, to stop
the slide towards chaos and conflict. It is time to deepen
cooperation and to strengthen multilateral institutions,
to find common solutions to common challenges.
Members of the Security Council, particularly those
that enjoy the privilege of serving permanently, have a
particular responsibility to make multilateralism work,
rather than contribute to its dismemberment.
Competition between States is inevitable, but that
should not rule out cooperation where shared interests
and the greater good are at stake. And when competition
escalates into confrontation, the multilateral system,
founded on the Charter and international law, is the
most effective means to manage disputes peacefully. We
must cooperate. We must adapt multilateral institutions
and foster trust where it is most needed. The urgency of
global challenges demands bold and swift action.
4/33

24/04/2023

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
It is symbolic that we are holding our meeting
on the International Day of Multilateralism and
Diplomacy, which was inscribed as an important date
on the calendar via General Assembly resolution 73/127,
adopted on 12 December 2018. In two weeks’ time, we
will celebrate the seventy-eighth anniversary of victory
in the Second World War. The defeat of Nazi Germany,
a decisive contribution to which my country contributed
decisively, along with the allies, allowed us to lay the
foundation for the post-war international order. Its
legal basis was the Charter the United Nations, and our
Organization itself, embodying true multilateralism,
took on a central, coordinating role in world politics.
For nearly 80 years of its existence, the
United Nations has been fulfilling its most important
mission mandated by the founding fathers. For several
decades, the basic understanding among the five
permanent members of the Security Council on the
supremacy of the purposes and principles of the Charter
guaranteed global security, and thereby created the
conditions for truly multilateral cooperation governed
by universally recognized norms international law. The
United Nations-centred system is currently experiencing
a deep crisis, the root cause of which is the desire on the
part of some of its members to replace international law
and the Charter of the United Nations with a certain
rules-based order. No one has seen those rules; they
have not been the subject of transparent international
negotiations. They have been invented and applied
with the goal of countering the natural processes of
establishing new independent development centres,
which is the objective manifestation of multilateralism.
There have been attempts to deter them with illegitimate
unilateral measures, including cutting off access to
modern technologies and financial services, removal
from supply chains, the confiscation of property, the
destruction of competitors’ critical infrastructure
and the manipulation of universally agreed norms
and procedures. As a result, global trade has become
fragmented, market mechanisms have collapsed, the
World Trade Organization has become paralysed and
now the International Monetary Fund has clearly and
completely been transformed into a tool for achieving
the goals of the United States and its allies, including
their military goals.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

In a desperate attempt to assert its supremacy by
punishing those who disobey it, the United States has
taken the path of destroying globalization, which it has
extolled for years as the ultimate good of humankind,
maintaining the multilateral world economic system.
Washington and its Western subordinates have applied
those rules every time they needed to justify illegitimate
measures taken against those who based their policies
on international law and refused to align themselves
with the self-interest of the golden billion. Those who
do not agree are blacklisted according to the principle
of “those who are not with us are against us”.
Western colleagues have long found it inconvenient
to reach agreement in universal forums, such as the
United Nations. In order to ideologically justify the
strategy of undermining of multilateralism, they
introduced theme of the unity of democracies in
countering autocracies. In addition to the so-called
summits for democracy, the composition of which is
determined by a self-proclaimed hegemon, other clubs
for the chosen are being created in circumvention of
the United Nations — the Summit for Democracy, the
Alliance for Multilateralism, the Global Partnership
on Artificial Intelligence, the Media Freedom
Coalition, the Paris Call for Trust and Security in
Cyberspace — all those and other exclusive projects
are designed to undermine negotiations on relevant
topics under the aegis of the United Nations, to impose
non-consensual concepts and solutions that benefit
the West. First, a narrow group of the select few make
decisions behind closed doors, and then they present
these arrangements as a position of the international
community. Let us call a spade a spade. Nobody
allowed the Western minority to speak on behalf of all
humankind. We must be civil and respect all members
of the international community. By imposing a rulesbased order, its sponsors arrogantly reject the key
principle of the Charter of the United Nations, namely,
the sovereign equality of States. The quintessence of
the complex of exceptionalism was the lordly statement
of Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, that Europe is a garden and most of the rest of
the world is a jungle. I will also quote the NATO and
European Union (EU) joint declaration of 10 January,
which states, “we” — the united West — “will further
mobilize the combined set of instruments at our
disposal, be they political, economic or" — and I stress
this — “military, to pursue our common objectives to
the benefit of our one billion citizens.”

S/PV.9308

The collective West has set out to reshape
multilateralism at the regional level for the advancement
of its interests. Recently, the United States called for
the Monroe Doctrine to be revived and demanded
that Latin American countries limit their ties with
the Russian Federation and the People’s Republic of
China. That policy, however, was confronted with the
determination of countries in the region to strengthen
their own multilateral structures, first and foremost, the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
and to defend their legitimate right to assert themselves
as a pillar of a multipolar world. Russia fully supports
those legitimate aspirations.
The United States and its allies have now devoted
considerable effort to undermining multilateralism in the
Asia-Pacific region, where the successful open system
of cooperation on economic matters and security has
been developing for decades around the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). That system has
allowed for the establishment of consensual approaches
that are acceptable for both the 10 ASEAN member
States and their partners in dialogue, including Russia,
China, the United States, India, Japan, Australia and
the Republic of Korea, ensuring a genuinely inclusive
multilateralism. With its so-called Indo-Pacific strategy,
Washington has embraced a policy of destroying that
established consensus-based architecture.
At its summit in Madrid last year, NATO, which
had always tried to convince everyone of its peaceful
disposition and the exclusively defensive nature of its
military programmes, spoke about global responsibility
and the indivisibility of security in the Euro-Atlantic
and the so-called Indo-Pacific region. Therefore, NATO,
which is, of course, a defensive alliance, is now moving
its line of defence to the Western shores of the Pacific
Ocean. Block-based approaches undermine ASEANfocused mindsets and are manifested in the creation
of the military alliance among Australia, the United
Kingdom and the United States — AUKUS — which is
trying to drag into its ranks Tokyo, Seoul and a number of
ASEAN countries. Under the aegis of the United States,
mechanisms for intervention in maritime security issues
have been established to uphold the unilateral interests of
the West in the South China Sea. Mr. Borrell Fontelles,
who I have already quoted today, mentioned the promise
yesterday to send EU naval forces to that region. It is
no secret that the purpose of the so-called Indo-Pacific
strategy is to contain the People’s Republic of China and
isolate Russia. That is how Western colleagues view
effective multilateralism in the Asia-Pacific region.

23-114765/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

After the collapse of the Warsaw Treaty
Organization and the departure of the Soviet Union from
the political scene, hope emerged for the advancement
of the principles of genuine multilateralism, without
any dividing lines, in the Euro-Atlantic space. But
instead of unleashing the potential of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on
an equal, collective basis, Western countries not only
preserved NATO, but — contrary to their solemn
pledges — embarked on a brazen takeover of adjacent
territories, including territories where vital Russian
interests always existed and will continue to exist. As
the then United States Secretary of State Jim Baker
reported to President George Bush senior, the main
threat to NATO is the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. I would add that currently
the United Nations and the requirements contained
in its Charter also pose a threat to Washington’s
global ambitions.
Russia has been painstakingly trying to reach
mutually beneficial multilateral agreements based on
the principle of the indivisibility of security, which
was solemnly proclaimed at the highest level in the
outcome documents of the OSCE Summits of 1999 and
2010. There, it is explicitly and unambiguously stated
in black and white that no State should strengthen its
security at the expense of the security of other States,
and no State, group of States or organization can be
given primary responsibility for maintaining peace in
the OSCE area or consider any part of the OSCE area
as its sphere of influence.
NATO ignored those commitments made by the
Presidents and Prime Ministers of its member States
and did the opposite, proclaiming its right to take any
arbitrary action. An egregious example is the unlawful
bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999, including the use of
depleted uranium, which subsequently caused a surge
in cancer among Serbian citizens and NATO troops
alike. Joe Biden was a senator at the time, and he
said with pride on camera that he personally called
for the bombing of Belgrade and the destroying of all
bridges on the Drina River. And recently the United
States Ambassador to Belgrade, through media outlets,
called on the Serbs to turn the page and stop taking
offence. The United States has a lot of experience with
that. Japan has long been shamefully silent about who
bombed Hiroshima and Nagasaki. School textbooks do
not say a word about that. As we know, at the recent
Group of Seven meeting, the United States Secretary
6/33

24/04/2023

of State, Mr. Blinken, lamented with great pathos the
suffering of the victims of the bombings, but failed
to mention those who organized them. These are the
“rules”. And no one dares contradict them. After the
Second World War, there were dozens of criminal
military ventures by Washington, without any attempt
to secure multilateral legitimacy. The shameful invasion
of Iraq by the United States-led coalition in 2003 was
a violation of the United Nations Charter, as was the
aggression against Libya in 2011. The result was the
destruction of Statehood, hundreds of thousands of
dead and rampant terrorism. Another blatant violation
of the United Nations Charter was the United States
intervention in the affairs of former States of the
Soviet Union. Colour revolutions were organized in
Georgia and Kyrgyzstan. There was a brutal coup in
Kyiv in 2014. In addition, there were also attempts to
forcibly seize power in Belarus in 2020. Not only do
the Anglo-Saxons — who are confidently leading the
West — justify these criminal misadventures, but they
also tout their policy of advancing democracy.
However, this is again done in accordance with
their rules: they will recognize the independence
of Kosovo without a referendum, but they will not
recognize Crimea, despite the fact that there was a
referendum there, and they will not touch the Falkland
(Malvinas) Islands, because, as a British Foreign
Secretary recently — and cleverly — claimed, there
was an organized referendum there. This is laughable.
In order to abandon double standards, we call
for all to adhere to consensual agreements that were
agreed upon through the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States (General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV), annex) of 1970, which is still in
force and which explicitly proclaims the need to respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States and
“the principle of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples ... possessed of [] governments
representing the whole people belonging to the
territory …”.
Any objective observer can clearly see that
the Nazi Kyiv regime can in no way be regarded
as representing the “whole people belonging to the
territory” who refused to accept the results of the brutal
coup in February 2014. As a result of this, the putschists
unleashed a war against them. Similarly, Pristina cannot
claim to represent the interests of Kosovar Serbs, who
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

were promised autonomy by the European Union,
just like Berlin and Paris promised special status for
Donbas. The results of these promises are well known.
The Secretary-General eloquently stated this
during the second Summit for Democracy on 29 March:
“Democracy flows from the United Nations Charter.
“Its opening invocation of “We the Peoples” reflects
the fundamental source of legitimate authority: the
consent of the governed.”
The key word in this context is “consent”.
In order to halt the war that was unleashed in the
east of Ukraine as a result of the coup, multilateral
efforts undertaken for the advancement of a peaceful
settlement were enshrined in resolution 2202 (2015),
with which the Security Council unanimously approved
the Minsk agreements. These agreements were trampled
upon by Kyiv and its western handlers, who themselves
recently, cynically, and even with pride, recognized
that they never intended to implement them. They
simply wanted to gain time to funnel weapons into
Ukraine for use against Russia. They therefore publicly
proclaimed that they violated a multilateral obligation
of all members of the United Nations enshrined in the
Charter, requiring that all Members comply with the
resolutions of Security Council.
Our subsequent action to prevent confrontation,
including President Putin’s proposal from December
2021 for an agreement to be reached on multilateral
mutual-security guarantees were high-handedly
rejected. Nobody, we were told, can prevent NATO
from embracing Ukraine.
For all of the years since the coup, despite our
insistence, nobody, and certainly none of Kyiv’s
handlers, brought Poroshenko or Zelenskyy or anyone
in the Verkhovna Rada to their senses. On the contrary,
through legislation, the Russian language, Russian
education, Russian media outlets and Russian cultural
and religious traditions were destroyed in direct
violation of the Ukrainian Constitution and the universal
conventions on the rights of national minorities. In
parallel, through legislation and in day-to-day life,
the Kyiv regime introduced Nazi practice and theory.
It openly organized exuberant torch-bearing marches
in the centre of Kyiv and other cities with SS division
banners held high. The West watched with silent glee,
because this was fully in line with United States plans
to leverage the openly racist regime that they fostered

S/PV.9308

in the hope of comprehensively weakening Russia,
with a strategic focus on eliminating competitors
and sabotaging any scenarios seeking to promote fair
multilateralism in world affairs.
Today, it is clear to all, even though it is not
commonly discussed, that this not at all about Ukraine.
It is about whether international relations will continue
to be shaped through the establishment of a sound
consensus on the basis of a balance of interests or
through the aggressive and volatile advancement of
hegemony.
We cannot consider the Ukrainian issue separately
from the geopolitical context. Multilateralism provides
for respect for the United Nations Charter and the
interlinkage among its principles, which was mentioned
previously. Russia has clearly announced the goals that
it is pursuing through the special military operation:
to eradicate the threats to our security, which were
created for years by NATO representatives directly
on our borders, and to protect people who have been
deprived of their rights proclaimed through multilateral
conventions from the Kyiv regime’s publicly announced
threats to destroy and expel them from territories where
their ancestors had lived for centuries.
We openly declared what and who we were fighting
for. Amid the hysteria whipped up by the United States
and the European Union, we would like to inquire: what
were Washington and NATO doing in Yugoslavia, Iraq
and Libya? Were there threats there to their security,
their culture, their religions or their languages? What
were the multilateral norms guiding them when they
proclaimed the independence of Kosovo in violation
of the principles of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and destroyed the economically
stable States of Iraq and Libya, located thousands of
miles from United States shores?
The multilateral system has been threatened by the
shameless attempts by Western States to subjugate the
Secretariat of the United Nations and other international
institutions. There has always been a personnel
imbalance there in favour of Western countries,
but until recently the Secretariat has at least tried to
maintain neutrality. Today, however, this imbalance has
become chronic, and staff members of the Secretariat
are taking more and more liberties with politically
motivated conduct that is not befitting of international
civil servants.

23-114767/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

We urge the Secretary-General to ensure that
all of his staff comply with impartiality in line with
Article 100 of the United Nations Charter. We also
urge the Secretariat leadership, when they are drafting
documents on the aforementioned “Our Common
Agenda” and the New Agenda for Peace, to be guided
by the need to encourage Member States to find ways
to seek consensus and to balance interests rather than to
help to advance neoliberal concepts. Otherwise, instead
of a multilateral agenda, there will be a deepening
of a division between the “golden billion” and the
international majority.
Speaking of multilateralism, we cannot be
limited to the international context alone, just as we
cannot disregard the international context when we
talk about democracy. Double standards need to be
abandoned, and multilateralism and democracy need to
be respected, both within States and in their relations
with one another. Everybody already knows that the
West, in imposing its understanding of democracy on
others, does not want to see the democratization of
international relations on the basis of respect for the
sovereign equality of States. But now, as it is trying
to advance its own “rules” in the international arena,
they are increasingly asphyxiating multilateralism and
democracy at home, applying increasingly repressive
tools for suppressing any dissent — as their criminal
Kyiv regime has done, with the support of its teachers,
the United States and its allies.
As was the case in the Cold War, we have reached a
dangerous threshold, possibly even more dangerous than
any we have seen before. The situation has worsened
with the loss of trust in multilateralism. When the
financial economic aggression of the West is destroying
the benefits of globalization, and Washington and its
allies have abandoned diplomacy, what they are asking
for is to clarify international relations on the battlefield.
And this has all been done within the halls of the
United Nations, which was created to prevent the horrors
of war. The voices of responsible and sensible forces
and the calls to show political wisdom and to revive
the culture of dialogue are being muzzled by those
who have decided to undermine the core principles of
multilateral relations. We all need to return to the source
and respect the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter in all its diversity and interlinkages.
Genuine multilateralism at present necessitates the
adaptation of the United Nations to reflect the trends
of the establishment of a multilateral architecture
8/33

24/04/2023

of international relations. Expedited reform of the
Security Council is needed to enhance representation of
Asian, African, Latin American countries. The current
excessive overrepresentation of the West in this main
organ of the United Nations undermines the principle
of multilateralism.
We call on all States that respect the Charter to join
the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations, established at Venezuela’s initiative. It is
also important to tap into the constructive potential of the
BRICS group of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South
Africa, as well as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
The Eurasian Economic Union, the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization are ready to contribute. And of course we
support enhancing the use of the initiatives and positions
of the regional associations of the countries of the global
South. The Group of 20 could also play an important role
in supporting multilateralism if its Western participants
stopped distracting colleagues from pressing issues on
its agenda in their efforts to suppress the topic of their
responsibility for the crisis situations accumulating in
the global economy. It is our shared responsibility to
preserve the United Nations as a hard-won model of
multilateralism and coordinated international policy.
The key to success is working together, renouncing
any claims to exceptionalism and once again ensuring
respect for the sovereign equality of States. That is
what we all signed up to when we ratified the Charter.
In 2021, President Putin proposed convening a
summit of the permanent members of the Security
Council, but although the leaders of China and France
supported the initiative, it has unfortunately not yet
been implemented. The proposal is directly related to
multilateralism, and not because the five Powers possess
any privileges over the rest but because of their special
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance
of international peace and security. And that is exactly
what is now crucial to the United Nations-centric
system, which is in danger of collapse thanks to the
West’s actions. We are seeing ever-increasing concerns
about this state of affairs in the numerous initiatives and
ideas of the countries of the global South, in East and
Southeast Asia, the Arab and the Muslim world generally
and Africa and Latin America. We appreciate their
sincere commitment to resolving every current issue
through honest, concerted efforts aimed at harmonizing
the balance of interests on the basis of the sovereign
equality of States and the indivisibility of security.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, I would like to address all the
journalists who are covering today’s open debate. Their
colleagues from Russia’s media outlets were denied
entry here. The United States Embassy in Moscow
mockingly informed them that they were ready to
issue passports with visas the moment our plane took
off. I therefore have an important request. I ask them
to compensate for the absence of Russia’s journalists
and to try to do their reporting in such a way as give
the world audience genuinely multilateral views
and assessments.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Al Marar (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over today’s meeting. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing.
Our
sustained
commitment
to
effective
multilateralism, based on international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, is
essential to maintaining international peace and
security, and defending the principles of the Charter is
therefore vital to maintaining effective multilateralism.
Those principles, including respect for every nation’s
sovereignty, the peaceful resolution of disputes and
the prohibition of the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State
are fundamental to the ability of the United Nations to
take effective measures in accordance with the Charter.
That is now a vital issue as we see the world
experiencing major challenges and the largest numbers
of armed conflicts since 1945. The forced displacement
of populations is at an all-time high. And as we struggle
to keep the Earth’s warming temperature within
the 1.5˚C goal, our international efforts to deal with
the growing threats of extremism and terrorism are
encountering great difficulties. If we are to address
our common challenges and threats we have to promote
dialogue and cooperation among nations. We must
redouble our efforts to peacefully resolve conflicts and
crises from Ukraine to the Sudan. In that context, the
following three points are critical if multilateralism is
to improve peoples’ lives.
First, multilateralism must serve the wider
United Nations membership, which reflects the rights
and aspirations of the planet’s 8 billion people and

S/PV.9308

should remain front and centre in our work. Yet our
international polarization and competing interests
mean that the multilateral system and its mechanisms
often struggle to act effectively. Some Member States
have always been able to influence multilateralism and
its conduct, including how to establish its systems and
whether or not they function in all of our interests. It is
those same Member States that can prevent or realize
the reforms needed to make multilateralism more
effective. Our international institutions and structures
are currently unable to address today’s challenges,
which means that we must reform our multilateral
mechanisms, including the Security Council, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, with a view
to improving their legitimacy and representativeness.
Decisions should be made with vulnerable countries’
participation, not just by taking their concerns into
consideration. For example, the emerging discussions
on reforming the international financial institutions
so that they can better support the countries of
the global South are encouraging developments in
promoting equality among peoples and establishing
stability worldwide.
Secondly, protecting global common goods must
be a top priority. Facilitating the peaceful settlement
of disputes, promoting human security and devising
collective solutions, even if they are only partial, are
key to addressing the challenges facing humankind. We
have recently seen some constructive initiatives aimed
at promoting cooperation, but that type of forwardlooking cooperation should be the norm rather than the
exception. The historic High Seas Treaty, and before it
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, are specific
examples of multilateral achievements that portend a
better future for our peoples.
Thirdly and lastly, multilateralism cannot be
merely an intergovernmental process. The perspectives
of all stakeholders, including women and young people,
must also help drive the relevant discussions. During
the coronavirus disease pandemic, public-private
partnerships in the United Arab Emirates, including
Dubai Ports World and the International Humanitarian
City, supported multilateral efforts to ensure the global
distribution of medical equipment and coronavirus
vaccines. As the incoming President of the twentyeighth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, we believe that the inclusion of all relevant
stakeholders, especially in vulnerable countries, is a

23-114769/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

cornerstone of success. The input of women, young
people, indigenous groups, scientists, academia and
the private sector will be channelled across all the
Conference’s outcomes.
In conclusion, we stress that only by working
together can we establish peace, stability and prosperity
for all nations and peoples. That requires us to reform
our multilateral system to ensure that we deliver on those
peoples’ aspirations.
Mr. Immongault (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
commend Russia for convening this important debate
on how to make multilateralism more effective, and I
thank the Secretary-General for doing an excellent job
of outlining the issues at stake and their scope.
Today’s open debate comes a week after the
publication of the report of the High-level Advisory Board
on Effective Multilateralism. The recommendations made
by the members of the Board, appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, reinforce our determination to strengthen the
foundations of the international community’s ability to
live together for greater international solidarity, which
forms the basis for the security and dignity of current and
future generations. That quest for international solidarity
is the matrix of the Charter of the United Nations. By
endorsing it, every Member of the United Nations opted
for indivisible security. By joining the United Nations,
every nation of the world rejected the idea of disjointed
nations or stratified and superimposed nations. A clear
choice is made in the Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations, in which we describe ourselves as we the
peoples of the world, as links in the same chain — that
of humankind.
That spirit should not only remain at the centre
of the collective security system but also underpin
our projection of sustainable development and shared
prosperity. The ideal approach that carries humankind
towards its common destiny is the multilateral approach.
Multilateralism is an inclusive dynamic of global
governance that is based on respect and consideration for
the narrative of each nation, because every State matters,
every community matters and every life matters. Our
differences in size, scope or appearance are indispensable
complementary factors that not only define us but also,
and above all, make us relevant and viable within the
concert of nations. Pandemics, economic fluctuations,
global warming and so on are constant reminders of our
interdependence and common destiny. More than ever
before, our main threats are transnational and cross-border.
10/33

24/04/2023

To meet the challenges ahead, our security
architecture should reflect the current realities. We
must update our international institutions, mindsets
and perceptions of lasting peace, shared prosperity
and coexistence. We must reinvent solutions to
contemporary threats, including climate change and the
chronic insecurity of fragile States. We must address
the crisis of international solidarity, which fuels the
underlying economic, humanitarian, health and food
crises. Indeed, we cannot meet the challenges of the
current century with the tools of a previous century.
Regrettably, a continent such as Africa, the secondmost densely populated continent, which according to
estimates will account for at least one quarter of the
world’s population by 2050 and today accounts for
almost 70 per cent of the Security Council’s agenda,
has no permanent seat in this decision-making organ,
in which its security fate is sealed. Let us put an end to
unsettling observations and make concrete proposals.
First, we must reform the Security Council without
further delay to ensure that it reflects today’s reality
and can respond effectively to current and future
challenges. Of course, as an African I hope that such
reform will prioritize the Common African Position
and its legitimate claim, as reflected in the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration. It is clear that
Africa will not wait indefinitely on the chaos of an
intergovernmental reform process, which in the eyes
of our peoples is an endless distraction. In that regard,
I echo the words spoken before the General Assembly
last September by Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President
of the Gabonese Republic and Head of State (see A/77/
PV.6). He underscored that Africa will wait no longer.
It is time for that unacceptable injustice to Africa to
be redressed. We intend to submit our thoughts on the
issue to Africa’s critical mass.
Secondly, we must redefine our rules and
mechanisms to adequately address the evolution of
insecurity and terrorism. With regard to rules, we
must ensure inclusiveness and solidarity and leave
no room for double standards or a solidarity based on
variable geometry. Furthermore, it is important that
we conclusively address the root causes of conflicts
and crises.
Thirdly, we must draw up a new social contract — a
new global pact between generations, between those
who govern and those being governed, and between
the global and regional levels, with a special focus
on the conditions of young people and women. In
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

that new social contract for the future, bridges must
replace walls in all areas. Education must cast aside the
shackles of ignorance and intolerance. Multilateralism
must prevail over unilateralist postures. And dialogue
must always prevail over antagonism. It is an illusion
to believe that humankind will survive in the form of
bubbles of security and prosperity surrounded by an
ocean of insecurity and poverty. If that were the case,
the inevitable alternative to peace and prosperity for
all would inevitably put everyone in danger and lead
to collective decline. As a matter of priority, we must
build a shield of actions and initiatives to protect
against, and ban each nation from, any plundering of
resources or deprivation of human dignity, in order to
restore to the peoples of the world their aspirations for
security, prosperity and greater freedom.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
need to abandon any distrust of, or deviation from,
multilateralism. Just as a number of monologues do
not add up to a dialogue, so a collection of bilateral
relations will never have the effect, let alone the virtues,
of multilateral consultation. Multibilateralism leads to
fragmentation and the division of the world into blocs,
whereas multilateralism’s calling is to bring about unity
and the building of bridges among we the peoples of the
world. We must provide answers to the current and future
generations that are commensurate with their legitimate
aspirations to live in security, peace and greater dignity.
Those answers are at hand, and they cannot and must not
be delayed any longer.
Mr. Mbomba (Ghana): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Russia on Russia’s presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April. We also welcome the participation
in today’s meeting of the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and we thank him for
his insightful remarks.
I would also like to note that we associate ourselves
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
The multilateral system, which was fashioned out of
the ashes of the Second World War, has no doubt been
the cornerstone, with some exceptions, of relative peace,
security and development across the world. Adherence
to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the sovereign equality of States and the
prohibition of the use of force, has been a pillar of global

S/PV.9308

stability. Given the current disinformation, migration
crises and food and energy insecurity, the world has
not faced a more profound crisis since the Cold War.
Structural impairments, including the debilitating
impact of the veto system in the Security Council, the
chronic lack of financing for development, the increase in
geopolitical competition and the decline in international
cooperation, have hobbled our efforts to renew global
institutions and deepen multilateralism.
In the face of an easy willingness to reject or
undermine our shared normative values and the
principles of collaboration and collective action, we
risk relapsing into a neo-Hobbesian state of nature.
It is not too late to seek a way out of the increasingly
confrontational politics, zero-sum games and egoistic,
chaotic and brutish tendencies of recent years. It is in the
interests of States, whether small or mighty, to safeguard
the multilateral system, since the agreed international
rules and institutions allow for all voices to be heard and
provide the ability to influence the international order in
less costly and more sustainable ways. Ghana therefore
welcomes the focus of today’s debate, which provides
us with an opportunity to deliberate on ways in which
we can defend the United Nations Charter and promote
it with a view to establishing an effective multilateral
system. In considering how we can enhance an effective
rules-based multilateral system through the defence of
the United Nations Charter, Ghana would like to share
five main points.
First, while it is important to reaffirm our respective
commitments to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, it is equally pertinent
to take practical steps to enhance our responsiveness
to the Charter’s demands. In that regard, we urge for
prioritizing a more inclusive and multi-stakeholder
approach that enables all actors to adhere to the norms
and values of the Charter. In our view, that should be
devoid of politicization or any form of selectivity in its
application. We cannot overemphasize the importance
of ensuring that Member States embrace a principled
approach to the application of the Charter’s provisions,
underpinned by a shared, good-faith understanding and
interpretation. We must also prioritize the desires of
all peoples of the world if we are to achieve a smooth
transition to a fair and equitable global world order. The
cynicism that some countries display in twisting those
principles or bending them to their will may bring them
short-term tactical advantages, but history shows that
such gains are ephemeral.

23-1147611/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, a candid recognition of the realities
of our time should spur us all to embrace deliberate
diplomatic action to build mutual trust consistent
with the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
As my compatriot Kofi Annan once said, our futures,
prosperity and security are wrapped together more
than ever before. No country, however wealthy or
powerful, can stand on its own any longer. That reality
should compel us to build bridges, not burn them, and
to lay solid foundations for dialogue and consensus,
including in discussing countries’ strategic intentions.
That will be critical if we are to avoid misjudgments
and unhealthy competition, especially among the major
military Powers.
In that context, it is also important to make earnest
and genuine efforts to address the structural flaws in
the multilateral system as part of the ongoing reform
initiatives within the United Nations system, including
the revitalization of the General Assembly and reform of
the Security Council. As an African Member State, we
have stated our positions and justified our arguments.
Those who support a strengthened multilateral system
have a responsibility to reciprocate and to work
constructively and urgently in good faith to address,
with us, the historical injustice done to the African
continent, which is also one of the weaknesses in the
multilateral structure
Thirdly, the multilateral system should be
turbocharged by working to effectively implement
our goals together with regional arrangements that
share similar objectives. We must therefore enhance
the implementation of Chapter VIII of the Charter,
especially with regard to regional prevention. The
United Nations has its strengths, but when it is unable
to act, we must embrace the strengths of regional
actors. For instance, we cannot attempt any legitimate
resolution of the terrorism crisis on the African continent
without collaboration between the institutions of the
African Union and regional economic communities and
initiatives such as the Economic Community of West
African States and the Accra Initiative in the Sahel. It is
also only fair that when those regional bodies stand up
and offer to act, their burden should be shared with the
principal body bearing that primary duty.
Fourthly, the prevailing global challenges are so
interconnected and multidimensional that we need to
enhance collaboration and joint consultation among our
various institutions and promote coherence if we are to
avoid negative consequences from global policies. In
12/33

24/04/2023

our view that demands that we consult with institutions
and processes outside the United Nations system,
such as the Bretton Woods institutions, but also, as
appropriate, with relevant civil-society organizations
and responsible private-sector actors, in order to
adequately address the pressing needs of people around
the globe, especially in the developing world. That
is important because when global crises occur, such
as the financial and food crises that we are currently
enduring, we know that down the road there may be
greater manifestations of sociopolitical instability,
diminished capacities for conflict management and
further conflicts.
Lastly, we believe that the Secretary-General’s
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), including its
New Agenda for Peace, provides us with a forwardlooking vision for reinvigorated, inclusive and
effective multilateralism to tackle contemporary global
challenges. Those initiatives can lay the groundwork for
effective multilateralism if they prioritize investment
in interventions aimed at addressing existing and
emerging risks, including those associated with
nuclear weapons and the disproportionate threat to the
countries of the Global South. Furthermore, we should
enhance the convening power of the United Nations in
tackling our multifaceted problems, including climate
threats, gender inequality in all its forms and the
work of involving women and young people in peace
processes, areas that are all germane to strengthening
the responsiveness of the multilateral system.
In conclusion, Ghana believes that the tools
available in the Charter remain indispensable to
addressing the existing and emerging challenges of our
time. What we have to do is to strategically harness and
effectively deploy those tools, including Chapter VI,
on the peaceful settlement of disputes. Ultimately, we
need all Member States, including Council members,
to demonstrate greater political will if we are to make
meaningful progress in the defence of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
First of all, I would like to express our concern
about the current violence in the Sudan, which is
having an intolerable impact on the country’s civilian
population. Switzerland joins the call of the SecretaryGeneral in that regard.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The adoption of the Charter of the United Nations
on 26 June 1945 signified a fundamental paradigm
shift. War, previously considered a legitimate means
of conducting foreign policy, was prohibited; territorial
expansion by force, previously the privilege of the great
military Powers, was outlawed, and the prohibition
of the use of force, coupled with the obligation to
resolve conflicts peacefully, was revolutionary. Those
principles placed all countries, no matter their size
or might, on an equal, or almost equal, legal footing.
The privileges of the great Powers were already being
debated intensely in San Francisco, but were finally
accepted on condition of a clear promise, which was the
greater responsibility of the permanent members of the
Council for international peace and security.
As Member States, we all subscribe to the
principles and values of the Charter, and we reiterated
that commitment in the excellent Declaration on the
Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of
the United Nations. Yet the Charter is being violated
on a massive scale. For more than a year, State
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the prohibition of
the use of force continue to be flouted by the military
aggression of a permanent member of the Security
Council against its neighbour. The most effective
way to preserve multilateralism and the integrity
of the Charter is therefore to respect it. Switzerland
emphatically condemns the military aggression against
Ukraine, and I reiterate here Switzerland’s firm call on
the Russian Federation to withdraw its troops from the
entire territory of Ukraine without delay.
This open debate is presented as an opportunity
for the Council to demonstrate its commitment to
the Charter and to discuss the strengthening of
multilateralism. That is our duty not only today but also
every time we call for the protection of civilians, every
time we condemn violations of international law and
every time we urge the parties to a conflict to silence
their weapons and return to the negotiating table.
That is our duty under the Geneva Conventions,
which represent a success story of multilateralism
because they are among the few international treaties
that have been universally ratified. When those
Conventions mark their seventy-fifth anniversary next
year, States must take concrete steps to strengthen
respect for international humanitarian law.
It is also a duty, in time of peace as well as in time
of war, with respect to the human rights that serve to

S/PV.9308

protect human dignity. The seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights this year
will be an opportunity to reaffirm its universality.
Switzerland
is
convinced
that
effective
multilateralism remains the only way to achieve the
vision of a peaceful and just world; a world where the
rule of law prevails, not the law of the strongest and
where human dignity is always — always — respected;
and a world in which the entire population benefits
from social and economic progress. We are convinced
of that because respect for the Charter remains vital
for a small or medium-sized State such as ours and for
most States Members of the United Nations, regardless
of whether the world is unipolar, bipolar or multipolar.
We are also convinced of that fact because the
Charter and multilateralism have enabled humankind
to make remarkable progress, including having averted,
so far, a nuclear confrontation; decolonizing many
regions of the world; reducing poverty; improving
access to health-care and education systems; making
economic progress; and even walking on the Moon and
creating artificial intelligence.
We have managed, in this forum, to negotiate
the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which, if we
finally implement them in full, could save our planet
and give rise to greater equality for our children
and grandchildren.
It is clear that the effectiveness of the Charter
depends on the willingness of States to implement it,
and that will is too often lacking. We are living in a
period of polycrisis. The United Nations estimates that
one in four young people are affected by violence or
armed conflict, in situations ranging from air strikes
on Khartoum, Bakhmut or Sagaing to sexual violence
in Port-au-Prince or Goma or being deprived of an
education in Kandahar.
The principles of the Charter are not a menu from
which to pick and choose. We call for unconditional
respect for international law by all actors in all
circumstances, and we call for the courage to finally and
seriously engage in reform of the multilateral system,
including the Council, in order to restore confidence
in and within that system. With Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) and the New Agenda for Peace, we have
not only a unique opportunity but also an urgent need.
We must change the course of history quickly. With
leadership, political will and confidence, we can do it.

23-1147613/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

History will judge whether we have lived up to the
Charter. One can deny the facts, use cynical rhetoric
and spread misinformation, but the memory of history
cannot be deceived. It will judge us. The human family
cannot heal until justice is done for the victims and trust
is restored. That is also the very first recommendation of
the report issued last week by the High-level Advisory
Board on Effective Multilateralism: rebuilding trust
through inclusion and accountability.
That requires that we listen to one another. Let us
hold a dialogue about what unites us — a constructive
dialogue rather than discussions about the number of
poles in the world, a dialogue that reminds us of the
universal principles to which we have committed
ourselves. There is no alternative to effective
multilateralism — a universal, inclusive multilateralism
based on international law.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the Russian
Federation for having organized this debate and the
Secretary-General for his statement.
In these challenging times, we should reinforce
our commitment to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, to international law and to
multilateralism. As members of the Security Council,
we have a particular responsibility in preserving the
principles and values based on which the multilateral
system has been collectively built over nearly
eight decades.
The conflict in Ukraine has added enormous stress
to the multilateral system, which was already subject
to fresh challenges and growing dissent. The failure
of the Council to effectively deal with yet another war
falls short of Member States’ expectations concerning
its primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, and eventually ends up eroding
its credibility.
The international community has already proved
its ability to adapt and evolve in several areas, except in
that of peace and security. For example, in 2008, after
the global financial crisis, a group of countries decided
to establish the Group of 20, which has proved to be a
valuable framework for addressing new economic and
financial challenges. Its deficiencies aside, such as the
limited representation of African countries, it has since
come to be one of the most representative bodies in the
international community.
14/33

24/04/2023

The Brazilian position on Council reform is known
to all: we believe that its current composition, which
reflects the balance of power as it was in 1945, is not
compatible with current geopolitical realities. The
African continent and our region, Latin America and
the Caribbean, are not represented in the category of
permanent members. That has resulted in this body’s
increasing lack of legitimacy to take decisions on the
peace and security agenda and underscores the sense of
frustration with the shortcomings of the United Nations
system as a whole.
That is not, however, the only cause of the
situation in which we find ourselves. In addition to
the structural flaws of the Council, we cannot but
notice a lesser disposition to engage in dialogue and
diplomacy, in contravention of the spirit of the San
Francisco Conference.
Since the beginning of our current mandate as an
elected member of the Council, there have been many
occasions on which the demand for sanctions has been
the knee-jerk reaction to crisis situations. In most cases,
those initiatives were preceded by unilateral coercive
measures, which are illegal under international law
and ineffective. In our discussions, due consideration
is rarely given to the spin-off effects on third countries,
especially those that already face strong economic,
social and institutional challenges and have the most
vulnerable populations.
Brazil rejects the pursuit of hegemonies, old or
new. In line with Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter,
we condemn the threat or use of force as a means of
resolving disputes, as we have seen in the case of
Ukraine. We also condemn the more subtle attempts to
impose the will of the few on the many on the basis
of concepts of dubious multilateral standing. We refute
conceptions of the world that are based on simplistic
divisions that fail to reflect the complexity of reality,
an approach that does not benefit the vast majority
of Member States and serves only to sow division
among nations.
We advocate a return to the principles on which the
Organization bases its very existence, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, with an increased
emphasis on peaceful means of ending conflicts. As a
founding Member of the Organization, we have never
and will never condone violations of Member States’
territorial integrity.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

We should not give up on diplomacy but, rather,
seek solutions collectively to address the challenges of
our times. Diplomacy and peace are the means and the
purpose of the Security Council. We must not shy away
from that responsibility.
The world is undergoing a process in which the
international order is being redesigned. In our view,
we are heading towards a sort of multipolar order that
should be welcomed and nurtured, since it will benefit
the whole of the international community. We are
aware of the many shortcomings of the United Nations
system, but we continue to trust in the centrality of the
United Nations and its role in preserving peace and
finding solutions to common challenges.
Brazil believes in the strength of the multilateral
approach to issues such as the climate emergency and
development needs, respecting the diversity of points
of view and national positions. It is essential, however,
that we engage in an earnest debate about the need for
a renewed multilateralism, in particular in the field
of peace and security, setting aside practices that will
only deepen divisions instead of contributing to a more
peaceful world.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to reiterate our hearty congratulations to Russia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We are delighted to see you, Sir, presiding over
this meeting.
We warmly welcome the initiative by the Russian
Federation of convening an open debate on today’s
theme and express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his important briefing.
It is universally recognized that the creation of
the United Nations represented a turning point in
humankind’s attitude towards mutual cooperation for
peace and security. The Charter, signed on 26 June
1945 in the aftermath of the bloody and tragic Second
World War, clearly affirmed the importance of
multilateralism. It proclaimed unambiguously therein
the will and determination of “we the peoples of the
United Nations”.
Furthermore, the Charter listed four purposes of
the Organization, the last one of which sums them all
up and is set out as follows in Article 1, paragraph 4:
“To be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in

S/PV.9308

the attainment of these common ends”. That was, in our
view, the birth of the new multilateralism that guides
modern-day interactions among States and nations.
It is our conviction that the overriding objective
of that multilateralism is to fulfil the purposes of the
United Nations, chief among them the maintenance of
international peace and security. That brings to mind
the old saying to the effect that war appears to be as
old as humankind, but peace is a modern invention.
That also resonates with Article 2, paragraph 4, of our
Charter, which represents a new approach to war in its
nature, an invention of the Charter that we agreed to
abide by.
It is our understanding that in that provision of the
Charter, the founding mission of the United Nations
was to provide all its Member States with a solid basis
of equal security. Our Organization would thus become
a forum in which we could work together to resolve
disputes peacefully and to prevent the outbreak of
another world war. In sum, the Charter proclaimed the
overriding importance of collective security.
In that context, the equal and indivisible security
of States is at the core of the collective security
consecrated by the Charter in its letter and its spirit.
Collective security means that the security of one is the
security of all and that security, in our globalized world,
is also a global concept, a global good that cannot be
divided or fragmented. That is why in our view Article
51, on individual or collective self-defence, comes as
an exception and a reminder of the fact that all States
deserve to live in peace and security.
In that connection, it is our view that relations among
nations should be based on respect for the principles of
equal rights and of the self-determination of peoples.
As the most representative intergovernmental
organization and the utmost expression of
multilateralism, the United Nations is the main forum
for addressing multifaceted and complex global
challenges through collective action. Any profound
divisions among Member States can therefore only
undermine the important endeavour that the founders
of the United Nations undertook to advance in 1945.
In that regard, multilateralism, unlike unilateralism,
implies adherence to common principles and objectives,
founded on respect for a system of shared norms and
values and guided by the principles of consultation,
inclusion and solidarity among nations.

23-1147615/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

24/04/2023

The current global security challenges, such as
inter-State wars, intra-State conflicts, terrorism,
transnational organized crime, the proliferation of
weapons, limited peacekeeping capacity and financing,
divided and competing collective security systems
and nuclear disarmament, among others, require
a concerted approach and a reinforcing of the role
of multilateralism.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that in order for
multilateralism to prosper and be more effective, the
United Nations and the entire membership must abide
by and uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations at all times. Multilateralism must
be reinvigorated in the interests of humankind as a
whole in order to address today’s global challenges.
Multilateralism is at the core of our Charter’s calling.

Divisions in our approach to the collective security
architecture and mistrust can only undermine dialogue.
They hamper our efforts for the peaceful settlement
of disputes and conflicts. They further weaken the
collective resolve of our universal Organization to
effectively achieve its objectives.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by thanking Secretary-General
Guterres for his remarks and thanking him and the
entire United Nations system for all the efforts made to
promote peace and security and to support the Charter
of the United Nations.

As Mozambique has stated in this Chamber time and
again, peace is a global good. Its preservation requires
our concerted efforts. With the positive cooperation of
States, we can find concerted and harmonized ways
to address most of the current and pressing conflicts
around the world, including in Africa, the Middle East
and Asia, on the Korean peninsula and even in Europe
and beyond.

I also thank colleagues for coming together to
talk about how we can defend the Charter and make
multilateralism more effective. This is a serious topic,
even if the meeting was convened by a Council member
whose actions demonstrate a blatant disregard for the
Charter of the United Nations.

Let us not forget the tragedies of the two World
Wars, the first of which claimed the lives of 9 million
people and the second more than 60 million. We see no
reason whatsoever why that should be repeated.
What I mentioned also bears testimony to the
fact that the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, must be reformed in order to be more inclusive,
effective, just, fair and democratic. Only in that manner
can we collectively address the current geopolitical and
security challenges facing humankind.
More important, it is a simple corollary of the
fundamental principle of the sovereign equality of
States that the Charter so clearly expounds. We value
democracy at the national level, and it must also be
valid at the international level.
Mozambique therefore reiterates its call for a
reform of the Security Council that takes into account
the African Common Position, based on the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
In addition, the Council must improve its working
methods. It must enhance its capacity to deliver in the
interest of all humankind. That means taking actions
that can bring about positive change and promote peace
and security around the world.
16/33

At the United Nations, if one asks a difficult policy
question, one gets 193 different answers. That makes
our work challenging. But it is also right, because, after
all, that is what the United Nations is all about: Member
States can work through disagreements, find common
ground and see where we can make progress together.
There are some things we are not meant to disagree
about. There are some values and principles that are
so fundamental, so critical to our purpose, that signing
on to them is the price of admission to the United
Nations. Those are the values laid out in the Charter of
the United Nations, a Charter that we have all sworn to
uphold and to protect, and it is quite clear what those
values are.
That little blue book is written in plain language. It
spells out our purposes and principles in its very first
chapter. I will quote from Article 1:
“The Purposes of the United Nations are:
“To maintain international peace and security…
to develop friendly relations among nations based
on respect for the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples…to achieve international
cooperation in solving international problems…
[and] promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and for fundamental freedoms”.
Article 2, paragraph 4, states clearly:
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any State”.
Territorial integrity, respect for human rights,
international cooperation: those are our values. They
are the shared, stated principles that we all agreed to
uphold — all of us. It is our belief in them that binds
us together.
Those principles have been the basis for the
greatest triumphs of the United Nations over the past
eight decades. Despite the international system’s
imperfections, our shared principles have helped us
curtail nuclear proliferation, prevent mass atrocities and
forge peace through negotiation and mediation. They
have undergirded an international order that has helped
us provide humanitarian aid to those in desperate need,
to lift more than a billion people out of poverty and to
prevent another world war.
Right now as much as ever, the world needs an
effective United Nations and effective multilateralism.
Challenges such as the climate crisis, the global foodsecurity crisis and the coronavirus disease pandemic
are exactly the kinds of borderless challenges that we
need the United Nations to tackle.
And yet, right when the world needed the
United Nations most, we were plunged into a crisis of
confidence. Our hypocritical convener today, Russia,
invaded its neighbour Ukraine and struck at the heart
of the Charter of the United Nations and all the values
we hold dear. That illegal, unprovoked and unnecessary
war runs directly counter to our most shared principles:
that a war of aggression and territorial conquest is never,
ever acceptable. And as we sit here, that aggression
continues. As we sit here, Russian forces continue to
kill and injure civilians. As we sit here, Russian forces
are destroying Ukraine’s critical infrastructure. As we
sit here, we brace ourselves for the next Bucha, the next
Mariupol, the next Kherson, the next war crime, the
next unconscionable atrocity.
One hundred forty-one United Nations Member
States have made it abundantly clear: Russia’s full-scale
invasion was not about self-defence. Russia simply
wants to redraw international borders by force in
violation of the very Charter of the United Nations. And
that goes against everything this institution stands for.

S/PV.9308

This does not concern just Ukraine or Europe. It
concerns all of us, because today it is Ukraine, but
tomorrow it could be another country, another small
nation that is invaded by its larger neighbour. And what
would we want the Security Council to do in response?
Would we want to sit on our hands? No. It is the very
reason the Charter of the United Nations was written in
the first place.
And, unfortunately, Russia has shown us,
consistently, over the past 14 months, that this invasion
is not an isolated incident. In the past 14 months, Russia
has weaponized global food supplies and obstructed
the Black Sea Grain Initiative from achieving its
full potential. Russia has breached its obligations
under the New START Treaty and issued dangerous
and provocative nuclear threats. Russia has violated
universal human rights and fundamental freedoms,
both outside and inside its own borders. It has violated
international law. That includes the wrongful detention
of American citizens: Paul Whelan, Trevor Reed,
Brittney Griner and now, Evan Gershkovich. Trevor
and Brittney are now, thankfully, home safe and
sound. But Russia has imprisoned Paul Whelan and
is now detaining Evan Gershkovich to use as political
bargaining chips, human pawns. Paul was simply in the
wrong place at the wrong time. Evan is a journalist.
He was just doing his job. Using people as pawns is
a strategy of weakness. Those are not the actions of
a responsible country, and while Russia plays political
games, real people suffer.
I want to direct Council members’ attention to the
gallery, where today we are joined by Paul’s sister,
Elizabeth. I want Minister Lavrov to look into her eyes
and see her suffering. I want him to see what it is like to
miss one’s brother for four years, to know he is locked
up in a Russian penal colony simply because Russia
wants to use him for its own means.
I am calling on Russia right now to release Paul
Whelan and Evan Gershkovich immediately, to let Paul
and Evan come home and to cease this barbaric practice
once and for all.
While Russia may be undermining the Charter
of the United Nations and this institution, the rest of
us can and must do better. The United Nations needs
reform — Council members have heard that. To support
and maintain its fundamental principles, this body must
evolve to meet the twenty-first century. As part of that
evolution, the Security Council needs to better reflect

23-1147617/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

today’s global realities. We must find credible, sensible
and politically viable paths to that end. And while we
work to forge those paths, those of us on the Security
Council have a duty to do more and to do better.
As all Council members know, in San Francisco
last year, I announced six principles for responsible
behaviour for Security Council permanent members.
Those were standards we set for ourselves, that we
welcome all to hold us to and that we encourage for
other permanent members.
The United States believes in the United Nations and
in the Charter. And that belief gives us faith that it can
be made better still. Our response to Russia’s flagrant
violations cannot be to abandon this institution’s
founding principles. Instead, we must recommit to the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and peace
and security and use those principles as guideposts as
we strengthen the United Nations and make it fit for the
purposes of the twenty-first century. We must reform this
institution and support efforts, such as the SecretaryGeneral’s ambitious Our Common Agenda (A/75/982)
initiative, to modernize the multilateral system.
We must not shirk our responsibilities to address
threats by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to international peace and security.
We must forcefully address the situation in the
Sudan, as we heard the call from the Secretary-General
for peace and a cessation of hostilities.
We must use our platform to call out aggression and
human rights violations wherever and whenever we see
them. We must renew our commitment to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals, to heal the climate and
to end poverty and hunger. That is the brighter future
we hope to build.
We must rally behind the Charter of the
United Nations, take our shared global challenges
seriously, do everything in our power to be better
neighbours and together create a more peaceful, more
prosperous world for us all.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): At
the outset, let me echo the strong concerns set out by the
Secretary-General about the situation in the Sudan and
the call for an immediate end to the violence. We have
requested a Council meeting to address the situation
tomorrow. I join others in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
18/33

24/04/2023

Minister Lavrov has called this meeting to share
the Russian vision for the future of multilateralism.
We have seen what Russia’s idea of multilateralism
means for the world. More than a year into Russia’s
full-scale invasion of Ukraine, President Putin has
brought unimaginable suffering to that country while
trampling on the Charter of the United Nations.
Thousands of Ukrainians have been killed. Millions
have been displaced. Across the world, billions have
faced rocketing commodity prices and food insecurity.
It has been an unmitigated disaster for Russia too.
Neither Russia nor its neighbours feel safer. Trust in
Russia’s promises to other States and to its own people
is at a catastrophic low. Again and again the General
Assembly has voted overwhelmingly to condemn
Russia’s invasion. President Putin can count the
supporters of his war on one hand.
Russia has severely damaged its reputation in
the international community, and now President
Putin is threatening to move nuclear weapons into a
neighbouring State.
For Russians, the world is getting smaller. Many
tens of thousands of Russian men and women have been
killed. Hundreds of thousands have been mobilized
against their will; millions are fleeing the country to
escape the draft. Independent journalists have been
arrested; free speech has been crushed. Russia’s
economy is shrinking. Its army is in disarray, reliant on
Wagner — an unaccountable mercenary group whose
existence was denied a year ago, but who now offers
the Russian Foreign Ministry advice on its Security
Council presidency.
A Russian generation has lost its future, and
the Russian Government cannot even explain why.
Russia’s justifications for the war — defeating Nazis
and defending against bioweapons — are obvious
falsehoods. Russia’s claims to Ukraine’s territory will
never be recognized. For all of Minister Lavrov’s claims
about effective multilateralism, I see nothing effective
or multilateral about Russia’s foreign policy.
Multilateral institutions can and should evolve,
the Security Council included, and, with the United
Kingdom, it supports reforms to make it more effective
and representative. Change must be underpinned by
respect for the basic principles of the Charter, above all,
the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The world also needs a free and safe Ukraine that
can return to supplying the world with food. The United
Kingdom will continue to stand together with Ukraine
as it lawfully defends itself. Foreign Minister Lavrov
claims that he is interested in ending the conflict as
soon as possible. To do so, Russia must immediately
remove its troops from all Ukrainian territory.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I am
honoured to speak as the representative of Mr. Qin
Gang, State Councilor and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of China.
China thanks Russia as President of the Security
Council for this month for its initiative to convene
today’s open debate and welcomes Foreign Minister
Lavrov’s presiding over this meeting. I also thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing. I also
agree with his assessment of the current challenges we
are facing.
The world is standing at a historic crossroads now.
Humanity is facing unprecedented global challenges.
Acts of hegemony and bullying are causing colossal
harm to the world. Bloc politics are creating huge
divisions and confrontations. It has become all the more
urgent and important to uphold the United Nations
Charter. What is most needed now is for all countries
to practice genuine multilateralism, strengthen unity
under the banner of the United Nations, enhance the
effectiveness of the global governance system, achieve
common security, promote common development and
open up our common future.
First, the authority of the United Nations Charter
must be firmly safeguarded. The United Nations
Charter is the cornerstone of the post-war international
order. The principles of respecting sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other countries, as stipulated in the Charter,
have become the basic norms for governing modern
international relations. The problems that have arisen
in the world today are not because the United Nations
Charter has become obsolete, but because its purposes
and principles have not been effectively implemented.
The security and well-being of present and future
generations of humankind still depend on the continued
promotion of the spirit of the Charter and on the
preservation of the status and role of the United Nations.
To safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the
Charter, we should not just do it in words, but also
in deeds. We must not just have others do it, but start

S/PV.9308

with ourselves. We must not be half-hearted and do it
selectively but do it all the time consistently. We must
not have exclusive clubby circles, fabricate so-called
democracy, confrontation and authoritarian narratives,
and provoke geopolitical conflict, but advocate dialogue
and cooperation and insist on extensive consultation,
joint contribution and shared benefits, and resolve
disputes by peaceful means.
Secondly, we must firmly uphold the international
order underpinned by international law. The world
has only one order, and that is the international order
underpinned by international law. Faced with the
great change and chaos in the world today, we must
always be guided by the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and use international law as
the basis of our handling of international affairs. This
is an important guarantee for upholding fairness and
justice, addressing global challenges and safeguarding
the sovereignty, security and development interests of
all countries.
We oppose some countries distorting the meaning
of international law, imposing their own will on the
international community, packaging it as the so-called
rules-based international order and wantonly violating
the legitimate rights of other countries, in violation
of the international rule of law. We also oppose the
sidelining of international agreements, whether it is
arbitrarily tearing them up or having double standards.
There is no credibility to speak of in this regard. If a
major Power arbitrarily turns important treaties and
agreements that bear on international peace and security
into dead letters, then not only will international law be
eroded but the world will have no peace at all. In this
regard, the relevant country should earnestly reflect on
its actions.
Thirdly, it is necessary to ensure equal participation
of all countries in international affairs. The international
system with the United Nations at its core carries the
common expectations of the world’s peoples and should
serve the interests of all countries. The United Nations
cannot and should not serve the interests of only some
countries, or even a few countries. It is unreasonable
for citizens of one country to head some specialized
United Nations agencies and international financial
institutions on a long-term or even permanent basis.
The big change in the world is accelerating. The
multipolar world is becoming a reality. The pace of
democracy in international relations must also keep

23-1147619/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

up to truly reflect equality and enhance the equity and
effectiveness of multilateralism. Developing countries,
and African countries in particular, deserve to play a
greater role in the United Nations. The right of developing
countries to participation and decision-making must
be ensured. We support the initiative of SecretaryGeneral Guterres to reform the international financial
institutions, and we must act immediately to improve
the global governance system.
Fourthly, unilateral sanctions that violate
international law must be resisted. Unilateral sanctions
indiscriminately imposed by the United States and
other countries outside the Council’s mandate are
entirely for maintaining their hegemony, technological
monopoly and ideology. Their practice has no legal
basis. This stands in sharp contrast to the development
and progress of the world. Unilateral sanctions are like a
rampaging monster constantly creating and aggravating
humanitarian crises, violating the basic rights of
women and children, hindering the development and
progress of countries, especially small and mediumsized countries, and causing immense damage to the
harmony and stability of international relations.
What is of greater concern is that unilateral
sanctions, often in the name of upholding international
law and implementing Council resolutions, have
subjected the United Nations to unfounded accusations
and weakened its authority for multilateralism. We
once again urge the relevant countries to immediately
stop unilateral sanctions. We call on the international
community and all countries to uphold fairness, justice
and independence and to jointly resist and counteract
such illegal acts.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a responsible major Power, China has always
adhered to genuine multilateralism. In complying
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the basic norms governing
international law and international relations, China
has the best record. President Xi Jinping’s concept
of building a community with a shared future for
humankind represents a fundamental direction for
resolving the major challenges and problems of the
world today. China will make every effort to promote
the implementation of the Global Development
Initiative, the Global Security Initiative and the Global
Civilization Initiative and to comprehensively promote
Chinese modernization, participate in the work of
the United Nations on all fronts and contribute to
20/33

24/04/2023

promoting international solidarity and cooperation
in jointly addressing challenges and safeguarding the
common values of humankind. In the face of a world
of intertwined changes and turmoil, China will move
firmly in the right direction.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to make it clear that multilateralism is at the very heart
of the United Nations. There may be different views
on multilateralism, but I hope that today’s open debate
is intended to unite us rather than divide us. No single
Member State can solve today’s global challenges
alone. We need a collective, multilateral response.
Multilateralism functions only when Member States
work together based on mutual trust and cooperation,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.
It is an irony — even a tragedy — that the Russian
Federation, a permanent member of the Security
Council, continues its unilateral aggression against
Ukraine, while hosting an open debate on effective
multilateralism through the defence of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, on the very
International Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy
for Peace. Russia’s unprovoked, ongoing aggression is
nothing but outright defiance of the principles of the
Charter. The relentless use or threat of use of the veto
that has accompanied that aggression has blocked the
Security Council from making decisions, paralysing
and discrediting the Council when the world most needs
it to fulfil its responsibility.
Russia must first and foremost immediately and
unconditionally withdraw all its troops and equipment
from the territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. That has been the repeated
demand of the General Assembly, supported by the
141 votes — an overwhelming majority of the Member
States — cast in favour of resolution ES-11/6. Let me be
clear: any attempt to unilaterally change the peacefully
established status of a territory by force or coercion
should not be tolerated anywhere in the world. Also, any
statement — especially by a permanent member of the
Council — that denies the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, its neighbours or
any other Member State should not be tolerated.
The concept note (see S/2023/244) circulated by
Russia for today’s open debate does not contain a single
word about Ukraine or the aggression against it, and
instead merely criticizes many other previous crises
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

and invasions. There is no country with a flawless
historical record — all of us should squarely face that
reality and be humble about it. In that regard, using the
term “multilateralism” solely to criticize selectively the
chosen unilateral actions of other countries is to misuse
or politicize it. Promoting such a narrative in an attempt
to garner support for one’s own camp and legitimize
one’s actions will only create further division among
us and undermine the rule of law and multilateralism
itself. Revitalizing and upholding multilateralism is
more important than ever.
Let us remind ourselves that this is not the first time
we have been divided. Every previous time, we found
a path to overcome our divisions. Let us go therefore
back to the starting point — the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
rule of law, which underpin effective multilateralism
in a world of diversity. That is why Foreign Minister
Hayashi reiterated in this Chamber in January his call
for States to unite in support of the rule of law (see
S/PV.9241). That is why Japan promotes the rule of law
in the Security Council and beyond. International law,
including the Charter and United Nations resolutions,
must be respected, complied with and implemented in
good faith by all. The United Nations should continue
to be the bulwark of multilateralism. The Security
Council should lead that work, not hamper it.
We have to admit that the United Nations has
never been perfect. Nonetheless, we all need the
United Nations as the core of multilateralism. We must
strengthen the functions of the United Nations through
reform in order to better reflect today’s reality rather
than that of almost 80 years ago, as the SecretaryGeneral just reminded us in his briefing. It has been
long overdue for world leaders to declare with one
voice the necessity for an early reform of the Security
Council, as they did in 2005. We should redouble our
efforts to achieve that goal at the earliest opportunity.
Japan fully supports the Secretary-General’s
initiative Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) and will
continue to actively and constructively participate in the
discussions on the New Agenda for Peace. I hope that the
ambitious recommendations by the High-level Advisory
Board on Effective Multilateralism will promote
lively discussions among Member States. The future
of the United Nations and of multilateralism depends
on us — the Member States. Let us seize it together.

S/PV.9308

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): Built
on the rubble of the Second World War, the multilateral
international order created by the Charter of the
United Nations is an instrument for peace, based on
principles such as the sovereign equality of nations,
respect for international law, the non-use of force and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Today those principles
are being violated and flouted. Multilateralism means
agreeing to abide by the rules that we have collectively
contributed to establish and that we have all chosen
to uphold in order to preserve international peace and
security. We must all respect our common Charter
and the system of collective security established by it,
based on the rule of law. We reiterate that the use of
force, except in self-defence, is illegal.
But for Russia, the rule of law and the principles
underlying multilateralism no longer seem to apply.
Russia used force illegally in Georgia in 2008 and
in Crimea and the Donbas in 2014, and it has been
doing so for more than a year throughout Ukraine.
Russia is violating the fundamental principles of
the international order. It violates Ukraine’s State
sovereignty and territorial integrity; it systematically
and deliberately violates international humanitarian
law by targeting civilians; it violates international
human rights law by deporting Ukrainian children and
committing torture and other atrocities; and it violates
the arms embargoes decided by the Security Council by
procuring drones from Iran to indiscriminately bomb
civilian infrastructure, in violation of resolution 2231
(2015). The General Assembly has unequivocally and
overwhelmingly condemned those violations of our
Charter. In particular, it has demanded that Russia end
its aggression without delay and withdraw its troops.
If Russia really wants to defend multilateralism,
it must actually respect international rules and
international law and it must stop violating the Charter.
If Russia truly wants to defend multilateralism, it
must end its war of aggression, which has serious
consequences for Ukraine and the whole world. If
Russia truly wants to defend multilateralism, it must
immediately withdraw its troops from Ukrainian
territory. If Russia truly wants to defend multilateralism,
it must commit in good faith to the quest for peace. If
Russia truly wants to defend multilateralism, it must
respect the decisions of international courts, including
the International Court of Justice, which has been clear
on the issue since 16 March 2022.

23-1147621/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

Considering the scale of the challenges of our
century, whether on the security, health, environmental
or technological fronts, only collective responses can
be effective. We must restore stability and overcome
crises such as the tragedy unfolding in the Sudan by
defending an ambitious multilateralism that protects
the interests of our nations and peoples, as well as
the common good of humankind. Only through strict
adherence to the principles of international law and
enhanced cooperation can we collectively maintain
international peace and security. The law of might
makes right protects no one.
We support international institutions and their
reforms aimed at adapting global governance to today’s
challenges. That is the reason for reforming the Security
Council, whose enlargement France supports. In
addition, together with Mexico, we have put forward an
initiative for the five permanent members to collectively
and voluntarily suspend the use of the veto when mass
atrocities are at issue. We call on all Member States to
endorse that initiative, which is already supported by
106 countries.
France shares the Secretary-General’s views on the
future of our planet and populations. We contributed to
the adoption of the New Agenda for Peace and are fully
committed to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. We remain committed to global health, education,
combating food insecurity and climate change and the
protection of biodiversity on land and at sea. Together
with Costa Rica, we will host the United Nations Ocean
Conference in 2025. In June we will also host a summit
in Paris that should enable us to conclude a new global
financial pact in a context where Russia’s aggression
in Ukraine has seriously exacerbated the situation in
countries that are most vulnerable to the food crisis.
France promotes and supports ambitious action
for gender equality, including through the Council’s
women and peace and security agenda. We support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and fully back
his recommendations for Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), which calls for an inclusive and effective
multilateralism to better respond to humankind’s most
urgent challenges. Let us continue to demand respect
for our common rules. Let us continue to take action
for international peace and security. Let us continue
to support and promote initiatives that truly benefit
international solidarity and international law.
22/33

24/04/2023

Ms. Gatt (Malta): I too thank the Secretary-General
for sharing his thoughts and insights with us today.
Over the years, multilateral institutions, with the
United Nations at their heart, have promoted cooperation
and brought prosperity and stability. To ensure that our
institutions continue to serve us well, we must recommit
to a revitalized multilateral system and uphold the
fundamental principles underpinning them, especially at
a time when they are being undermined. We need it to
help us address the unprecedented global challenges we
are facing.
Enhanced
cooperation
among
multilateral
organizations at the international and regional levels,
with the United Nations at the core of that work, is
especially important in the areas of peace and security
and sustainable development. Malta is a strong advocate
for the integrity, independence and functionality of the
human rights mechanisms of the United Nations. Human
rights are universal and indivisible. A transformational
shift in global governance to respond to growing
inequalities is also needed. Building equality through
multilateralism requires the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women to promote gender-transformative
actions and agreements.
I would like to make some observations on the
concept note (see S/2023/244) circulated ahead of
today’s meeting.
First, it is important to highlight that since the creation
of our Organization, the world has been widely guided
by the Charter of the United Nations and its fundamental
principles, among which we find the principle of the
sovereign equality of States. It is also worth highlighting
that according to the 1970 United Nations Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, there is no
conflict between the principles of international law
because they are interrelated, and each principle should
be construed in the context of the other principles. In
that context, we can never accept the results of last year’s
illegal referendums engineered by Russia as a pretext
for the further violation of Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Neither can we
recognize the so-called republics emerging from Russia’s
illegitimate acts towards Ukraine and their “striving for
independence or ‘strategic autonomy’”, as indicated
in the concept note. On the contrary, such actions
contribute to the unravelling of the rules-based order.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, it is deeply worrisome that the Russian
Federation, a permanent member of the Security
Council, blatantly disregarded the Council’s primary
function of maintaining international peace and
security when it launched its aggression against
Ukraine. Nor can we forget that its illegal, unprovoked
and unjustified war has generated one of the worst
refugee crises since the Second World War, along with a
global grain shortage, hundreds of thousands of people
killed or injured, forced deportations of children,
worldwide anxiety about a nuclear disaster and damage
to the Council’s credibility. Today we once again urge
the Russian Federation to stop the war, withdraw its
military forces from the entire territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders and turn
to dialogue and diplomacy as the tools that can bring
stability to the region.
As an elected member of the Security Council,
Malta firmly believes in making use in good faith of
the toolbox for the peaceful settlement of disputes as
outlined in Article 33 of the Charter. In that context,
there is also space for the Security Council to strengthen
its cooperation with the International Court of Justice
and the International Criminal Court. With regard to
reforming the Security Council, Malta is firm in its
belief that the Council should reflect today’s realities
and challenges. If it is to respond to true multilateralism,
we underline that it is also important for the Council to
be more inclusive.
Malta is a strong supporter of the standing mandate
for a General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in
the Council. In the same vein, we also fully support
the political declaration on the suspension of veto
powers launched by France and Mexico, as well as
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group. Finally, Malta unequivocally
supports the Secretary-General’s key proposals in
the report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), as well
as all the current related negotiations on advancing
the work of the Organization and enhancing the
constructive power of multilateralism, together with
the work of the High-level Advisory Board on Effective
Multilateralism, established by the Secretary-General
in March of last year.
In preparation for the 2023 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) Summit, we underscore the
need for the international community to take stock of
the progress it has achieved so far and the gaps that
remain, while engaging in intensive multilateral efforts

S/PV.9308

to bring the implementation of the SDGs back on track.
We also look forward to the September 2024 Summit
of the Future and to advancing ideas for governance
arrangements in areas of global commons.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking Secretary-General
António Guterres for his statement.
I would also like to underscore the importance
of the topic we are discussing, which complements
the debate organized by India in December 2022 on
a new orientation for a reformed multilateralism (see
S/PV.9220), the meeting organized by China in May 2021
on upholding multilateralism and the United Nationscentred international system (see S/2021/456) and even
the debate organized by Viet Nam in January 2020 on
upholding the Charter of the United Nations in order to
maintain international peace and security (S/PV.8699).
In other words, year after year, this Chamber has borne
witness to States agreeing on the need for effective
multilateralism in order to better defend the Charter.
The problem is that, instead of decreasing, since January
2020 the number of conflicts has increased, despite the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. If we
are to talk about multilateralism, it is time to transform
words into action and speeches into deeds. After the
tragic experiences that led humankind into two world
wars, we enshrined multilateralism through the same
Charter of the United Nations that we defend today.
Never again would it be permissible for any nation,
no matter how powerful, to jeopardize the peace and
security of another nation, or of the world at large,
simply because it suited its interests or ambitions.
The obligation and principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes is central, as recalled by
the Security Council in presidential statement
S/PRST/2022/3, of 6 May 2022, which was issued in
connection with its consideration of the item entitled
“Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine”. In just
two weeks’ time, it will be the first anniversary of that
statement, which has yet to be implemented. Another
central principle of the Charter, which is sacred for
States, is the inviolability of territorial integrity. In
that sense, the debate that brings us together today will
have been useless if at the end of it there is not one
fewer conflict, one fewer war or one fewer invasion.
What better outcome could today’s debate have than the
determination of your country, Mr. President, to end the
military aggression against Ukraine, as ordered by the
International Court of Justice on 16 March 2022? What

23-1147623/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

better legacy could your presidency have, Mr. President,
than your Government choosing to return to the path of
peace and withdrawing its occupying troops?
None of the pretexts invoked for attacking Ukraine
in violation of the Charter have any legal basis
whatsoever. We have been told in this Chamber, for
example, that the invasion of Ukraine is a response to
an alleged phobia of Russian culture. We have been told
that the invasion is in response to an alleged plot by
the West to weaken the President’s country. We are told
that Russia is acting in self-defence against Ukraine’s
anti-Russian policies towards certain inhabitants. As I
just said, none of those arguments has any basis in the
Charter of the United Nations. The Charter, we must
remember, is one, indivisible and universal. There is
not one Charter for the West, one for the East, one
for the North and one for the South. There is not one
United Nations Charter for Muslims, one for Christians
and one for Jews. Neither can there be one Charter
for Africa, one for Europe and one for America, and
so on. No — the Charter is, I repeat, one, indivisible
and universal. We cannot fail to recognize Russia’s
enormous contribution, including that of the great
exponents of its culture, such as Tolstoy, Dostoevsky,
Pushkin and Pasternak. Neither can we imagine for one
minute that they would agree with the death and pain
that this absurd war has brought to millions of people.
The concept note for this debate (see S/2023/244)
raises the question of how the United Nations can
contribute to a smooth transition to a just and equitable
world order. Rest assured that war and violence
will in no way lead to an order that is more just and
equitable, but one that is less so. Global military
spending exceeded $2 trillion in 2022, single-handedly
undermining the core objectives of multilateralism
and of this Organization, namely, peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights. Worse
still, nuclear weapons have no place in a law-based
international order and challenge the very existence
of humankind. We cannot therefore speak of effective
multilateralism unless we move towards effective arms
control and disarmament. Even Article 26 of the Charter
refers to the least possible diversion of the world’s
human and economic resources into armaments. Let
us silence the guns and honour the promise of peace
we made in San Francisco, as well as our commitment
to live together as good neighbours. What greater
enemy of multilateralism is there than treating the
world like a round of Risk or some such board game?
24/33

24/04/2023

That was the way in which the colonial Powers of the
nineteenth century and the fascist and Nazi regimes
of the twentieth century understood the world as they
invaded and annexed other nations and subjugated
them by force, sometimes by resorting to shameful
referendums to give the appearance of legality. Such
practices are not only incompatible with the Charter of
the United Nations but ethically intolerable.
Ecuador cannot remain silent in this situation and
is committed to supporting the reform of the Security
Council and the establishment of a New Agenda
for Peace. But make no mistake: any institutional
framework, however modern it may be, and any
planning tool, however strategic and up-to-date it may
be, will be reduced to empty gestures if they are not
accompanied by a change in behaviour on the part of
States. In that regard, the permanent members of the
Council have an obligation to exercise responsible
leadership that understands and respects the principle of
res communis omnium, whereby our common heritage
cannot be appropriated by one entity since it is for the
shared use of all States in the international community.
As former Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali put it, only
one power is left that can impose order on incipient
chaos: it is the power of the principles that transcend
the changing perceptions of expediency.
In conclusion, I must recall that multilateralism
is not an end but a means upon which the women and
girls in Haiti, Colombia, Yemen, Afghanistan, Syria,
the Sudan and Somalia, all of us and all of our nations
depend. Let us defend the Charter of the United Nations
by practising restraint and tolerance and maintaining
and consolidating peace. As the Secretary-General
reminds us in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), peace
is a global public good that we must protect and manage.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me start by thanking the
Secretary-General for his remarks and paying tribute
to his tireless efforts, as well as to his clear, strong
and always principled position in favour of peace and
security, multilateralism and respect for the Charter of
the United Nations.
Four hundred years ago, François de La
Rochefoucauld said: “Hypocrisy is the tribute that
vice pays to virtue”. Fast forward to this meeting and
the flagrant contradiction in which we find ourselves
today. A permanent member of the Security Council
has openly and defiantly disregarded the Charter of the
United Nations. That very country has knowingly and
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

willingly transgressed every rule commonly established
with regard to relations among States. It has ignored
Security Council resolutions and its own international
commitments, and yet it has chosen to lecture the world
about multilateralism, as we heard today.
I could go on with generalities or repeat many
important issues mentioned by colleagues around the
table, but I prefer to recall the simplest facts. Russia
is waging an unjust, unjustifiable and illegal war of
aggression against a sovereign nation. It is questioning
that nation’s right to exist and has the audacity to
pretend to come to the rescue of sovereign equality.
The Russian military and the Wagner Group are
committing horrible crimes in Ukraine, as documented
by the United Nations, while Russia pretends to defend
universal values. Russian missiles are destroying
residential areas, killing civilians and flattening schools,
health facilities and other civilian infrastructure to
force an entire country into submission. And Russia
has come here to share its views about friendly
relations and cooperation among States. If it were not
for the thousands of innocent victims, the millions
forcibly displaced, the countless children stripped
of their dreams and deprived of their childhood, the
immense pain of the tortured, the women raped and the
families torn apart, it would be a parody — something
that Monty Python might have entitled Preserving the
United Nations Charter, Russian-style: shred it and
store it six feet under. Unfortunately, this is not a parody,
and we cannot laugh. What has happened in Ukraine is
a tragedy — a human-made catastrophe with serious
security repercussions in Europe and detrimental ripple
effects around the world. It represents the opposite of
everything we stand for and everything that brings
us together here. No peace-loving nation will buy an
artificial parallel reality engineered to transform an
aggressor into a defender of the Charter, an arsonist
into a firefighter or a warmonger into a peacemaker.
That is the real issue, and it is what we think we should
be talking about, especially today.
The ongoing war in Ukraine and the current
global reality are putting in question the fundamental
question of multilateralism, its future and our ability
to defend it. Almost eight decades have clearly shown
that multilateralism has continued to be indispensable
to promoting peace and stability, upholding the rule of
law and promoting and protecting human rights. Today
we need multilateralism more than ever, because we
know that global challenges require global solutions

S/PV.9308

and that we can achieve more by working together
rather than by pursuing our interests individually. No
one country, regardless of its size or wealth, will be able
to deal successfully with climate change, transnational
terrorism or future pandemics. That requires a genuine
commitment to international cooperation, diplomacy
and compromise and the firm recognition that no
country can achieve its goals at others’ expense. That
requires defending and standing by what we have
agreed, respecting international commitments and
condemning those who abuse and deform their spirit in
the guise of defending it.
The United Nations needs reform in order to
strengthen it and make it more efficient and more
effective, not to undo it. We do not want a world fuelled
by resuscitated imperial appetites, a world fragmented
by new rivalries rather than one united in purpose. The
number of poles will be meaningless and ridiculous if
we fail to address the fundamental challenges posed by
climate change and environmental deterioration. The
General Assembly has affirmed many times that it will
not accept a future where might dictates right and that
it will not be trolled by cynical semantics whereby an
aggression is labelled a “special operation” and crimes
are disguised as “special care”. Yes, let us call a spade
a spade, since hypocrisy is nothing more than the
audacity to preach integrity through depravity.
And unfortunately there was a ton of it from
Russia today, in a toxic mixture of everything that
fits its propaganda. In particular, it has become a
Russian obsession to refer to the Republic of Kosovo,
a country recognized as such by more than half of the
United Nations membership, in justifying its unlawful
actions in Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine since
2014 — which, as we all know, are still going on at
this moment. The International Court of Justice has
ruled that Kosovo’s independence is in accordance with
international law. The Court has also asked Russia to
stop its war. And there is nothing that sounds hollower
than the desperate effort to justify the unjustifiable
and the attempt to hide behind the unacceptable. As
we know, you cannot hide the sun with your finger,
and once again today we heard nothing on the key
issue — under which article of the Charter has Russia
attacked its neighbour and annexed parts of its territory
by force?
If we want to maintain the United Nations as the
cornerstone of the multilateral world, we need to show
respect for one another, not contempt. We need to show

23-1147625/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

24/04/2023

solidarity, not threats. We need to choose diplomacy and
foster dialogue, not wage war. We need to work together
to abide by our commitments. And we need justice
through accountability for the crimes committed so
that the perpetrators can be held to account. In today’s
terms of urgency, that means that Russia must end its
war, withdraw its troops from Ukraine and respect the
latter’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.

equitable international order that respects the sovereign
equality of States for the benefit of present and future
generations. We must promote a culture of peace that
ensures the security and welfare of our nations. The
role of the General Assembly must be revitalized
and strengthened to enable it to do its work without
interference from the Security Council. And we must
reform the Council and make it a more transparent,
inclusive, democratic and representative organ.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.

Multilateralism and full respect for the purposes
and principles of the Charter and international law
represent a path to guaranteeing peaceful coexistence,
maintaining international peace and security and
finding lasting solutions to systemic problems. The
implementation of unilateral coercive measures and the
establishment of spurious and arbitrary lists, such as
those made up of States allegedly sponsoring terrorism
in contravention of international law, must cease
immediately. The world needs solidarity, cooperation
and mutual respect, not blockades and sanctions. Cuba
will steadfastly and consistently continue to defend the
Charter and international law and uphold the provisions
of the Declaration proclaiming Latin America and the
Caribbean as a Zone of Peace. In strictly adhering
to those principles, we reaffirm our commitment to
multilateralism and the preservation of international
peace and security.

Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statements to be delivered
by the representatives of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and Venezuela,
on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the
Charter of the United Nations. We welcome Minister
for Foreign Affairs Sergey Lavrov and Deputy Foreign
Minister for Foreign Affairs Sergey Ryabkov presiding
over the Security Council today. We are grateful for the
convening of this open debate as we commemorate the
International Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy for
Peace, an initiative proposed in the General Assembly
by our brother Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela during
its chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement from
2016 to 2019.
In the current complex situation, dogged by
escalating tensions and new forms of domination
and hegemony, threats to international peace and
security are growing and multilateralism is gradually
weakening. The multidimensional global crisis, which
has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, is having a greater impact on the countries
of the South as a result of the unjust and unsustainable
prevailing international order. Inequalities, social
exclusion and poverty have deepened. Conflicts are
proliferating, unconventional wars are increasing in
number and the arms race is accelerating out of control.
Attempts are being made to reimpose a unipolar order
by disregarding international treaties and increasing
unilateral coercive measures, together with other
frequent violations of the Charter and international law,
undermining peaceful coexistence among nations. In
the face of that grim reality, we reaffirm the importance
of combining our efforts to strengthen multilateralism,
international cooperation and solidarity in order to
overcome out shared challenges. We must urgently and
meaningfully transform the United Nations, which will
enable us to advance towards a democratic, just and
26/33

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): The convening of today’s debate on effective
multilateralism is timely, provided that we approach it
in a comprehensive manner. In this regard, we thank
the Secretary-General for his accurate diagnosis.
Mexico believes that multilateralism is important
in addressing the common problems of humanity, but
for it to be effective, it is essential that States respect
and fulfil their obligations in full compliance with
the rule of law. Only in this way will it be possible to
deploy the multilateral mechanisms needed to prevent
the weakening of the international order or to restore
it when it has been broken. In this regard, the current
challenges that call into question the effectiveness of
multilateralism are enormous. The constant violations
of the Charter of the United Nations, resolutions of the
Security Council and obligations derived from treaties
and political commitments put international peace and
security at risk in a highly volatile dynamic.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

As for violations of the Charter, the invasion of
a sovereign country by another represents a flagrant
violation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
and constitutes an act of aggression under the terms
of General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) of
14 December 1974. On the other hand, we also reiterate
our concern over the frequent invocations of legitimate
self-defence against non-State actors, which could be
an abuse of Article 51 of the Charter.
We are faced with breaches of the system of collective
security on which the United Nations and much of the
world order is based. The frequent non-compliance with
decisions of the Security Council without any major
consequences undermines the Council’s authority and
credibility in the eyes of the international community
and the peoples of the United Nations.
With regard to non-compliance with international
treaties, we will mention only one example, but it is
one that has historically been of the greatest concern to
Mexico. More than 50 years after the entry into force of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the commitments made by the nuclear-weapon States
under Article VI are still far from being fulfilled. The
same is true of some political commitments. In the
area of small arms and light weapons, for example, a
matter of great interest to many countries, including
my own, it is regrettable that effective measures to
prevent, combat and eliminate illicit trafficking in
these weapons have yet to be adopted. Even some of the
major arms-producing countries allow or tolerate their
proliferation and diversion, which is a major accelerator
of conflicts around the world.
Effective multilateralism should therefore take
measures to contain and reverse such situations.
Unfortunately, this is difficult to achieve, especially in
matters of international peace and security, when the
Security Council is paralysed by the veto that only a few
may exercise. Those with the veto power are able to halt
the action of the international community as a whole.
Multilateral judicial bodies remain limited in scope.
It is therefore necessary to achieve the universality
of the Rome Statute, which created the International
Criminal Court, as well as to advance in the acceptance
of the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.
But reality shows us another side to the situation: after
almost 80 years, fewer than half of the States Members
of the United Nations accept the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice.

S/PV.9308

In short, discussions such as the ones we are having
today are necessary and timely. But the challenges
facing multilateralism go well beyond the limitations
of the United Nations. As has already been said many
times today, if we truly want to move towards a more
effective multilateralism, preventive diplomacy and
mediation must be real options, as should the ineluctable
reform of the Security Council. For this reason, Mexico
has submitted a proposal for a comprehensive reform
of the Security Council so as to give impetus to the
negotiations under way in the General Assembly.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
acknowledge the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for convening this important and timely open
debate, and we thank Mr. Lavrov and the SecretaryGeneral for their insightful views and briefings
reaffirming the significance of multilateralism.
Multilateralism has been recognized as a wellestablished approach to addressing global challenges.
Effective multilateralism, operating within the
framework of the United Nations Charter, is essential
for ensuring international peace and security.
Achieving this requires a strong commitment to
upholding international law, promoting transparency
and accountability, and adhering to the principles
outlined in the United Nations Charter.
The United Nations Charter established a
comprehensive framework of principles and norms that
Member States must adhere to in their relations with
one another. These principles include the peaceful
resolution of disputes, respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, non-interference in internal affairs,
the prohibition of the use of force and the promotion of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. By abiding
by these principles, Member States can promote a
stable and secure international legal order that benefits
all nations and peoples.
In the meantime, multilateralism must ensure the
active participation of all nations, regardless of their
size, wealth or political orientation. The exclusion of
any country undermines the principle of inclusiveness

23-1147627/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

and may result in biased outcomes. All countries,
especially those directly affected by decisions made
through multilateral mechanisms, should have an equal
opportunity to participate, contribute and be heard in
decision-making processes.
The integrity and effectiveness of multilateralism
are undermined by the abuse of the United Nations
system and selective application of international law,
as well as the use of unilateralism, which poses a
serious threat to international cooperation, peace and
security. Unilateral coercive measures, including their
extraterritorial application, represent a concerning
example of harmful unilateral acts that run counter
to the fundamental principles of international law,
the United Nations Charter and basic human rights.
These illegal measures have far-reaching humanitarian
consequences and can undermine diplomatic affairs
aimed at resolving disputes and promoting cooperation.
Within this context, the unilateral withdrawal
by the United States from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, together with the imposition of illegal
unilateral sanctions on Iran, and its coercion of other
countries to engage in these illegal actions in defiance
of the International Court of Justice order are striking
examples of how such harmful unilateral acts violate the
United Nations Charter, undermine the United Nations
systems and threaten multilateralism.
In its recent judgment, on 30 March 2023, in the
case concerning Certain Iranian Assets (Islamic
Republic of Iran v. United States of America), the
International Court of Justice declared that the United
States has violated its international obligations to the
Iranian people by imposing unilateral sanctions that
are deemed illegal under their international law. The
International Court of Justice’s ruling is final and
binding, requiring the United States to comply with
its decision.
In conclusion, collaboration, rather than
confrontation, should be the cornerstone of
multilateralism. Collaborative approaches foster trust,
build consensus and promote sustainable solutions to
global challenges. Through collaborative problemsolving and engagement with all parties, multilateralism
can effectively address the challenges facing our
world today. In this context, diplomacy, dialogue and
negotiation should be the preferred means for resolving
disputes among Member States.
28/33

24/04/2023

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov,
on Russia’s presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April, and we commend you for choosing
this important topic for today’s meeting. It is a topic
to which Egypt attaches special importance, especially
in the light of the complexities our world has been
encountering, with multiple difficulties and challenges
that require promoting cooperation within the
international multilateral system. That would ensure
its effectiveness and ability to address the challenges
that affect developing countries, in particular
African countries.
As we are talking today about strengthening
multilateral action and restoring the effectiveness of
the international system, as reflected in the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, we must
first recall the history of the system and the objectives
of the Charter that established it. The signing of the
Charter, in 1945, represented a watershed moment in the
history of humankind, during which the international
community made a conscious decision to establish
international relations on the basis of cooperation
and consensus, upholding the values of justice, peace
and coexistence and achieving an effective system for
collective security, while acknowledging the principle
of equality among all States in terms of sovereignty and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
Egypt has always been a major supporter of the
multilateral international system and an influential
factor in its stability. It was among the first countries
to sign the Charter and played a pioneering role in
the establishment of other international and regional
organizations, in particular the Organization of African
Unity, the League of Arab States and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, in addition to establishing
effective groupings and alliances within international
forums such as the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Group of 77 and China. More than
75 years after the establishment of the United Nations,
we have observed a number of practices that have
infiltrated the multilateral international system and
threaten the values on which it was founded. Allow me
to mention some of what we see from those practices
that represent reasons for concern about the future of
the multilateral system.
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, there has been a remarkable retreat from
the basic principles on which the United Nations was
founded, and there have also been attempts to violate
the principle of the sovereignty of States, as well as
a constant endeavour to interfere in their internal
affairs under various pretexts that differ according to
the circumstances.
Secondly, we have seen some major Powers
monopolize
decision-making
and
international
policymaking in dealing with specific cases, especially
in Africa, without understanding the nature of the
matters on the ground, without adequate consultation
with the countries of the continent or coordination
with their regional mechanisms, and with disregard for
the developments that have occurred on the African
continent over the past seven decades.
Thirdly, many countries have adopted double
standards in their dealings with the draft resolutions
submitted to the United Nations, as they determine their
voting patterns not according to objective considerations
and their consistency with the Charter but rather
according to the parties involved in each issue and the
nature of their political and strategic relations and their
existing ties with each of them.
Fourthly, we have seen continuous attempts by
a number of States to politicize international forums
of a technical nature, which undermines the ability
of those forums to act and weakens the ability of
countries to achieve consensus, disrupting important
aspects of international multilateral action, such as
international trade, development efforts and confronting
climate change.
Fifthly, we have seen continuous attempts by some
States to downplay the main leadership role of all States
and their contribution to multilateral international action
on various issues by attributing greater importance to the
actions of non-State actors, which is a very dangerous
development. While we acknowledge the role of civil
society and other non-State actors, their role must remain
supportive of States and complement their efforts, and they
must not act as a substitute for, or in opposition to, them.
Egypt believes that a comprehensive reform of the
international multilateral system needs to be based on
the following.
First, all States need to believe in peaceful
coexistence based on justice, equality and the principles
of the Charter. That constitutes the international

S/PV.9308

consensus that establishes the current international
system, while developing those principles to address the
ongoing challenges facing humankind.
Secondly, immediate action must be taken to
reform the global economic governance system, at the
heart of which are the Bretton Woods institutions and
other international financial organizations. We need
that reform in order to enable developing countries to
face global challenges such as climate change and food
security, in line with the initiative submitted by Egypt
with the support of world leaders to the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change at its twenty-seventh session, held
in Sharm El-Sheikh last year, and on the basis of the
need to reform the multilateral trade system.
Thirdly, we need to reconsider the collective
security system represented by the Security Council,
which no longer reflects the current international reality
after decades of complex international practice. In
that regard, Egypt supports the ongoing governmental
negotiations to reform the Security Council and calls
on all countries to adopt the comprehensive vision
presented by Africa, based on the Ezulwini Consensus
and the Sirte Declaration, in a way that corrects the
historical injustice against African countries and
contributes to making the Security Council more just
and representative for developing countries. In addition,
there is a need to work with regional mechanisms
and organizations.
Egypt has been actively engaging in current
dialogues on the future of the international system and
its repositioning in a changing world and follows with
interest the valuable ideas and proposals put forward
by the Secretary-General in policy papers and in
preparation for the Summit of the Future, to be held
next year, based on his report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982). We look forward to contributing to a new
agenda for peace through effective partnership with
regional organizations. That is a window of opportunity
that should not be wasted, and we will work on building
international consensus in that regard during the
upcoming year.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, Mr. President,
it is a profound pleasure for me personally to see
you preside over the Security Council today, and my
delegation thanks you and the Russian presidency

23-1147629/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

for organizing this important debate on international
security and effective multilateralism. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his important briefing.
Today international peace and security is
confronted by multiple threats arising from violations
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
great-Power rivalries, a renewed global arms race,
the proliferation of conflicts and disputes and the
spread of terrorism, hate and Islamophobia, as well as
organized crime, rising poverty and growing climate
impacts. We believe that those multidimensional
and global challenges can be overcome only through
multilateral cooperation.
We reject a unipolar, bipolar or even a so-called
multipolar world if it is dominated by a few large and
powerful States. Such an order would be contrary to
the principle of the sovereign equality of States. We
seek effective multilateralism — a multilateral order
constructed on the basis of the purposes and principles
of the Charter, one in which every Member State has an
equal voice and an equal stake.
At the same time, we must express our concern about
some new concepts advanced in some of our discussions
within the United Nations, such as “multi-stakeholder”
and “networked” multilateralism. Those concepts,
too, are contrary to the United Nations Charter, which
envisages an international system composed of equal
and sovereign Member States. Effective multilateralism
can address the current and emerging threats to
international peace and security. A critical part of that
endeavour must be to promote universal and consistent
respect for the fundamental principles of the Charter by
all States, irrespective of their size, power or influence.
To that end, the Secretary-General should prepare an
annual review of situations on the Security Council’s
agenda, outlining where the Charter’s principles and the
resolutions of the Council are being violated or remain
unimplemented. The Council must take bold decisions
to secure the compliance of States with the Charter’s
principles and its own resolutions and decisions. The
Council has various means available to it under the
Charter to secure such compliance.
The Secretary-General has rightly mentioned
decolonization as a major achievement of the
United Nations. Yet a prime illustration of derogation
from the Charter and Security Council resolutions is
the situation in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir,
where the Kashmiri people’s exercise of their right to
30/33

24/04/2023

self-determination, prescribed by the Security Council,
has been subverted and suppressed by India over seven
decades of force and fraud. Another is the situation in
occupied Palestine. Protestations of commitment to
the Charter ring hollow when no action is being taken
to redress those blatant violations of the Charter and
the resolutions of the Security Council on two issues
that have remained on the Council’s agenda for the past
75 years.
Secondly, if the world is to avoid global catastrophe,
it is now essential to redress the rising tensions between
the major military Powers. We hope that a sincere effort
will be made to end the war in Ukraine based on the
Charter and international agreements. We hope that
tensions will not be further provoked in Asia. We are
concerned about the expansion of military alliances and
the escalation of military expenditures and capabilities.
Such developments also threaten peace and stability in
South Asia and the Indian Ocean.
The Summit of the Future next year should reaffirm
the solemn commitment, especially by the militarily
significant States, to refraining from the use or threat
of use of force, respecting the principles of the Charter,
implementing Security Council resolutions, restraining
military expenditures and provocative deployments
and eschewing military blocs and alliances. Rising
global tensions have undermined the entire edifice of
arms control and disarmament. An uncontrolled arms
race, which now encompasses several new weapons
and arenas of competition, will sooner or later lead
to a disastrous conflict involving States armed to the
teeth with conventional and nuclear weapons. The
United Nations can and should take the lead in reviving
the process of arms control and disarmament, based on
the consensus achieved in 1978 at the General Assembly’s
first special session devoted to disarmament, whose
central principles were equal security for all States,
ensuring national security at the lowest possible level
of armaments and the preservation of military balance
and mutual restraint at the global and regional levels.
We must also outlaw dangerous military doctrines,
especially the presumption that conventional wars can
be fought between nuclear-armed States without fear of
nuclear escalation.
The Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General can do much more to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes through the multiple
modalities available under Chapters VI, VII and VIII
of the Charter. The New Agenda for Peace, mentioned
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

by the Secretary-General, should also address the
fundamental causes of conflict, including poverty and
hunger, foreign occupation and oppression, injustice,
human rights violations and environmental and
climate impacts.
Finally, effective multilateralism can be built only on
the foundations of strong international institutions. The
Security Council should be enlarged and become more
representative, accountable, democratic, transparent
and effective. It should not become an enlarged club
of the large and powerful States. However, a reformed
Security Council in itself offers no panacea for ensuring
effective multilateralism. It must be accompanied by
making full use of the considerable potential of the
General Assembly, the activation of the United Nations
disarmament machinery and, most critically, the
reform and democratization of the Bretton Woods
institutions. Effective multilateralism, in short, must
be comprehensive, inclusive and equitable. Pakistan
will work assiduously to promote such effective
multilateralism, including in the preparations for the
Summit of the Future next year.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate on multilateralism. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
President Ferdinand R. Marcos, Jr., recently stated
that
“amid challenging global tides, an important ballast
is the stabilization of our common vessel, that is, our
open, inclusive and rules-based international order,
governed by international law and informed by the
principles of equity and justice” (A/77/ PV.5, p.3).
With that in mind, and as a proud founding Member
of the United Nations, the Philippines reaffirms its
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations, its
principles and firm adherence to the rule of law among
nations. We reject any attempt to deny or redefine
our common understanding of those principles.
The landmark 1970 Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States represents our common
understanding of those principles. In multilateralism,
international law is a great equalizer.

S/PV.9308

For its part, the Philippines has made every possible
effort to reinforce the predictability and stability of
international law in addressing challenges to peace
and security. International law provides a strong basis
for dialogue and consensus in addressing differences.
With the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, we provided an example of how States
should resolve their differences — through reason and
through right. Resorting to the peaceful settlement of
international disputes through arbitration and credible
and competent international tribunals plays a key role
in the interpretation of international norms and should
not be seen as an unfriendly act among civilized nations.
Defending the Charter means adherence to
its fundamental principles and compliance with
international tribunals, as well as active engagement
with United Nations processes, including through the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations,
to ensure constructive outcomes. I would like to take
this opportunity to highlight the Manila Declaration,
which reaffirms fundamental principles of the Charter,
including the obligation of all States to settle their
international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that justice and international peace and security
are not endangered. As an initiative of non-aligned
countries, the Manila Declaration remains as relevant as
ever as we confront complex interrelated challenges to
the rule of law and the Charter, including in the context
of the New Agenda for Peace.
Fundamental to an effective multilateralism is an
inclusive, transparent, reformed and representative
Security Council. A reformed Council should be able to
respond decisively and swiftly to twenty-first-century
challenges and threats to international peace and
security. It should highlight improved working methods
aimed at ensuring greater participation by non-members.
It should also involve an enhanced mechanism for
consultations between the Security Council and regional
groups and subgroups.
I would like to conclude by underscoring that for
the Philippines, a people-centred multilateralism will
thrive as a unifier and a platform for the inclusion
and empowerment of nations and their citizens.
People-centred multilateralism must be a constant, even
as we continue to face global challenges amid geopolitical
tensions and strategic competition. Multilateralism will
be effective if we adhere to the principles that we deeply
cherish — non-aggression, non-interference, peaceful
coexistence, respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and equality and mutual benefit.

23-1147631/33

S/PV.9308

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, who is presiding over this meeting.
I also thank the Russian Federation for holding this
important meeting, which is timely and substantive.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan, on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
and by the representative of Venezuela, on behalf of
the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Since its inception nearly 80 years ago, the
United Nations system has been the principal face
of multilateralism at the international level. The
United Nations has directly contributed to the
peaceful settlement of conflicts, decolonization,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, promoting efforts for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
counter-terrorism. The Charter of the United Nations
is clearly organized and includes specific benchmarks
with regard to the work of its principal organs, including
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
other organs established by the Charter. The Charter
also includes a number of provisions that regulate
the mechanisms and mandates of all the organs that
it creates. There is therefore a need for those organs,
in discharging their mandates and activities, to abide
by those provisions without departing from their
mandates or encroaching on those of other organs. Any
disruption or competition among those organs should
also be avoided, whether at the decision-making level
or at the level of the management of international crises
and conflicts.
The mechanisms and working methods of the
United Nations have significantly affected the
development of friendly relations among Member States,
which have also been influenced by the increasing
number of challenges imposed by the changing reality
of international relations. That calls for continuous
and comprehensive reviews of those mechanisms
and working methods in terms of their substance and
procedures. The fundamental approach to promoting
the work of the United Nations is based on true pluralism
by enhancing the values of peace, resolving conflicts
peacefully and establishing sovereign equality among
32/33

24/04/2023

all Member States, as well as by enhancing development,
economic cooperation and shared benefits. To achieve
that objective, all Member States should abide by the
founding principles of the United Nations system as
reflected in its Charter, in addition to the provisions
of international law and the established norms of
international relations. Meanwhile, we must avoid
using new terminology and concepts, such as the socalled “rules-based international system”, to evade the
established provisions and principles of international
law. Such terminology and concepts have never gained
consensus among Member States.
The development and improvement of the work of
the principal organs of the United Nations require more
objectivity and informed planning in order to manage
the discussions they conduct and address the items on
their agenda. In recent years, the General Assembly has
witnessed a remarkable increase in the number of items
on its agenda, and there has been an unprecedented
increase in the number of non-consensual resolutions
adopted, while in many cases they are required to be put
to a vote despite the substantial differences prevailing
with regard to their substance and procedural content.
The Security Council has also witnessed severe
political polarization, especially on the part of a number
of its permanent members, in the form of reframing
from addressing important issues and priorities in an
endeavour to divert the Security Council away from
its primary mandate, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security, in order to serve their
own narrow political interests and destructive agendas.
The multilateral system established by the
United Nations has faced many challenges in
addressing a number of political, economic and social
crises during the past two decades. That was clear in
its spectacular failure to prevent the United States
invasion of Iraq in 2003; its inability to put an end to the
tragedy of the Palestinian people, who have languished
under the yoke of the Israeli occupation for decades;
its inability to address the increasing terrorist threats
and the outbreaks of pandemics and diseases; and the
worsening humanitarian suffering due to poverty,
hunger, thirst and lack of health care. Preserving
genuine multilateralism will require reforming the
current structures, above all expanding the Security
Council to be truly representative of the new reality
in international relations and reforming financial
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank in order to address the interests
23-11476

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

of developing countries, especially the countries of the
South. That will also require actively addressing any
attempts to manipulate the provisions of the Charter and
misinterpret them to justify interfering in the internal
affairs of Member States or to fuel bloody conflicts
and stoke chaos and terrorism, thereby increasing
peoples’ suffering and depriving them of opportunities
for development.
During the past decade, my country, Syria, has
been a victim of the loss of genuine multilateralism
and the exploitation by a number of countries of the
United Nations as a platform to serve their hostile and
interfering policies in intervening in the affairs of
Syria. Syria was left alone to face the threats of the
most intractable and cruel terrorist groups. Its national
resources and wealth were pillaged by foreign forces
illegally present in its territories, not to mention the
worsening humanitarian suffering of its people due
to the unilateral compulsory measures imposed by
the United States and the European Union, which
are totally illegal, inhumane and immoral and have

S/PV.9308

adversely affected all aspects of daily life and given
rise to significant numbers of displaced persons and
refugees, thereby constituting grave violations of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that today we
need more than ever to review the methods of work of the
United Nations system and guarantee the promotion of
true multilateralism based on the Charter, by upholding
its purposes and principles and achieving the objectives
that the founding fathers of the United Nations aspired
to, and by upholding and promoting the efficiency and
efficacy of its work in order to uphold its credibility at
the international level.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are still
a number of speakers on the list for this meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, I intend to suspend this
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

23-1147633/33
