UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
THIRTY-NINTH

COUNCIL
YEAR

MEETING:

B

6 SEPTEMBER

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2556). . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . , . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . , . , . . . , . , . . . . . . . * . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . , . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16713). . . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

S1PV.2556

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
>_.’
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2556th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 6 September 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Elleck Kufakunesu
(Zimbabwe).

Mr. Al-MosJir (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Noman
(Yemen) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council Chamber.

MASHINGAIDZE

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

3. I shall now make a statement
representative of ZIMBABWE.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16713)

in my capacity

as

4. I have already paid a richly deserved tribute to
Ambassador Bassole of the Republic of Burkina Faso
for the most exemplary manner in which he presided
over the business of the Council during August. He
certainly acquitted himself as an experienced and accomplished diplomat, which is to the credit of his great
country and people.

agenda (SIAgendal2556)

1.

The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/16732, which contains the text
of a draft resolution submitted by Lebanon.

of the agenda

5. Only some three weeks ago, the Council was requested to consider and pronounce itself on a matter
regarding the behaviour of the apartheid regime of
South Africa, which is continuously and flagrantly violating international
law and the most fundamental
norms of human decency. Now the Council is seized of
another equally grave matter concerning Israel’s inhuman practices in southern Lebanon, the western
Bekaa and the Rashaya district, which Israel continues
to occupy illegally, in blatant defiance of the demands
of the Lebanese people and of the Council’s decisions
and resolutions. Many speakers have already observed
that it is not coincidental that Israel is intransigent in
this matter and that it continues to violate international
humanitarian law in ways similar to those characteristic
of the apartheid South African regime, The Tel Aviv
and Pretoria regimes, it has also been pointed out, are
birds of a feather.

was called to order at 4.15 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16713)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [2552nd to
2555th meetings], I invite the representative of Lebanon and the representative of Israel to take places at the
Council table; I invite the representatives of Cuba,
Democratic
Yemen, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Kuwait, Qatar, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. Let me remind members that, on 6 June 1982, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 509 (1982), in
which, inter alia, it demanded that Israel immediately
and unconditionally
withdraw its military forces to the
internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon.
More than two years, however, have gone by without
any sign that Israel intends to comply with that demand.
In fact, Tel Aviv has come up with one pre-condition
and pretext after another in a vain attempt to justify
its continued illegal behaviour. Israel must be reminded
in clear language that there is no justification
under
international
law for any act which in any way threatens
the territorial integrity, unity, freedom and sovereignty

At the invitation of the President. Mr. Fakhourv
(Lebanon) and Mr. Kevin (Israel) took places at the
Colincil table; Mr. Oramas Oliva (Cuba), Mr. AlAs&al (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Damavandi Kamali
(Zslamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassnn
(Kuwait),
Mr. Al-Kawari
(Qatar), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. ElFattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Kirca (Turkey),

1

of another State. The Charter of the United Nations
clearly states, in Article 2, paragraph 4, that

in the Middle East, in our view, as long as the inalienable rights to self-determination, independence and
sovereignty are denied to the Palestinian people, Any
efforts to bring peace and security to that region which
evade or in any way glossover this very important issue
will not succeed.

“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Purposes of the United Nations.”

12. We believe that the essential elementsof ajust and
lasting Middle East settlement, with prospects for
peace and security for all the peoples of the region,
must include, among other things, complete Israeli
withdrawal from all the occupied Arab and Palestinian
lands, followed by the restitution of Arab sovereignty in
these territories and the establishment of an independent and sovereign State of Palestine in Palestine, We
are afraid that the road which Israel is following, with
regard both to southern Lebanon and to the rest of the
region, can only complicate further the already dangerous situation and risk an even bloodier bloody conflict, the effects of which may be impossible to confine
to that region. It is therefore the duty andresponsibility
of the Council, in accordance with the Charter, to take
all possible steps to avert such a prospect. Regarding
Lebanon’s complaint about current Isareli practices in
its territory, the Council should insist on the utmost
respect of Lebanon’s legitimate right of territorial integrity and political sover,eignty, asdemanded by resolutions 508 (1982)and SO9(1982) and in accordance with
the Charter.

7. Concern has been expressed, in the Council and
elsewhere, that Israel’s occupation of one third of the
territory of Lebanon in defiance of international opinion may be part of its grand expansionist design. Those
who have voiced this concern have cited Israeli occupation of the West Bank, the GazaStrip and Syria’s Golan
Heights, which have now been annexed in defiance of
United Nations demands.
8. As if the military occupation of the territory of the
people of southern Lebanon was not a sufftcient humiliation and deprivation, the occupying authorities daily
commit atrocities against those people. The statement
made by the representative of Lebanon to the Council
on 29 August last [2552nd meeting] is indeed a detailed
and well-documented catalogue of Israel’s violations of
the rights of the Lebanese population in the occupied
parts of Lebanon.
9. The intervention of the representative of Israel
[ibid.], on the other hand, reads very much like a classical example of the arrogance of the phenomenon of
military aggression and occupation. The representative
of Israel not only chose to ignore, asofno consequence,
the charges of the violation of the humanitarian principles of the Regulations annexed to The Hague Convention IV respecting the Laws and Customs of War on
Land of 1907’and the Geneva Conventions of 1949,2but
also arrogated to himself and to his country the right to
tell the Government and people of Lebanon how they
should conduct their affairs in the northern part of the
country.

13. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT,
14. Mr. BORG (Malta): At this point of the debate on
the question submitted to the Council by the representative of Lebanon, I should like to direct my statement
to a point of procedure.
15. I should like first, however, to extend to you, Sir,
the congratulations of the delegation of Malta on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We have already experienced the benefits of
your well-known diplomatic skills and abilities, which
do honour to you and to your country, Zimbabwe. We
are therefore sure that with your leadership the work of
the Council is in safe and able hands.

10. Israel’s current practices in southern Lebanon,
and that regime’s continued military occupation of that
territory in defiance of resolutions adopted by the
Council, constitute a systematic violation of the territorial integrity of Lebanon and they threaten its freedom and political sovereignty. The Council must be
gravely concerned about this situation, and should
therefore demand Israel’s immediate compliance with
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982).

16. Allow me also to take this opportunity to pay a
tribute to your predecessor,Mr. Bassole, the representative of Burkina Faso, for the dedicated and fine manner in which he guided the work of the Council during
the month of August.

11. On 29 August, the representative of Israel adduced Israel’s security interests and concerns as justification for the continued illegal military occupation of
a third of Lebanon’s land. We have already rejected
this, however, and we should like to point out that
peace and security for all in that volatile region can
never be achieved by pursuing policies which are aggressive, militaristic and expansionist, nor by avoiding
the real root causeof tension and conflict in that region.
There can never be peace and security for any country

17. In accordance with rule 38 of the provisional rules
of procedure, which states, in particular, that "proposals and draft resolutions may be put to a vote only at
the request of a representative on the Security Council”, the delegation of Malta would like formally to
request that the draft resolution submitted by Lebanon
[S/16732] be put to a vote.
18. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the pro+
sions of rule 38 of the provisional rules of procedure,
2

the representative of Malta has requested that the draft
resolution submitted by Lebanon be put to a vote. If
.I hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

order to achieve this legitimate objective, and generally
in order to produce true opportunities for the stabilization and pacification of Lebanon, it is essential that all
foreign presence in the territory be removed. Secondly,
and consequently, we reaffirm our support for strict
compliance with the provisions of the relevant Council resolutions, particularly 508 (1982) and 509 (1982).
Thirdly, the occupation authorities and forces must
comply with their duties and responsibilities under international law and consequently put an immediate end
to the measures and,practicesthat are so detrimental to
the Lebanese people through which they seek to usurp
the patrimony of that people.

19. I shall first call on those members of the Council
that wish to make statements before the voting.
20. Mr. ARIAS STELLA (Peru) [inrerpuetationfrom
Spanish]: 1 should like to extend my delegation’s cordial greetings and congratulations to you, Sir, in these
early days of your term as President of the Council for
September. We are well aware of your abilities and
experience and we are quite sure that our work will be
given wise guidance during this month.

27. It is plain to my delegation that the sufferings of
the Lebanese people are but one link in the long chain of
sufferings of the peoples of the Middle East. These
lengthy sufferings include those unjustly visited upon
the Palestinian people. Clearly, the Middle East problem is very complex and has many facets requiring
appropriate political solutions and a genuine desire
for compromise on the part of the parties involved.
This long-awaited process can be viable only to the
extent that the Governments of the region refrain from
carrying out acts or adopting attitudes that will aggravate their differences and jeopardize the prospects
for a comprehensive and lasting peace.

21. We take great pleasure also in expressing our
gratitude to the representative of Burkina Faso, who
has just completed a month of hard work as President of
the Council-a month during which he showed brilliance; his sense of balance and his abilities were appreciated by all of us.
22. The Council is now meeting again to consider the
situation in Lebanon-this time becauseof the implications of the practices and measuresof the Israeli authorities in the southern part of the country. According to
information made available by the Lebanese Government, these practices and measures are a flagrant
breach of the human rights of the inhabitants of the
region and constantlyjeopardize their development and
well-being.

28. For those reasons my delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution. Peru would have preferred
a more balanced text, however, including mention of
other occupying forces, which must also comply with
the terms of the fourth Geneva Convention.

23. The invasion of the territory of Lebanon in 1982
clearly lies at the origin of this situation, as does the
occupation to which it led. Both the invasion and the
occupation have been repeatedly rejected by the Council and the entire international community.

29. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): I have to
admit that my return to New York at the very end of
August was not solely in order to have the pleasure’of
sitting under your presidency in the Council, Sir, but it
is with pleasure that I seeyou presiding. Your country
and mine have very special links, and you have made a
notable place for yourself in this body.

24. Since then, notwithstanding the unanimous demands for the withdrawal of the occupation forces,
Lebanon has proved unable to recover its legitimate
rights to sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity.

30. I do not regret having been on leave, but 1 am
sorry to have missed the presidency of Ambassador
Bassole of Burkina Faso. The fame of his achievements last month has been reported to me, and my
delegation is very grateful for all he did for the Council
during his presidency.

25. The conduct of the occupation forces, besides
being in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, breaches many international legal instruments,
including the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949,’ and The Hague Conventions II of 1899 and IV
of 1907respecting the Laws and Customs of War on
Land.’

31. My delegation listened with great sympathy to the
representative of Lebanon as he described to the Council yet a further chapter in the human tragedy which still
afflicts his country. The plight of the long-suffering
Lebanese people is a matter of continuing concern to
my Government. It is indeed a matter of continuing
concern to us all.

26. Consequently, with regard to the facts the Council
has taken note of at earlier meetings, my country’s
position is as follows. First, once again we demand
the immediate restoration of the right of the Lebanese
People and Government to independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity and full exercise of their
authority throughout the territory within the frontiers
universally recognized as being theirs. It is clear that in

32. Throughout Lebanon’s crisis my Government has
consistently spoken out in support of the restoration of
Lebanese sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. These principles were reiterated in the
declaration on Lebanon adopted by the Ministers for
3

should be given a wider and more useful role in helping
the Lebanese Government to maintain security in
southern Lebanon. This will be particularly needed as
Israeli withdrawal takes place, in order to provide
added protection for the Lebanese and Palestinian
civilians who may be at risk.

Foreign Affairs of the 10 States members of the European Economic Community on 27 March this year [see
S/16456, annex], and have been repeatedly supported
by the Council. We must continue to do all we can to
give effect to them.
33. External factors are crucial to the return of Lebanon to its former stability and prosperity. The Lebanese will not be able to regain their sovereignty and
independence while the greater part of Lebanon remains under the occupation of foreign forces. The
United Kingdom, like its partners in the Ten, has consistently called for the early withdrawa of all such
forces, Indeed, the withdrawal of forces ought to proceed hand in hand with national reconciliation.

39. We hope that after this debate is over all concerned will seek, swiftly and without recrimination,
to advance the course of diplomacy, My Government
believes that, in the absence of general support for
the draft resolution, it would have been better not to
have pressed it to a vote. However, since a vote has
been called and since certain helpful changes have been
made to the draft, my Government will vote in favour.
We do so to register the importance which we attach
to the scrupulous observance of the provisions of the
fourth Geneva Convention in the occupied areas of
southern Lebanon. In the discussions and negotiations
which have led to the present draft we have consistentIy
sought to promote attitudes of mutual understanding, to
avoid extremes and to encourage the solution of difficult problems through a process of accommodating all
the interests legitimately involved.

34. It is now more than two years since Israel’s invasion of Lebanon in June 1982. That attempt by Israel to
impose its will by force was profoundly mistaken and
rightly condemned by the international community. We
are now faced with its sad consequences.
35. Israel’s continued occupation of the area is wrong
and is leading to hardship and a worsening cycle of
violence. The situation has become bitter for both occupier and occupied.

40. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): First of all,
I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month af
September. Your diplomatic skills and experience are
well known to all of us.

36. The solution is clear. The Israeli Government
should now withdraw its forces. There is an urgent need
for early talks on the subject, through intermediaries if
necessary. These talks must recognize, however, that
Israel has legitimate security needs. My Government
naturally supports the principle of security arrangements which ensure safety for citizens on both sides of
the border. Peace on that border is clearly in the interests of all concerned, the inhabitants of Israel and
Lebanon alike, and indeed of the international community as a whole. It is aprincipal object of my Government to bring about that situation,

41. Also, I want to pay tribute to the representative of
Burkina Faso, Mr. Bassole, for the exemplary way in
which he presided over the Council during the month of
August.
42. The Council has been convened to consider the
situation in the southern part of Lebanon that is at
present occupied by the Israel Defence Forces. During
the debate the representative of Lebanon conveyed to
us the deep concern of his Government at the general
deterioration
of the situation in the area under Israeli
occupation.
In particular, he drew our attention to
the recent restrictive measures by the Israeli military
authorities, such as the closing of roads and crossings,
the limitation
of freedom of movement of individuals
and the normal flow of persons and goods between the
occupied areas and the rest of Lebanon, and the obstructions placed in the way of Lebanese government
institutions and personnel.

37. In the meantime, it is imperative that the Israeli
occupying forces should scrupulously respect the international conventions on humanitarian law applicable to
armed conflicts. In particular Israel should respect
all the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949.3 My Government recognizes that
Israel, as the occupying Power, may find it necessary to
institute security precautions. But these must be designed to have the minimum effect on the lives of the
local inhabitants, and must not conflict with Israel’s
obligations under the fourth Geneva Convention,

43. My Government shares those humanitarian
concerns of the Lebanese Government. We deplore the
situation that has been created in southern Lebanon
owing to the prolonged Israeli military occupation of
that area in contravention of the relevant resolutions
of the Council. Israel is in duty bound to respect and
uphold all the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,) as well as of other norms of
international
law, such as the obligations arising from
the Regulations annexed to The Hague Convention IV

38, It should be the objective of the Council to help
promote a solution to the problem of southern Lebanon. It cannot do so by rhetoric. The key to a solution lies in constructive diplomacy, pursued actively
but quietly. Both the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
have a
potentially
important role to play in this, My Government believes that through painstaking diplomacy
the necessary agreements can be achieved. UNIFTL
4

of 1907 respecting the Laws and Customs of War on
Land.’ My delegation therefore agreeswith the relevant
paragraphs in the draft resolution now under consideration which affirm the applicability of the aforementioned international conventions and call upon Israel
strictly to respect the rights of the civilian population in
the areas under its occupation in southern Lebanon,

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France,
India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Against:

44. At the same time, my delegation also harbours
some considerable hesitations about the draft resolution aspresented to us by the Lebanese delegation. The
situation in southern Lebanon is, no doubt, serious
and deserves our attention. Is it proper, however, for
the Council to single out the humanitarian situation
in southern Lebanon only, without regard for other
aspects of the crisis in Lebanon which need to be addressed urgently as well?

Abstaining:

United Statesof America.
None.

The result of the vote was 14 in favour and I against.
The draft resolution was not adopted, the negatiye
vote being that of a permanent member of the Council.

50. Mr. CLARK (United Statesof America): Wewish
to extend to you, Sir, our sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and
also to express our sincere appreciation to the representative of Burkina Faso for the extremely skilful way in
which he led the Council last month.

45. My delegation has stated on many occasions that
we fully support the territorial integrity, unity, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon, and it is clear
that the foregoing requires the withdrawal of all unauthorized foreign forces from Lebanese territory.

51, No one can remain unmoved by the plight of the
people of Lebanon. The people of the United States
know of their suffering. We have shared in it. No one
wishes more for an end to the violence and suffering
that continues throughout Lebanon and for the restoration of a normal, peaceful condition in that country.
Unfortunately, the draft resolution we had before us
today would not have advanced that goal.

46. Moreover, although we fully sympathizewith the
humanitarian intentions of the draft resolution, let us
not forget that our main objective should beto facilitate
the early and complete withdrawal of the Israel Defence
Forces from Lebanese territory which is already long
overdue. The Netherlands has always been committed
to that objective, which is a necessarycondition for the
restoration of genuine peace and normality in southern
Lebanon. One of the major reasons why the Netherlands has kept a limited contingent in UNFIL is becausewe still hope that the Force will play an important
role in achieving the objectives of an Israeli withdrawal
and of the restoration of peace and normality, as well as
the re-establishment of the authority and sovereignty of
the Lebanese Government in southern Lebanon.

52. We are, of course, aware of the particular problems endured by the people of southern Lebanon over
the past decade which led to the invasion of the Israeli
forces and occupation in 1982. As the occupying military Power in southern Lebanon, Israel clearly hasboth
special rights and duties as prescribed by the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12August 1949,3and the Regulations annexed to The Hague Convention IV of 1907.’
In his statement [2552nd meeting] the representative of
Israel said that Israel’s conduct in southern Lebanon
met the requirements of the fourth Geneva Convention
and that the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) was aware of the fact that Israel had been
applying that Convention in areas of Lebanon under its
control.

47. The Secretary-General recently put forward some
useful ideas to attain these goals with which all parties
concerned would seem to have concurred. The Secretary-General also suggested that the Council consider at the appropriate time a future course of action
which would make more effective UNIFIL’s mandate
in southern Lebanon in the context of an Israeli withdrawal from’that area. Whether such an opportunity
will indeed present itself to the Council in due course
we will probably know only after the formation of a new
Government in Israel, where elections were held recently. In the meantime, the Council should, in our
opinion, avoid any actions that might prove to be counter-productive,
48. In conclusion, it is with those reservations in mind
that my Government will nevertheless cast an affirmative vote on the draft resolution. The humanitarian
intentions of that draft resolution have our full sympathy.

53. Lebanon desperately wants and needs an end to
the hostilities throughout Lebanon and peace in which
to heal its wounds, We support efforts which will
achieve these goals, My Government strongly supports
full respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries. My Government has
worked hard to help achieve these objectives. Sadly,
they remain to be achieved and they are hardly addressed in today’s draft resolution.

49. The PRESIDENT: 1shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/16732.

54. For example, an essential element in achieving
these goals is the evacuation from Lebanon of all for5

62. In January 1982 i2329th meeting], the United
States vetoed the draft resolution envisaging consideration by the Council of specific measures to rescind the
annexation by Israel of the Syrian Golan Heights. The
United States voted then in order to perpetuate that
annexation of Syrian lands.

eign forces. Yet the draft resolution made no specific
mention of all foreign forces or of the discord in Lebanon other than that in southern Lebanon.
55. We have heard repeatedly from many speakers in
this debate that the principle subject of the draft resolution, however, is the continued Israeli military presence in southern Lebanon. Yet Israel has repeatedly
expressed its willingness and desire to leave southern
Lebanon. The representative of Israel repeated to the
Council that his Government is prepared to enter into
direct negotiations on security questions with the
Government of Lebanon. Further, the draft resolution
was silent about humanitarian concerns for the suffering of those elsewhere in Lebanon. In terms of practical
help for humanitarian concerns in the south or elsewhere in Lebanon, there was no mention in the draft
resolution, or in fact in most of the statements before
the Council, of the appropriate role available for international organizations, such as ICRC.

63. In April 1982 twice [2348th and 2357th meetings],
and in August 1983 [2461st meeting] the United States
blocked the adoption by the Council of measures
against Israeli atrocities in the occupied Arab territories. Thus the United States three times voted for
the continuation
of the presence of Israel in these
territories.
64. Twice in June 1982 [2379th and2381st meetings],
and again in 1982 [239Zst meeting], the United States
vetoed three draft resolutions which sought an end
to Israel’s aggression against Lebanon and the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon. Today’s veto
by the United States against Lebanon gives the goahead for the continuation by the Israeli occupying
forces of outrages in a third of the territory of Lebanon. This is the record of the United States in the
Council-a
loo-per-cent anti-Arab record. Eight vetoes
by the United States are simply eight nails in the coffin
of the faIse claims by the United States to a so-called
objective position in the Middle East.

56. We believe it is unreasonable and unrealistic for
the Council to address the question of foreign forces
in southern Lebanon and humanitarian and security
problems there without dealing with these same problems in all of Lebanon. When the Council is prepared
to look at the security and humanitarian
problems
throughout Lebanon, we will join in that effort. But we
cannot be a party to an unbalanced draft resolution
which takes a selective, myopic look at only one part of
the problem.
57. For those reasons my Government
the draft resolution.

65. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on representatives
who asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

voted against

66. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom):
May
I recall the last sentence of my explanation of vote,
which I think is relevant to the explanation of vote that
we havejust heard from the Soviet Union-or was it the
beginning of a new debate? The last sentence of my
explanation of vote read as follows:

58. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [interpretationfrom
Russian]: Since the Soviet
delegation is speaking this month for the first time in the
Council, allow me sincerely to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the lofty post of President of the
Council. We are familiar with your great diplomatic
experience and we are sure that the conduct of the
Council is in reliable hands.

“In the discussions and negotiations which have led
to the present draft we have consistently sought to
promote attitudes of mutual understanding, to avoid
extremes and to encourage the solution of difficult
problems through a process of accommodating all the
interests legitimately involved.” [Para. 39, above.]

59. I should like to take this opportunity to thank the
representative of Burkina Faso, your predecessor in
the post of President of the Council last month, for the
highly qualified conduct of the Council’s work,

That is the attitude of my Government. I believe that is
the attitude of the great majority of delegations represented around the Council table. That palpably is not
the attitude of the Soviet Union, and my Government
regrets that,

60. In our last statement made in the Council, the
Soviet delegation had an opportunity to show that the
policy of the United States in the Middle East was
fundamentally anti-Arab. Today’s vote by the United
States in the Council has reaffirmed that well-known
truth that the policy of the United States in the Council
is also an anti-Arab policy in essence.

67. It is strange that the delegation which has cast by
far the largest number of vetoes in the young history
of the Organization should ‘now be casting stones at
another delegation, It ill becomes it. It is strange that
a delegation which calls so vehemently for the withdrawal of forces from southern Lebanon has failed to
heed the call of the General Assembly and the Security
Council for the withdrawal of forces from Afghanistan.
I believed we had finished our debate. I hoped we had
done it, as I had tried to do, on a note of co-operation in

61. Over the last three and a half years, the United
States has eight times used the veto in the Council
against the vital interests of Arab countries and peoples: the veto against the Syrian Arab Republic, the
veto against the Palestinians and the veto against
Lebanon.
6

future. I regret the statement of the.representative of
the Soviet Union.

keeping the south free of the bloody turmoil and upheavals plaguing the rest of the country.

68. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [interpretation from Russian]: The statement
made today by the representative of the United Kingdom confirms the view stated by the Soviet delegation
at the last meeting that the United Kingdom acts as a
junior partner of the United States. I hope the interpreters will render this notion clearly, because last time
it was rendered as “younger brother” instead of “‘junior partner”. I hope the representative of the United
Kingdom will not deny that in the United States-United
Kingdom partnership the United Kingdom is a junior
partner. This is truly so, becausethe United Kingdom is
very ready to turn its own side to face the blows in order
to spare the flanks of its senior partner.

75. Syria, the tormentor of Lebanon over this past
decade, was absolved of any mention by the Arabs and
many of the other speakers. As a consequence of all
that, the irrelevance of this debate to the situation in
Lebanon as a whole is a fact. The south, after all, is an
integral part of the whole of Lebanon.
76. Israel’s position on the question of the south has
been made abundantly clear by my delegation. Everyone here knows why we were compelled to go in and
destroy the terroris state-within-the-state that menaced our lives from just across the border-the PLO
[Palestine Liberation
Organization]
state-within-theState. The countries represented around this table
would not have done less; some have done a great deal
more. But whereas Israel and Lebanon came to an
agreement on 17 May 1983 to provide for the withdrawal of Israel’s forces from the south, no parallel
agreement has been drawn up or indeed contemplated
with Syria. Syria has, on the contrary, made every
effort to perpetuate its stranglehold over Lebanon and
forced that country to relinquish its hope of establishing
good-neighbourly relations with Israel, a development
that Syria interprets as contrary to its selfish interests.

69. In my statement there was not a word about the
position of the United Kingdom. Therefore, I was surprised when the representative of the United Kingdom
singled out my delegation and madeit the subject of his
statement. It would have been more logical if he had
said something about the country which, in total isolation, has used the veto against a quite minimal draft
resolution proposed by Lebanon. But clearly the representative of the United Kingdom has his own distorted perception of reality.

77. We have pointed out the glaring differences between the degree of security prevailing in the south and
the situation to the north of the Awali River. In the
month of August, for instance, not one Lebanese citizen was killed in the south, but according to Lebanese
police sources some 215 were killed elsewhere in Lebanon, half of this number in Tripoli. More are being
killed there every day,

70. I shall not respond to the attacks of the representative of the United Kingdom against my country, on
the understanding that this is my last warning to him.
71. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel
has asked to speak, and I now call on him.
72. Mr. LEVIN (Israel): Allow me to return to the
subject we are discussing, Mr. President, But let me
first congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of the Council and say that I am certain that
your rich experience and knowledge will help guide the
Council’s work.

78. Sadly, but predictably, the results of today’s
meeting and vote will not change anything in Lebanon.
This the Lebanese knew well enough. The Karame
Government sought to obtain a propaganda victory to
patch up its public image. The Lebanese public will
know better.

73. I should also like to express our appreciation of
the exemplary manner in which Ambassador Bassole of
Burkina Faso discharged his duties during the month
of August.

79. The allegations brought here against Israel can be
characterized by the patent nonsense about the waters
of the Litani and the Wazzani. In fact, recent objective
evidence, as for instance a United observers’ report on
their visit to the site of the Wazzani, was studiously
ignored by the Lebanese delegation and those who took
up this strident falsehood. One of the speakers here
charged that Israel had claimed to have made southern
Lebanon into a paradise-a ridiculous statement, never
made by my country. Nevertheless, it will not be denied
that tens of thousands of displaced Lebanese have returned to their villages in the south, abandoned during
the PLO terrorist misrule. Since we are in the south,
however, temporarily and largely as a result of the
Syrian-inspired abrogation of the 17 May 1983 Agreement, we shall not and cannot sit idly by and see the
security of that area reduced to the hellish conditions
prevailing under Syrian control. The gross abuse of

74. The vote that was taken just a few minutes ago
appears to have been the second time a vote has
been taken during the debate on Lebanon requested
by the Permanent Representative of that country and
prompted largely by internal constraints. The first vote
took place at the very start of deliberations. It was a
decision taken by some members of the Council, but it
did not go by a show of hands, The decision was to treat
Lebanon as if the majority of its burdens-its lack of
independence, its civil war, its subjugation by Syriawere all irrelevant to the south and somehow outside
the pale. The decision was to ignore the north and
the east and the centre, It was decided to heap abuse
on Israel because apparently Israel has succeeded in
7

Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.3

Lebanon’s sovereignty and of human rights under Syrian domination, in the present as in the past, are common knowledge everywhere save in the deliberations of
the Council. Tel-el-Za’atar, Zahle and Tripoli stand out
among others. But no investigation was requested here
into the depredations of the Syrian Army in Lebanon,
the Army which the Arabs still call a “deterrent
force” -to deter the Lebanese from regaining their
independence, no doubt.

86. Whatever has been said here to belittle the scope
of the humanitarian tragedy or to distract attention from
it, or to deny the existenceof such practices by Israel or
to justify them, has been countered by the painful reality which I presented to the Council in my statement
on Wednesday, 29 August [2552nd meting]. May I refer
members of the Council to articles published in the
press, more particularly to one published by The
New York Times on 2 September and written by its
correspondent in Jezzin,in the occupied south. I refer
members to this article so that they themselves may
check the accuracy of the information we have provided and make their own judgements on the credibility
of the claims of the representative of Israel,

80. This has been a contrived, counter-productive
and unnecessary exercise. The main problems of Lebanon were not even touched upon and have been left
where they were, The fires still burn in Tripoli, in Beirut
and its environs; car bombs are still being set off and
large numbers of people killed asthe Council concludes
another series of meetingsdivorced from the realities of
fife outside.

87. May the representative of Israel allow me to speak
on behalf of Lebanon and for Lebanon. He does not
have the right-nor does anyone else-to speak for me.

81. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Lebanon has asked to speak and I call on him.
82, Mr. FAKHOURY (Lebanon) [interpretation
Sir, please accept the sincere congratulations of the delegation of Lebanon on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for September. You
have clearly shown your skill, wisdom and experience
in expediting the Council’s work and in directing its
consultations. You have exerted your good offices on
many occasions in order to allow the Council to fulfil its
tasks.

88. The events that have taken place from time to time
in some parts of Lebanon are the inescapable consequences of a lo-year-long crisis. It is neither correct
nor fair to compare what is taking place there with what
is taking place on territory occupied by Israeli forces.
Neither is it fair to usethis asan excusenot do deal with
the tragedy and its root causes.

from Arabic]:

89. The Lebanese Government of National Unity is
working seriously and with determination to spread the
sovereignty of the State to all the territory of Lebanon.
Unanimous adoption by the Council of the Lebanese
draft resolution would have put an endto the tragedy by
putting an end to arbitrary Israeli practices. It would
also have helped to support the Lebanese Government
and to assist it in its efforts aimed at the ultimate liberation of the land and its unification under one legitimate
authority and one national sovereignty.

83. I also wish to express our thanks to Mr. Bassole,
the representative of Burkina Faso, for his continued
efforts and for the wisdom and skill he showed during
his presidency of the Council in August.
84. Following the vote on the draft resolution submitted by Lebanon, I cannot but thank the members who voted in favour of it for responding to the
human tragedy which is being experienced daily by
800,000 Lebanese citizens in the south, the western
Bekaa and the Rashaya district and to the suffering
caused by Israel’s occupation and inhuman practices.
I further thank them for having taken a clear stand on
those practices and the need to put an end to them
forthwith.

90. On 15 March last, the Lebanese cabinet adopted a
resolution in which it accepted security arrangements
with Israel in order to ensure complete Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese territory. Since that time Lebanese officials have reiterated that it is that decision
which must be stressed. I say this so that no one will
think that it is Israel alone that wishes peace.

85. Lebanon, which cameto the Council with apurely
humanitarian issue, deeply regrets the opposition of
a friendly super-Power, the United States, to a draft
resolution limited purely to humanitarian aspects.Until the very last moment the Lebanese delegation had
hoped for a unanimous, positive response to the Lebanese demands to be enshrined in a resolution adopted
by the Council so that Israel would not feel itself
freed from its international commitments and so that
the continued helplessness of the Council could not
become an incentive for Israel’s practices in contravention ofthe Articles of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, international conventions and, more particularly, the Geneva

91. In conclusion, I wish again to expressour deepest
regret that again today the Council was unable to respond to our rightful demands and to do its duty regarding Lebanon, a Founding Member of the United
Nations. Lebanon, which believes in the principles of
the Organization, is committed to the Charter and respects the resolutions and decisions adopted by its
organs.
92. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked to make a statement in
exercise of the right of reply, I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
8

93. Mr, EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) [interpref~tationfrona Arabic]: Allow me at the outset to convey to you, Sir, our sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic has
on many occasionsexpressed its appreciation to you, to
your Government and to your people, which has waged
a valiant struggle for freedom and independence and
against colonialism and hegemony.

97. When the representative of Lebanon said, “all the
members of the Council”, I understood at whom his
remark was aimed; I understood what he meant: there
was a general feeling that a United States veto was
looming. As has been pointed out by the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, this is the
eighth in a series of United States vetoes.
98. Lebanon lodged a complaint with the Council
about what has been taking place in its country at the
hands of the Israeli authorities. It appealed to the Council and expressed the hope that all the members of the
Council would fully understand the depth of the tragedy
and take the necessary measures.

94. I wish also to take this opportunity, Sir, to express
to your predecessor, the representative of Burkina
Faso, our sincere thanks for the efforts he undertook at
a time when the Council was adopting an extremely
important resolution.

99. The United States has clearly contravened here
the Charter. The United States has not lived up to its
responsibilities to a State a part of whose territory is
occupied. I do not believe that this stand will serve the
cause of peace in our region, On the contrary, it will
lead to an escalation of terrorist activities by Zionist
Israel in southern Lebanon. There will be more arbitrary measures, more repression, more killing, more
theft of water and more of the many other practices that
htive been clearly described in the documented statement by the representative of Lebanon to the Council.

95. The previous statement, by my brother the representative of Lebanon, has almost made it unnecessary for me to speak in response to the blatant lies
spoken in the Council, as is his custom,by the representative of international Zionism. He spreads his lies near
and far, as if to throw sand in the eyes of representatives, in an attempt to distract attention from what is
actually taking place in the occupied Arab territories of
Palestine, the Golan Heights and southern Lebanon.
96, I wish to express my deepestregret that, owing to
the United Statesvetp,.the Council hasnot been able to
shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. But, in fact, a decision was taken in the
Council: it was a condemnation by the United Statesof
the United States. I think that no State in the world
could cast a vote against the 1949 Geneva Conventions? particularly the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12August 1949-no State but the United States. What
is strange is that the United Statesknows full well that
the 1949Geneva Conventions were drafted in order to
prevent practices which are very similar to the practices of nazism. By having voted against the draft resolution which was before the Council today, the United
States has said to Israel, “Yes, stay in southern Lebanon; destroy southern Lebanon; escalate your operations against civilians; separate the south from the
north; but do not take any account of the representative
of Lebanon when he comes to the Council and says,

100. I really cannot see any explanation for the negative vote cast by the United Stateson the draft resolution. How can one explain the failure by the United
States to live up to its responsibilities in connection
with a purely humanitarian issue? It is said that there
are American elections in the offing. Yes, indeed, there
are American elections. But are the American elections
in contradiction with the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention? Is Lebanon to be deprived of the
rights enshrined in the fourth Geneva Convention because there are to be American elections? Moreover,
the candidates for the presidency of the United States
agree that Israel’s hegemony over the region should
be extended. So what is the United States delegation
afraid of?
101. We have been told that this question was presented at a difficult time because of the American elections. But are we the Arabs in Lebanon, Palestine and
Syria to pay the price every four years for contradictory
American interests? Are we to pay the price because
there are American elections? Why should we pay the
price for the so-called democracy practiced every four
years in the American elections? In any casewe regard
them as a farce, so evident from what we see every day
on the television screens.

“Once again Lebanon has had recourse to the
Council, which remains the haven of small countries
that believe in the principles of the United Nations.
Lebanon has always been devoted to the principles
and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and has always respected the decisions of its
organs. ’ ’ [2552nd meeting, para. 10.1

102. Of what has Lebanon been deprived? It has been
deprived of the support of the international community and the protection of the fourth Geneva Convention by the action of a permanent member of the Council. That is what the United States has done today. By
its opposition to the draft resolution, which is completely in accordance with the fourth Geneva Convention-a Convention that is applicable to all of occu-

That Lebanese appeal went on:
“That is why we are lodging a complaint with
regard to the practices of the Israeli authorities in our
country, and we hope that all the members of the
Council will fully uriderstand . , , this tragedy” [ibid.,
para. II].

9

pied Lebanon’s territory-the United States has said to
Israel: do exactly what you wish in southern Lebanon.
Of course, the agent of the United States in the region is
Israel. Israel has become a burden to the American
taxpayer; it is obvious that the representative of the
United States is not listening to what the American
people are saying about what Israel is costing the
United States.

108. Mr. LEVIN (Israel): The representative of the
subjugators of Lebanon-I refer to Syria-said a few
words about the position of his Government, about its
policy on Lebanon. Allow me, for his edification, to
read out a short excerpt from the Monday morning
interview with no lessan authority on the subject than
the former representative of Lebanon, Ghassan Tueni,
He said the following:

103. The Zionist representative says that the Council
met in order to divert attention from the events taking
place in Lebanon to the occupied southern part of the
country. We all know that the Syrian presence in Lebanon was based on a legitimate Lebanese request. That
situation has not changed. We have helped Lebanon
and we shall continue to help Lebanon because of our
traditional, historic relations with it. We have a joint
determination to throw out the invaders and to end the
Israeli occupation of the southern part of Lebanon as
soon as possible.

“Syria’s regional role does not really coincide with
Lebanon’s view of Syrian-Lebanese relations. Now,
to be realistic, we all know that Syria exercises tremendous, incredible influence in Lebanon. But that
this be considered a fact and that this fact be legitimized are two different proposals. Lebanon’s independence is not compatible with the legitimization of
such Syrian interests in Lebanon. Furthermore, to
admit that Syria could play the role of the protector
of the Muslims or their representatives, or that the
Muslims should be able to have recourse to Syria in
order to enjoy a greater share of power, may be an
element of disruption of the Lebanese national unity.
Syria has often taken Lebanon as a hostage in its
struggle with the West and with Israel, of course.
Syria will continue to try to see to it that it has the
ability to intervene, to limit our freedom of decision
and action, and we will continue to try to seeto it that
Syria’s ability to intervene is limited.”

104. The vote by the United States in the Council, on
the other hand, amounts to permission to Israel to
remain in southern Lebanon, to continue occupying it,
to continue engaging in the practices to which we have
now become accustomed. These practices are engaged
in every day against the people of Palestine, against the
inhabitants of the Syrian occupied territory, the Golan
Heights, and against the inhabitants of the occupied
southern part of Lebanon.
105. It is not only the pretext of American elections
that is cited: we are told also that there are elections in
Israel-as though we are supposed to wait for the results of the Israeli elections before the inhabitants of
southern Lebanon can get rid of Israeli control. But all
that is a lie. The Israeli elections have no connection
whatsoever with the work of the Council, The Israeli
elections are an internal struggle of the Zionist movement between those in power and those out of power.
Zionism is one; the Zionist movement is one. It had
16parties; I think it now has 24. But they are all Zionists. They all believe in Judaization. They all believe il,
the acquisition of territory and in ejecting the original
inhabitants. Therefore, it would indeed be strange to
expect the Israeli elections to liberate Lebanon, to liberate Palestine, to liberate the Golan Heights. Only a
simple-minded person could believe that such a thing
could happen.
106. We believe that the United States veto will convince the Arab peoples, wherever they may be, to trust
sincerely in their own forces to end the Israeli occupation of Palestine, the Golan Heights and southern Lebanon. We shall not be able to regain our rights so long as
the United States displays such clear hostility, No delegation in the whole world other than the United States
delegation would vote against the fourth Geneva Con-

I think that this needs no further comment.
109. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic wishes to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
110. Mr. EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) [intarpretafionfrom Arabic]: I am not speaking to respond to
the representative of the Zionist enemy that is occupying Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories.
11I, Mr. President, the occupier always hasa pretext,
and I think your experience with South Africa is quite
sufficient to make that clear. There is a similarity, if not
complete identity, given the sacred alliance between
Tel Aviv and Pretoria.
112. I have not come here to exchange words with the
representative of Israel. I have come here to say one
thing, and that is that the United States has prevented
the Council from adopting a draft resolution that merely
stresses the fourth Geneva Convention and has thus
failed to live up to its responsibilities vis-d-vis fraternal
Lebanon. Therefore there is no need for an exchange of
words between us and the Zionists here in the Council.
113, We cannot expect our enemies to behave appropriately. Those enemies know full well the aspirations of the Arab nations and their feelings regarding
their acts against Palestine, against Lebanon, against
Syria.

vention.

107. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and
I now call on him.
10

114. I believe it to be truly regrettable that the representative of Zionism should here quote the words of a
previous Ambassador to the United Nations. It is truly
regrettable that he does not quote the words of the
present representative of Lebanon here in the Council.
This is clear proof of the moral values of the so-called
State of Israel.

submitted by Lebanon and to confine it to the very
elementary imperatives of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949”perhaps at the last moment a
change of mind in tune with the value systemthe United
States has always advocated would enable it, if not to
join in the unanimity, at least to refrain from disrupting
it. That is why, as we said earlier, there has been a
breach of an intellectual contract between the United
States and the Arab people,

115. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris Mr. Clovis Makspud, Permanent Observer for the League of
Arab States, to whom, at its 2552ndmeeting,the Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

119. Maybe in some of our most romantic moments
we could say that tonight there was a breach in the
spiritual bond between the United States Government
and many, many millions of the Arab people. It is
unfortunate, because several of us have been eager
throughout that our differences and some of our divergences of opinion and policies with the United States
should not culminate in a situation of either conflict or
confrontation. And, in spite of the veto, we still entertain the possibility of a corrective process, because we
consider the United States to be a persuadable constituency. However, at the moment we are sufficiently
hurt and wounded that the option of anger cannot be
totally ruled out.

116. Mr. MAKSOUD: I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council, which is a testimony to your country’s great
struggle against colonialism and racism and to your
personal record of distinguished service and leadership
in this august body.
117. I was reluctant to address the Council again since
we had spelt out our position at earlier meetings of the
Council. As a matter of fact, the statementof the representative of Lebanon has dispelled the repeated attempts at distortion by the representative of Israel.
I remained reluctant to address the Council again despite the deep hurt I am sure every Arab feels concerning the exercise by the United States of its veto
power in the voting on a draft resolution in which the
Lebanese delegation has sought to focus attention on a
limited subject in a limited area-namely, the southern
part of Lebanon and the Bekaa. As a matter of fact,
much of the evidence regarding the practices of the
Israeli occupation authorities in the south of Lebanon is
drawn from documentation and reports that people in
the United StatesGovernment, the United States Congressand the United States press and other media have
confirmed. Therefore the hurt comesnot so much from
a super-Power exercising the right of veto.

120. It is the level of permissiveness this veto exercise
confers that shows Israel to pursue its policies uninterrupted and the Israeli representative, without hesitation or forethought and in the typically mindless Israeli
form, to deflect attention from the focus of Lebanon’s
complaint by attempting to verbalize and cover up the
various violations Israel commits in the south of Lebanon through a technique which has the elements of
filibuster, diversionary tactics and analogies that are
not within the Council’s purview or germane to the
debate. Yet the Israeli technique is well known: it has
been uncovered repeatedly and it has been isolated and
pinpointed repeatedly.
121, What is more surprising and more hurtful is that
some of the Israeli assumptions should be accepted and
acquiesced in by the United States, which definitely
knows better, For example, the United States knows
that Lebanon’s complaint to the Council which is under
consideration today and since 1982and the discussion
of the practices in occupied southern Lebanon stem
from Israel’s invasion of Lebanon.

118. The representative of the United Kingdom has
mentioned other countries that have exercised the right
of veto. The issueis not who exercisesthe right of veto
more than others. The test is on what kind of issues the
right of veto is exercised, It is in this respect that a
wound has been inflicted on peoples throughout the
Arab world today. Despite the fact that the Arab peoples and the Arab States had perhaps expected this
veto, there is yet a level of innocence throughout the
Arab world and among the Arab peoples: they hoped
that perhaps at the last moment the United States might
abstain. There is so much residual good will throughout Lebanon and the Arab world towards the people
and the intellectual and political heritage of the United
States that, despite pragmatic and realistic assessments, there was hope that, since many countries-of
Western Europe particularly, whose relations with the
United States are of paramount strategic, ideological
and political importance-had sought to modify some
of the legitimate imperatives in the draft resolution

122. What is in fact mind-boggling is to reward the
invasion of Lebanon, which has lasted for more than
two years now, with the diplomatic shield that this veto
has provided, thereby enabling Israel to project itself
as almost a determining factor in Lebanon’s internal
development and the dynamics of its search for political
stability and the exercise of its sovereignty. Whatever
might have been the circumstances of the presence of
Syrian forces in Lebanon, Israel cannot under any circumstance or condition equate its presence in southern
Lebanon as a result of invasion with the presence by
invitation of the Arab deterrent forces in the rest of
Lebanon. To allow Israel even to recharge the batteries
11

NOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore
SE

NATIONS

may be obtained
ftom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

PROCURER

LES

Lcs publications
des Nations
Unies
mnnde entier.
Informcz-vous
aup&
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

sent en vente dam les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLlCAClONES

L;ts publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas panes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE

LAS

NAClONES

Unidas
estPn en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

UNIES

et Its agences
B : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccicin de Ventas.

90-$1313-Februaty

1993~2,05Q
