V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committf•e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _1_47

Noting the efforts of the people and Government of
Madagascar to deal with the emergency situation and to
initiate a reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Noting also the emergency assistance provided by several States, international and regional organizations, specialized agencies and voluntary agencies,
Affirming the need for prompt and concerted international action to assist the people and Government of Madagascar in carrying out the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the stricken regions and sectors,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States, programmes
and organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental, non-governmental and voluntary organizations which provided assistance to Madagascar during the
emergency;
2. Urges all States to participate generously through
bilateral or multilateral channels in projects and programmes for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Madagascar;
3. Requests the international and regional organizations, the specialized agencies and voluntary agencies to
continue and increase their assistance in response to the
reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of
Madagascar;
4. Requests the programmes and organizations of the
United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
and all other international and regional financial institutions concerned, to give sympathetic and urgent consideration to requests for assistance submitted by the Government of Madagascar under its reconstruction, rehabilitation and development programmes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To take the necessary steps, in collaboration with
the programmes and organizations of the United Nations
system, to mobilize the resources needed for implementing
the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development programmes of Madagascar;
(b) To keep the question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Madagascar under constant
review;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to apprise
the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the progress made in the implementation
of the present resolution and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/192. Assistance to Sierra Leone
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/158 of 17 December 1982
and 38/205 of 20 December 1983, in which it appealed to
all States, the specialized agencies and international development and financial institutions to provide all possible
assistance for the development of Sierra Leone,
Further recalling its resolution 3 7/ 133 of I 7 December
1982, in which it decided to include Sierra Leone in the
list of the least developed countries,
IOI A/39/392, sect. VIII.

Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 1° 1
Noting with concern that the economy of Sierra Leone is
being undermined by srvere scarcities of imported raw
materials and spare parts for industry, a drying-up of trade
and commercial credits, large commercial payment arrears
and unmitigated strains on government finances,
Concerned that unusually low rainfall in 1984 has seriously affected the food production of the country and considerably worsened its balance-of-payments position,
Noting that the Government of Sierra Leone, in co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme,
has initiated preparatory activities for a round-table of
partners in development of Sierra Leone, to be organized
with the assistance of the Programme early in 1985,
Reiterating the need for effective mobilization of international assistance, in order to implement fully the programme of development outlined in the report of the multi-agency mission, 102
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for Sierra
Leone:
2. Urgently reiterates its appeal to the international
community, including the specialized agencies and other
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to
contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral
channels. to the economic and social development of
Sierra Leone;
3. Urges all States and relevant United Nations
bodies - in particular the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities - to provide all possible assistance to help the
Government of Sierra Leone meet the critical humanitarian needs of the population and to provide, as appropriate, food, medicines and essential equipment for hospitals
and schools;
4. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their
governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs
of Sierra Leone and to report the decisions of those bodies
to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1985;
5. Appeals to all States and international organizations
to participate at a high level in the round-table of partners
in development of Sierra Leone to be held early in 1985,
and to contribute generously to the programme of action
that will be presented by the Government of Sierra Leone;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Sierra Leone;
(b) To apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its
second regular session of 1985, of the assistance granted to
Sierra Leone:
(c) To keep the situation regarding assistance to Sierra
Leone under review and 10 report to the General Assembly
IO.' ,\ .18 :i I I. annex

148

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/193. Assistance to the Comoros
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/209 of 20 December 1983
and its previous resolutions on assistance to the Comoros,
in which it appealed to the international community to
provide effective and continuous financial, material and
technical assistance to the Comoros in order to help that
country overcome its financial and economic difficulties,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the
Comoros as an island developing country and as one of the
least developed countries,
Noting that the Government of the Comoros has given
priority to the questions of infrastructure, transport and
telecommunications,
Noting also the economic difficulties arising from the
country's scarcity of natural resources, compounded by the
recent drought and cyclones,
Noting further the grave budgetary and balance-of-payments problems facing the Comoros,
Bearing in mind the holding at Moroni, from 2 to 4 July
1984, of the first international solidarity conference for the
development of the Comoros,
Having examined the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 103
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for the
Comoros;
2. Notes with satisfaction the response by various
Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other organizations to its appeals and those of the
Secretary-General for assistance to the Comoros;
3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance
thus far provided continues to fall short of the country's
urgent requirements and that assistance is still urgently
required in order to implement the projects described in
the report of the Secretary-General;
4. Appeals to those States and organizations which participated in the first international solidarity conference for
the development of the Comoros, to put into effect as soon
as possible their declaration of intent;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, programmes and organizations of the United
Nations system, regional and international organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial
institutions, to provide the Comoros with assistance to
enable it to cope with its difficult economic situation and
pursue its development goals;
6. Requests the appropriate programmes and organizations of the United Nations system to increase their current programmes of assistance to the Comoros, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance and to
report periodically to him on the steps they have taken
and the resources they have made available to help that
country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
103 A/39/392, sect. IV.
104 Official Records of the General Assemhlr. Thiro·-n,nth Session. P/enan
Meetings, 30th meeting, paras. I 16-157.

(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme offinancial, technical
and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b) To keep the situation in the Comoros under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, the specialized agencies, the regional and other
intergovernmental organizations and international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985,
of the status of the special programme of economic assistance for the Comoros;
(c) To report on the evolution of the economic situation of the Comoros and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the special programme of economic
assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/194. Special economic assistance for Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council decision 1984/
I 06 of IO February 1984, in which the Council requested
the Secretary-General to send an inter-agency mission to
Swaziland to assess that country's priority needs in the
light of the cyclone of January 1984 and its medium-term
and long-term implications for the economy,
Having heard the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Swaziland on 11 October 1984, 104 in
which he expressed appreciation for the assistance rendered by Governments, the United Nations system and
other organizations during the difficult period following
the cyclone,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 105 to which was annexed the report of the inter-agency
mission which visited Swaziland from 30 April to 5 May
1984,
Noting from the report the serious damage to the economic infrastructure of Swaziland and the efforts made by
the Government and people of Swaziland to cope with the
problems of reconstruction,
Taking note of the recommended programme of assistance for Swaziland drawn up by the inter-agency mission,
in consultation with the Government, concerning priority
projects designed to permit the resumption of normal economic activity,
I. Draws attention to the urgent need for international
action to assist the Government and people of Swaziland
in their efforts for reconstruction and rehabilitation;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his prompt action and for the report of the inter-agency
mission on the economic situation of Swaziland and the
additional assistance required by that country to cope with
the problems of reconstruction and rehabilitation;
3. Expresses /Is gratitude to all States and organizations that have provided emergency assistance to Swaziland;
4. Endorses the assessment and recommendations of
the inter-agency mission contained in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
lllS A 391598.
