S/2004/298

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 April 2004
English
Original: French

Letter dated 17 March 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I wish to apprise you of the activities that have been undertaken by Cameroon
and Nigeria through my good offices and with the assistance of the United Nations
Secretariat with a view to facilitating the implementation of the ruling of the
International Court of Justice of 10 October 2002 on the land and maritime
boundary between these two countries.
It should be recalled that, in anticipation of the Court’s ruling and in an effort
to secure both countries’ prior commitment to the implementation of the expected
decision of the Court on their boundary dispute, President Paul Biya and President
Olusegun Obasanjo met in Paris on 5 September 2002, at my invitation and in my
presence. In a press release issued at the end of the meeting, both heads of State
agreed to respect and implement the Court’s ruling and to establish an
implementation mechanism with the support of the United Nations. The two
Presidents also agreed on the need for a number of confidence-building measures
aimed at strengthening overall ties between their two countries.
Following the Court’s announcement of its ruling on 10 October 2002, I
invited the Cameroonian and Nigerian Presidents to a second tripartite summit,
which was held under my auspices in Geneva on 15 November 2002, to agree on the
implementation mechanism and on confidence-building measures to be put in place
to facilitate the implementation of the Court’s ruling. In a joint communiqué issued
following the meeting, both heads of State renewed their commitment to renounce
the use of force in their bilateral relations and to strive to settle their boundary
disagreement by peaceful means. In order to move forward on the implementation of
the Court’s decision, both heads of State requested me to establish a Mixed
Commission, to be chaired by my Special Representative, Mr. Ahmedou
Ould-Abdallah.
The Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission was mandated to consider the
implications of the Court’s decision, including the demarcation of the land boundary
between the two countries; making recommendations on additional confidencebuilding measures such as the development of projects to promote joint economic
ventures and cross-border cooperation; troop withdrawal from relevant areas along
the land boundary; eventual demilitarization of the Bakassi peninsula, with the
possibility of deploying international personnel to observe the withdrawal; and
reactivation of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, a five-nation structure of which

04-31293 (E)

160404

*0431294*

160404

S/2004/298

Cameroon and Nigeria are leading members. The Mixed Commission meets
bi-monthly, alternately in Yaoundé and Abuja.
At its first meeting, held in Yaoundé in early December 2002, the Mixed
Commission agreed to establish a subcommission with responsibility for the
demarcation of the land boundary between the two countries. The subcommission,
which consists of legal experts and cartographers from the two parties and the
United Nations, held its first meeting in Geneva in January 2003. The
subcommission reports back on its work to the Mixed Commission’s bi-monthly
meetings.
As mandated, the subcommission on demarcation has prepared a small-scale
map indicating the boundary and a work programme for the demarcation exercise,
which was approved by the Mixed Commission at its second meeting, held in Abuja
in February 2003. The demarcation exercise is expected to last approximately 96
weeks.
The Mixed Commission, which reaffirmed its commitment to guarantee the
rights of all people affected by the Court’s decision, both Cameroonians and
Nigerians, has established a subcommission on affected populations. At its eighth
meeting, held in Abuja on 10 and 11 February 2004, the Mixed Commission decided
that the subcommission on affected populations should undertake an additional visit
to the land boundary area, which will be followed immediately by a field visit to the
Bakassi peninsula in February and March 2004. In February, the subcommissions on
affected populations and on demarcation carried out a field visit to the southern part
of the land boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria. From 24 to 28 February, the
group visited the Bakassi peninsula.
At the Abuja meeting, the Mixed Commission also decided that it would carry
out field visits to the land boundary area and the Bakassi peninsula itself in March
2004. In addition, the Mixed Commission considered the issue of the maritime
boundary, including a proposal to set up a subcommission on this matter. It decided
to establish a working group, to be composed of five experts each from Nigeria and
Cameroon, along with United Nations experts, in order to make a preliminary study
and submit recommendations. In particular, the working group is expected to
propose a delineation of the maritime boundary in conformity with the course
determined by the International Court of Justice and to produce a map on that basis.
To promote confidence-building, the Mixed Commission has also identified
possible projects to promote cross-border cooperation and joint economic ventures,
the implementation of which could benefit the population in the area. These include
the reactivation of the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
The progress achieved so far by the Mixed Commission since its first meeting,
in December 2002, is commendable. In addition to the various structures outlined
above, the Commission has adopted a detailed work plan for the period to 2005. One
of the most important tasks carried out by the Commission was the successful
completion of the withdrawal of and transfer of authority from the civil
administration and military and police forces in the Lake Chad area, which took
place in December 2003. Nigeria handed over 28 villages to Cameroon, while
Cameroon transferred one village to Nigeria. On 16 December, the Mixed
Commission Chairman, Mr. Ould-Abdallah, presided over formal ceremonies to
mark the handover, in the presence of the heads of both countries’ delegations,

2

S/2004/298

namely, Mr. Amadou Ali, Minister of Justice of Cameroon, and Prince Bola Ajbola,
former Minister of Justice of Nigeria.
To consolidate the withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area,
the Mixed Commission decided to establish an observer personnel group there for a
period of one year, composed of five members each from Nigeria and Cameroon, as
well as five representatives from the United Nations.
I welcome the progress achieved so far, which has proved that neighbouring
States can, with minimal United Nations support, work together to prevent a border
conflict and settle their differences peacefully. I wish to stress that such progress has
been greatly facilitated by the leadership and firm personal commitment of President
Biya and President Obasanjo, as well as their high-level representation on the Mixed
Commission. This was evidenced in particular by the contributions made by the two
countries of $3 million each to the United Nations trust fund for the financing of the
demarcation process, which has approximately $12 million. The European
Commission has agreed to allocate 400,000 euros for the demarcation exercise.
Other donors have expressed willingness to contribute to the trust fund established
for this exercise.
Furthermore, I am pleased to inform you that at a third tripartite summit
between President Biya and President Obasanjo, held in Geneva on 31 January 2004
under my auspices, the two leaders reaffirmed their commitment to implementing
the agreed work plan of the Mixed Commission in good faith and in the interest of
peace and stability, not only in their countries but also in the subregion. In addition,
they agreed to strengthen confidence-building measures through an exchange of
ambassadors, the opening of consulates along their common border and the
introduction of joint patrols by their respective security forces.
Both heads of State also agreed to consider concluding a treaty of friendship
and non-aggression between their two countries. They decided that the Joint
Commission, a long-standing bilateral mechanism for cooperation, would meet at a
higher level and on an annual rather than biannual basis. They renewed their
commitment to take appropriate measures to guarantee the security and welfare of
the populations affected by the decision of the International Court of Justice in areas
under their respective sovereignty. Both leaders agreed to meet again under my
auspices in due course to review the ongoing process.
The total amount of resources required for the demarcation exercise and for the
funding of the activities of the United Nations support team to the Mixed
Commission until the end of 2005 is estimated at $25 million, including $12 million
for the demarcation and $13 million for support to the Commission. As indicated
above, Cameroon and Nigeria have already contributed $3 million each to the
United Nations trust fund for the financing of the demarcation process. The
outstanding balance of $6 million to finance the demarcation process would be met
from voluntary contributions.
It should be noted that the activities of the United Nations support team to the
Mixed Commission have so far been funded through ad hoc arrangements, with
extrabudgetary resources being used for its 2003 operations. It was understood that
these ad hoc arrangements could not continue after 2003. In view of the significant
progress achieved so far, and in order to ensure the successful completion of the
implementation of the Court’s ruling, it is vital to secure the estimated funding

3

S/2004/298

needed — $13 million — to enable the United Nations to continue to support the
Mixed Commission until the end of 2005. It is therefore my intention to seek such
funding from the regular budget.
I should be grateful if you would bring the content of this letter to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

4
