General Assembly-Fifth Session

24

394 (V). Palestine: Progress report of the
United Nations Conciliation Commission for
Palestine; Repatriation or resettlement of
Palestine refugees and payment of compensation due to them

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948,
Having examined with appreciation the general
progress report 12 dated 2 September 1950, and the
supplementary report 13 dated 23 October 1950, of the
United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine,
Noting 'With concern:
(a) That agreement has not been reached between
the parties on the final settlement of the questions outstanding between them,
( b) That the repatriation, resettlement, economic
and social rehabilitation of the refugees and the payment
of compensation have not been effected,
Recognizing that, in the interests of the peace and
stability of the Near East, the refugee question should
be dealt with as a matter of urgency,
I. Urges the governments and authorities concerned
to seek agreement by negotiations conducted either with
the Conciliation Commission or directly, with a view to
the final settlement of all questions outstanding between
them;
2. Directs the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine to establish an office which, under the
direction of the Commission, shall:
(a) Make such arrangements as it may consider necessary for the asstlssment and payment of compensation
in pursuance of paragraph 11 of General Assembly
resolution 194 (III);
( b) Work out such arrangements as may be practicable for the implementation of the other objectives
of paragraph 11 of the said resolution;
( c) Continue consultations with the parties concerned regarding measures for the protection of the
rights, property and interests of the refugees ;
3. Calls upon the governments concerned to undertake
measures to ensure that refugees, whether repatriated or
resettled, will be treated without any discrimination
either in law or in fact.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
395 (V).

Treatment of people of Indian origin
in the Union of South Mrica

Th,; General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44 (I) and 265 (III) relating
to the treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union
of .South Africa,
Having considered the communication u by the Permanent Representative of India to the Secretary-General dated 10 July 1950.
11

18

See documents A/1367 and A/1367/Corr.l.
See document A/1367/Add.1.

a See document A/17.W}.

Having in mind its resolution 103 (I) of 19 November 1946 against racial persecution and discrimination,
and its resolution 217 (III) dated 10 December 1948
relating to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Considering that a policy of "racial segregation"
(Apartheid) is necessarily based on doctrines of racial
discrimination,
l. Recommends that the Governments of India, Pakistan and the Union of South Africa proceed, in accordance with resolution 265 (III), with the holding of a
round table conference on the basis of their agreed
agenda and bearing in mind the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;

2. J<ecmnmends that. in the event of failure of the
governments concerned to hold a round table conference
before 1 April 1951 or to reach agreement in the round
table conference within a reasonable time, there shall be
established for the purpose of assisting the parties in
carrying through appropriate negotiations a commission of three members, one member to be nominated by
the Government of the Union of South Africa, another
to be nominated by the Governments of India and
Pakistan and the third to he nominated by the other two
members or, in default of agreement between these two
in a reasonable time, by the Secretary-General ;
3. Calls upon the governments concerned to refrain
from taking any steps which would prejudice the success
of their negotiations, in particular, the implementation or
enforcement of the provisions of "The Group Areas
Act", pending the conclusion of such negotiations;

4. Decides to include this item in the agenda of the
next regular session of the General Assembly.
315th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

396 (V). Recognition by the United Nations of
the representation of a Member Stale

The General Assembly,
Considering that difficulties may arise regarding the
representation of a Member State in the United Nations
and that there is a risk that conflicting decisions may
be reached by its various organs,
Considering that it is in the interest of the proper
functioning of the Organization that there should be uniformity in the procedure applicable whenever more than
one authority claims to be the government entitled to
represent a Member State in the United Nations, and
this question becomes the subject of controversy in the
United Nations,
Considering that, in virtue of its composition, the
General Assembly is the organ of the United Nations in
which consideration can best be given to the views of all
Member States in matters affecting the functioning of
the Organization as a whole,
l. Recommends that, whenever more than one authority claims to be the government entitled to represent a
Member State in the United Nations and this question
becomes the subject of controversy in the United Na-

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Ad Hoe Political Committee
tions, the question should be considered in the light of
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and the circumstances of each case ;
2. Recommends that, when any such question arises,
it should be considered by the General Assembly, or by
the Interim Committee if the General Assembly is not
in session;
3. Recommends that the attitude adopted by the General Assembly or its Interim Committee concerning any
such question should be taken into account in other
organs of the United Nations and in the specialized
agencies;
4. Declares that the attitude adopted by the General
Assembly or its Interim Committee concerning any such
question shall not of itself affect the direct relations of
individual Member States with the State concerned;

25

5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the other organs of the United Nations and to the specialized agencies for such action as
may he appropriate.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.

397 ( V).

Report of the Security Councll

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report 15 of the Security Council
covering the period from 16 July 1949 to 15 July 1950.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
15 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 2.
