96

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

5. Decides that the Legal Sub-Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its twenty-second session should:
(a) Continue on a priority basis its detailed consideration of the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth
from space, with the aim of formulating draft principles
relating to remote sensing;
(b) Continue its consideration of:
(i) The possibility of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the use of nuclear power
sources in outer space through its working group;
(ii) Matters relating to the definition and/or delimitation
of outer space and outer space activities, bearing in
mind, inter alia, questions relating to the geostationary orbit, and devote adequate time for a deeper
consideration of this question;
6. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
at its nineteenth session continued:
(a) Its consideration of questions relating to remote
sensing of the earth by satellites;
(b) Its consideration of the United Nations Programme
on Space Applications and the co-ordination of space activities within the United Nations system;
(c) Its examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit;
(d) Its consideration of technical aspects of and safety
measures relating to the use of nuclear power sources in
outer space;
(e) Its consideration of questions relating to space transportation systems and their implications for future activities
in space;
(/) Preparations for the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
in its capacity as Advisory Committee to the Preparatory
Committee;
7. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee at its twentieth session should:
(a) Consider the following items on a priority basis:
(i) Consideration of the United Nations Programme on
Space Applications and the co-ordination of outer
space activities within the United Nations system;
(ii) Questions relating to remote sensing of the earth
by satellites;
(iii) Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;
(b) Consider the following items:
(i) Questions relating to space transportation systems
and their implications for future activities in space;
(ii) Examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit;
8. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space
Applications for 1983, as proposed to the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by the Expert on Space Applications, 10 and the recommendations by the Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space relating_ to the Programme; 11
9. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, with the benefit of possible advice of both its
Sub-Committees in their next sessions, to consider the implementation of the recommendations of the Second United
10

NAC.105/302, sect. III.
See Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Vienna, 9-21 August 1982 (Al
CONF. 101/10 and Corr. I and 2), paras. 429 and 430.
11

Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space, in particular the order of priorities and the
carrying out of the studies recommended by the Conference;
10. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments as
well as specialized agencies and other international organizations which acted as hosts to, offered fellowships for, or
otherwise assisted in the holding of, international training
seminars and workshops on space applications, particularly
for the benefit of developing countries;
11. Requests the specialized agencies and other international organizations to continue and, where appropriate,
enhance their co-operation with the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and to provide it with progress
reports on their work relating to the peaceful uses of outer
space;
12. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance with the
present resolution and previous resolutions of the General
Assembly, to consider, as appropriate, new projects in outer
space activities and to submit a report to the Assembly at
its thirty-eighth session, including its views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
100th plenary meeting
I O December I 982

37/90.

Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/16 of 10 November 1978, 34/
67 of 5 December 1979, 35/15 of 3 November 1980 and
36/36 of 18 November 1981 concerning the convening as
well as the preparation of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
held at Vienna from 9 to 21 August 1982,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in developing the rule of law for the advancement and preservation of the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space.
Gravely concerned at the extension of an arms race into
outer space,
Aware of the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its applications and to contribute to an orderly
growth of space activities favourable to the socio-economic
advancement of mankind, in particular the peoples of developing countries,
Taking into account new developments in space science
and technology which are being projected and envisaged in
the coming decade as well as the new applications emerging
therefrom and their potential benefits and possible implications for national development and international cooperation,
Conscious of the need further to increase the awareness
of the general public with regard to space technology and
its applications,
Desiring to enhance the effectiveness of the co-ordinating
role of the United Nations, which is eminently suited to
bring about increased international co-operation and assistance to the developing countries in the field of exploration
and peaceful uses of outer space,
Expressing its satisfaction with the successful preparation
of the Conference through the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space in its capacity as Preparatory Committee for the Conference, and its Scientific and Technical
Sub-Committee in its capacity as Advisory Committee, as
well as through the Conference secretariat.

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

Taking note of the report of the Second United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, 12
1. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the Government and people of Austria for the excellent facilities
and generous hospitalit" provided for the Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space;
2. Endorses the recommendations pertaining to international co-operation in the exploration and peaceful uses
of outer space, as contained in the report of the Conference; 13
3. Invites all Governments to take effective action for
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Conference;
4. Invites all Member States, in particular those with
m.tjor space capabilities, to contribute actively to the goal
of preventing an arms race in outer space, as an essential
condition for the promotion of international co-operation in
the exploration and uses of outer space for peaceful purposes;
5. Requests all organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations which are working in the field of outer space or
space-related matters to co-operate in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference;
6. Takes note of the recommendations of the Conference regarding study projects 14 and invites all specialized
agencies and other intergovernmental organizations concerned to contribute within their field of competence to the
elaboration of those studies;
7. Decides, upon the recommendations of the Conference, 15 that the United Nations Programme on Space Applications should be directed towards the following
objectives:
(a) Promotion of greater exchange of actual experiences
with specific applications;
(b) Promotion of greater co-operation in space science
and technology between developed and developing countries
as well as among developing countries;
(c) Development of a fellowship programme for in-depth
training of space technologists and applications specialists,
with the help of Member States and relevant international
organizations and establishment and regular up-dating of
lists containing available fellowships in all States and relevant international organizations;
(d) Organization of regular seminars on advanced space
applications and new system developments for managers
and leaders of space application and technology development activities as well as seminars for users in specific
applications for durations, as appropriate;
(e) Stimulation of the growth of indigenous nuclei and
~ autonomous technological base, to the extent possible,
m space technology in developing countries with the cooperation of other United Nations organizations and/or States
Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized agencies;
(f) Dissemination, through panel meetings and seminars, of information on new and advanced technology and
applications, with emphasis on their relevance and implications for developing countries;
(g) Provision or arrangements for provision of technical
advisory services on space applications projects, upon request by Member States or any of the specialized agencies;

8. Decides to establish an International Space Information Service, initially consisting of a directory of sources
of information and data services to provide direction upon
request to accessible data banks and information sources;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen the Outer
Space Affairs Division of the Secretariat with an appropriate
augmentation of technical personnel and decides, upon the
recommendation of the Conference, 16 that all new or expanded activities contained in the present resolution are to
be funded mainly through voluntary contributions of States
in money or in kind, as well as through the rearrangement
of priorities within the next regular budget of the United
Nations;
10. Appeals to all Governments to make voluntary contributions, either in money or in kind, towards carrying out
the recommendations of the Conference;
11. Approves the recommendations of the Conference
regarding the establishment and strengthening of regional
mechanisms of co-operation and their promotion and creation through the United Nations system; 17
12. Emphasizes the need for close co-operation between
all United Nations bodies engaging in space or space-related
activities, as well as the desirability of close co-operation
with international funding agencies and subsidiary bodies,
such as the United Nations Development Programme;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to assure the availability and appropriate dissemination of the report of the
Conference;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
JO December I 982
37/91.

Question of the review of the Convention on
International Liability for Damage Caused by
Space Objects

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in the field of the exploration and peaceful uses of outer
space, including the moon and other celestial bodies, and
of promoting the law in this field of human endeavour,
Taking note with appreciation of the work accomplished
by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, in
particular that of its Legal Sub-Committee,
Recognizing that, in view of the considerable increase of
activities in outer space, effective international rules and
procedures concerning liability for damage caused by space
objects continue to be of great importance,
Having reviewed the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects, 18
Noting with satisfaction that to date seventy-two States
have signed and sixty-two States have ratified the Convention,
I. Reaffirms the importance of the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects;
2. Invites all States that have not yet done so to give
urgent consideration to ratifying or acceding to the
Convention.
100th plenary meeting
JO December 1982

2

Ibid. (A/CONF. 101/10 and Corr. I and 2)
Ibid .. para. 361.
Ibid .. para. 428.
" Ibid .. para. 430.
'

11

14

97

•• Ibid .. para. 423.
11
Ibid .. para. 353.
'"Resolution 2777 (XXVI). annex.
