S/2002/1294

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 November 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 25 November 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached letter, dated 23 November 2002, from
H.E. Mr. Naji Sabri, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq.
I should be grateful if you would have this letter circulated as a document of
the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-70832 (E)

251102

*0270832*

S/2002/1294

Annex
Letter dated 23 November 2002 from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: Arabic]
Further to my letter dated 13 November 2002, in which I informed you of the
decision of the Government of the Republic of Iraq to comply with Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002) despite its iniquitous contents, I wish to place on record our
observations on the provisions, allegations and measures contained in the resolution
that are inconsistent with international law, the Charter of the United Nations, the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the relevant constitutive instruments
of organizations of the United Nations system concerning the inspection and
monitoring regime in Iraq.
1.
Before reviewing the paragraphs of the resolution, it is essential to refer to the
background to the resolution and the circumstances under which it was issued. The
United States of America submitted the draft resolution that was adopted on
8 November 2002 as resolution 1441 (2002) after the entire international community
had expressed its rejection and condemnation of the desire of the United States to
launch a military attack against Iraq in order to attain its openly declared colonial
objectives of occupying the country by force and imposing colonial domination over
the entire Middle East region.
The United States accordingly changed its tactics and, rather than trying to
attain its purposes on its own, took the Security Council as a cover for its colonialist
and aggressive objectives, the more so as it had a long history of using the Council
as a cover for its hostile intentions against Iraq since 1990. It therefore submitted the
draft resolution under the false guise of working through the United Nations, while
its real purpose of creating pretexts for aggression against Iraq were concealed
under an international cover, as the following review of the paragraphs of the
resolution makes clear.
2.
The third preambular paragraph referred to what it called “the threat Iraq’s
non-compliance with Council resolutions and proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction ... poses to international peace and security”. This was an attempt to
impose a forced interpretation of the concept of a threat to international peace and
security, as referred to in Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations, in order to
justify United States aggression against Iraq.
The starting point of the paragraph is the baseless assumption of “Iraq’s noncompliance with Council resolutions and proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and long-range missiles”. That is the basis for a further groundless
assumption, namely that Iraq is a threat to international peace and security. This
assumption is baseless and unsupported by any evidence; it is Iraq that has been
subjected to aggression ever since 1991, and there is not a single nation in the world
that shares the biased view of the matter taken by the United States and the United
Kingdom. Whatever is based on a nullity is itself a nullity.
3.
The fourth preambular paragraph refers to Security Council resolution 678
(1990) which authorized Member States to use all necessary means to implement
resolution 660 (1990) and subsequent resolutions in order to restore international
peace and security in the area.

2

S/2002/1294

This reference creates the fallacious impression that the authorization to use
force in resolution 678 (1990) is still current. However, that authorization ceased to
be current, from the legal and practical points of view, when Iraq withdrew from
Kuwait towards the end of February 1991, thereby fully implementing resolution
660 (1990). The authorization has also ceased to be legally in force because of the
provisions of paragraph 33 of resolution 687 (1991), which declared that “upon
official notification by Iraq to the Secretary-General and to the Security Council of
its acceptance of the above provisions, a formal ceasefire is effective between Iraq
and Kuwait and the Member States cooperating with Kuwait in accordance with
resolution 678 (1990))”. The required official notification was provided on behalf of
Iraq by the Minister for Foreign Affairs in a letter dated 6 April 1991 addressed to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and to the President of the Security
Council. In paragraph 34, which was the final paragraph of resolution 687 (1991),
the Security Council affirmed that any measures for the future use of force against
Iraq would require further authorization by the Security Council. That paragraph
provided as follows: “Decides to remain seized of the matter and to take such further
steps as may be required for the implementation of the present resolution and to
secure peace and security in the region”. It follows that there is no legal basis that
can be invoked as authorizing the use of force against Iraq after the formal ceasefire
that was declared by the Council and in the absence of any new authorization. There
is therefore no legal justification for reopening discussion of resolution 678 (1990),
which has been implemented and has been superseded by resolution 687 (1991).
4.
The sixth preambular paragraph deplores what it refers to as Iraq’s failure to
provide a final and complete disclosure of all aspects of its earlier proscribed
programmes.
That paragraph contradicts the facts set forth in official United Nations
documents. In paragraph 79 of document S/1997/779, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) stated: “There are no indications of significant discrepancies
between the technically coherent picture that has evolved of Iraq’s past programme
and the information contained in Iraq’s FFCD-F [the definitive version of the ‘Full,
Final and Complete Declaration’] issued on 7 September 1996”.
In its report issued as document S/1997/301 the Special Commission stated the
following: “The accumulated effect of the work that has been accomplished over six
years since the ceasefire went into effect, between Iraq and the Coalition, is such
that not much is unknown about Iraq’s retained proscribed weapons capabilities”.
5.
The seventh preambular paragraph alleges that Iraq has not cooperated fully
and unconditionally with the weapons inspectors and ultimately ceased all such
cooperation.
This paragraph totally distorts the facts concerning Iraq’s cooperation: as a
consequence of its cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission and
IAEA those two bodies concluded their missions with respect to disarmament. The
IAEA report of 27 July 1998 (S/1998/694) stated in paragraph 35:
“... there are no indications of Iraq having retained any physical
capability for the indigenous production of weapon-usable nuclear material in
amounts of any practical significance, nor any indication that Iraq has acquired
or produced weapon-usable nuclear material other than the nuclear material

3

S/2002/1294

verified by IAEA and removed from Iraq in accordance with paragraph 13 of
resolution 687 (1991).”
The Special Commission noted in numerous reports that it had completed the
main part of its work: its report issued as document S/1995/494 stated in paragraph
29: “in the ballistic missile and chemical weapon areas, the Commission is now
confident that it has a good overall picture of the extent of Iraq’s past programmes
and that the essential elements of its proscribed capabilities have been disposed of.”
The former Executive Chairman of the Special Commission, Ambassador Rolf
Ekéus, in a statement made on 13 January 1993, affirmed that Iraq had implemented
95 per cent of the obligations imposed on it. Mr. Ekéus reaffirmed that statement in
an interview with the Swedish Broadcasting Corporation on 7 September 2002.
Furthermore, the report of Ambassador Celso L. N. Amorim to the Security
Council (S/1999/356) stated that the remaining disarmament issues could be
addressed within a reinforced ongoing monitoring and verification system. In other
words, the disarmament phase had in practical terms been concluded.
6.
The eighth preambular paragraph deplored the absence, since December 1998,
of inspection activities in Iraq and placed responsibility for that on Iraq, considering
that it was a reason for the prolongation of the crisis in the region and the suffering
of the Iraqi people ... !!!
This paragraph misrepresents the history of events. What caused the
withdrawal of the inspectors from Iraq on 15 December 1998, thereby bringing the
inspection activities to an end for practical purposes, was the United States of
America. On the day after the inspectors’ departure, the United States and the
United Kingdom carried out a large-scale military attack against Iraq which, among
other things, targeted the sites that had been subject to the ongoing monitoring
regime and contained the sensors, cameras and their attachments used in the
monitoring operations. The Security Council failed to take any action in the face of
this unilateral use of aggressive force against Iraq and has so far failed to assert that
country’s legitimate rights. Moreover, the United States used the former United
Nations Special Commission as an instrument of its hostile policy towards Iraq; it
used the activities of the Special Commission to undermine Iraq’s national security,
to provide cover for aggression against it and to prolong the unjust blockade of its
people. This led ultimately to the loss of the credibility of the Special Commission,
its dissolution and the dismissal of its Executive Chairman, Richard Butler. The
United Nations has yet to take any action to call to account those who used United
Nations bodies for purposes incompatible with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, by spying on
Iraq and instigating crises, thereby flagrantly violating Article 100 of the Charter.
Iraq has not been compensated for the damage caused to it by the misuse of United
Nations bodies to harm it.
7.
The ninth preambular paragraph accuses Iraq of terrorism and human rights
abuses and of failing to cooperate in respect of missing persons and property. In this
connection we wish to place on record the following observations:
(a) The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq sent a letter
dated 11 June 1991 to the Secretary-General of the United Nations (S/22687) in
which he fully explained Iraq’s position on that matter. In fact, it was Iraq that had
been subjected for over 30 years to terrorism by international and regional forces led

4

S/2002/1294

by the United States and the United Kingdom, which spurred them on and financed
them, just as other peoples and States were subjected, and continue to be subjected,
to the terrorism and hostility of those two countries. Iraq has been subjected to
constant hostility on a daily basis in the form of terrorism by the United States and
the United Kingdom through the imposition of the illegal no-flight zones to the
north and south of Iraq. This aggression has also taken the form of the new strategy
of the United States of America through its adoption of what is known as preemptive war which violates the purposes and principles of the United Nations and is
another form of international terrorism. Moreover, the Security Council is incapable
of putting an end to the Zionist terrorism against our heroic Palestinian people and
the valiant freedom fighters, to say nothing of the encouragement given by a
permanent member of the Security Council to the Zionist entity, enabling it to
practise terrorism, assassination and destruction. We are referring to the United
States of America and its policy that is detested throughout the world.
(b) As far as Kuwaiti property is concerned, this has been returned to Kuwait
by Iraq, ending with the Kuwaiti archive which was handed over by the Iraqi
authorities to Kuwait during the period from 19 to 29 October 2002. As for the other
allegations, Iraq’s treasury is being plundered continuously through what is termed
compensation.
(c) Iraq has cooperated fully with the States concerned ascertaining the fate
of missing Kuwaiti nationals and nationals of third countries, and it has expressed
its full willingness to cooperate directly with Kuwait to resolve this humanitarian
issue which involves 1,137 missing Iraqis, 582 missing Kuwaitis and members of
other nationalities, and removing this issue from the tendentious politicization
perpetrated by the United States administration which is detrimental to both sides.
Iraq has been cooperating, and continues to cooperate, with the International
Committee of the Red Cross on the grounds that it is a neutral international party,
and with the States that have files of missing persons, thereby complying with the
obligations specified in the Geneva Convention of 1949.
8.
The tenth preambular paragraph indicates that a ceasefire under Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) would be based on Iraq’s acceptance of the provisions
of that resolution.
This clause is premature and ill-intentioned; it should have referred to the fact
that Iraq accepted resolution 687 (1991) by means of a letter from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs dated 6 April 1991 and has fulfilled its obligations under the
resolution. The Security Council, however, has not fulfilled its own corresponding
obligations. Similarly, two permanent members of the Security Council have not
fulfilled their obligations and, since 1991, have persisted, among other things, in
their military aggression against Iraq in the two illegal no-flight zones.
9.
The eleventh preambular paragraph states that the Council is determined to
ensure Iraq’s compliance with resolution 687 (1991).
This negates Iraq’s compliance with its obligations under the resolution and
ignores the fact that the Security Council has fulfilled none of its corresponding
obligations, including the obligations in paragraph 14 to free the Middle East region
from weapons of mass destruction and in paragraphs 21 and 22 concerning the
lifting of the comprehensive blockade imposed on Iraq which is a collective
punishment imposed on an entire people in violation of the principles of the United

5

S/2002/1294

Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as of the
provisions of the Charter and of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
concerning the need to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Iraq and to stop the daily aggression by the United States and the
United Kingdom against Iraq in the two illegal no-flight zones. This means that the
Security Council has given in, either willingly or because it was forced to do so, to
the United States tactic whereby, whenever the world called for a discussion of the
lifting of the blockade on Iraq and the application of paragraph 14 of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) to the Zionist entity preparatory to making the Middle
East region a zone free from weapons of mass destruction, and the Security Council
seemed likely to respond positively, the United States resorted to attack as a means
of defence, raising issues that diverted the Security Council from its duties, and
confusing public opinion, in an attempt to have the hated executioner declared
guiltless and to cast the great fighter for the humanitarian cause (Iraq) as the accused
party.
10. The thirteenth preambular paragraph indicates that the letter dated 16
September 2002 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq
addressed to the Secretary-General is a necessary first step towards rectifying Iraq’s
continued failure to comply with relevant Security Council resolutions.
The purpose of that paragraph is to contradict the letter from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the Security Council (S/2002/1034) which regarded Iraq’s
acceptance of the return of the inspectors as a first step towards a comprehensive
solution which would include the lifting of the sanctions and the implementation of
other provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
11. In the fourteenth preambular paragraph, the Council takes note of the letter
dated 8 October 2002 from Mr. Blix and Mr. El-Baradei and expresses concern at
the continued failure of the Government of Iraq to provide confirmation of the
arrangements as laid out in that letter.
In fact, Iraq has concluded an agreement with UNMOVIC and IAEA regarding
the practical arrangements that are prerequisites for the return of the inspectors, and
this agreement was incorporated in the joint press release issued in Vienna on 1
October 2002. Both parties agreed in principle that the inspectors should return to
Iraq on 19 October. The letter from Mr. Blix and Mr. El-Baradei contained things
that Mr. Blix had not asked for during the meetings in Vienna because such things
did not fall within his mandate but must be the subject of agreements with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and decided by the Security Council.
Nevertheless, Iraq addressed these points in its two replies to the aforementioned
letter, dated 8 and 10 October 2002, in which it affirmed that it was not opposed to
the contents of that letter.
12. It must be noted that the preambular paragraphs focus on the imaginary threats
to regional and international peace and security allegedly posed by Iraq’s supposed
weapons of mass destruction, whereas they make no mention whatsoever of the real
dangers posed to security in the region and the rest of the world by the considerable
arsenal of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction that is in
the possession of the Zionist entity, even though the establishment in the Middle
East of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction is one of the main objectives
of Security Council resolution 687 (1991), as noted in paragraph 14 of that
resolution. This paradox is a reflection of the odious policy of double standards

6

S/2002/1294

which the United States of America imposes on the Council insofar as its positions
and resolutions are concerned.
13. In paragraph 1 of resolution 1441 (2002) the Council claims that Iraq has been
and remains in breach of its obligations under relevant Council resolutions.
Without offering a shred of evidence, this paragraph dismisses out of hand the
cooperation Iraq displayed over eight years to secure the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions. Yet this cooperation is a clear and established fact, as can be
seen from the reports of the former Special Commission and IAEA. The Special
Commission, speaking through its Chairman from 1993 onward, stated that it had
accomplished 95 per cent of its work. IAEA, meanwhile, has maintained since 1992
and continues to say in its reports that it has completed its disarmament missions
and that there are no issues pending in the area of disarmament. One may well ask
whether these two bodies could have completed the tasks entrusted to them by
Security Council resolution 687 (1991) without Iraq’s full cooperation. What does
this mean and, further, what does it mean that the Security Council is failing to fulfil
its obligations? To Iraq and to other States it means that the Council is in a sorry
state and that, because it is bowing to the will of the United States and British
Governments, it is pursuing a policy based on expediency and power that is far
removed from the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. The results are the
same, regardless of whether Iraq or other States fulfil their obligations: the Zionist
entity is exempted from any legal measures so long as it participates, along with the
United States of America, in the odious imperialist alliance that seeks to dominate
the world. Moreover, it is the United States that has been and remains in violation of
Security Council resolutions by using the former Special Commission as a tool for
spying on Iraq and fomenting crises, and by undermining Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity by joining with the United Kingdom to impose illegal no-flight
zones on the country. During the past 11 years the United States and the United
Kingdom have continually launched large-scale military attacks on Iraq,
undermining its sovereignty and independence and publicly encouraging a number
of mercenary terrorists, whom they train, arm and finance to perpetrate terrorist acts
on Iraq and its people, thereby contravening the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, all of which call for respect for
Iraq’s sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity.
14. In paragraph 2 of the resolution the Council decides “to afford Iraq … a final
opportunity to comply with its … obligations”.
This paragraph gives the erroneous impression that the Security Council has
begun to take steps against Iraq. In fact the opposite is true. Indeed, when the
inspectors left Iraq it was discovered that some of them had been spying on Iraq and
its vital national interests while stirring up crises; the final report of the Chairman of
the now defunct Special Commission was also used by the United States of America
and the United Kingdom to disguise their perfidious attack of 16 December 1998.
Yet despite all that, Iraq has been engaging in dialogue with the Secretary-General
since February 2000 with a view to reaching a comprehensive settlement that will
ensure the balanced and lawful implementation of Security Council resolutions,
including the fulfilment by the Council of its own obligations, to Iraq – the lifting of
the embargo and the ensuring of respect for Iraq’s sovereignty – and to the region –
the implementation of paragraph 14 of resolution 687 (1991) – as well as the
restoration of the inspection regime aimed at ensuring that Iraq has eliminated its

7

S/2002/1294

weapons of mass destruction. On 16 September 2002 Iraq agreed to the inspectors’
unconditional return, but it was the United States that prevented their return, exerted
all kinds of pressure on the members of the Security Council and haggled with them
to ensure that Security Council resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted in order to
mislead the international community and public opinion and make them forget the
great lie put forward by the United States Government and its vassal in order to
provide pretexts and obscure the aggression being carried out in accordance with its
plans.
15. In paragraph 3 of the resolution the Council calls upon Iraq to provide to
UNMOVIC, IAEA and the Council a currently accurate, full and complete
declaration of all aspects of its programmes to develop weapons of mass destruction
as well as other chemical, biological and nuclear programmes.
This paragraph is based on the entirely unrealistic assumption that programmes
for the development of weapons of mass destruction exist in Iraq. Iraq, however, has
vehemently rejected this allegation, and the United States of America and the United
Kingdom cannot offer a single piece of credible evidence. The Council further calls
for the submission of declarations regarding civilian programmes, without being
more specific. It also asks in this paragraph for a model report, even though no
precedent exists; this gives Council members another pretext for questioning Iraq’s
declarations and affords an opportunity to spread untruthful allegations about Iraq’s
failure to cooperate.
16. Paragraph 4 of the resolution posits a false hypothesis, namely that Iraq might
submit declarations containing false statements or omissions, or that it might fail to
comply with the resolution. A second false hypothesis is then posited on the basis of
the first, namely that such action would constitute a material breach of Security
Council resolutions.
The arbitrary judgement made in paragraph 4 is without precedent in national
and international legislation at any time in the history of mankind. In the first place,
to consider that the supplying of false information (bearing in mind the thousands of
pages of information that must be submitted) constitutes “a material breach” makes
it perfectly clear that the intent is to find pretexts for distorting Iraq’s position and
justify military action against that country, and not to attain the objectives set by the
Security Council. Secondly, to consider omissions from the statements submitted as
“a material breach” means that Iraq has already been selected as a target, whatever
justification may be cited for doing so. Viewing omissions as “a material breach”
constitutes an attempt to establish new norms of international law, something the
Security Council is not authorized to do under the Charter; moreover, such norms
are incompatible with the principles of justice relating to legal procedures.
17. In paragraphs 5 and 6 of the resolution the Security Council unjustifiably
confers on UNMOVIC and IAEA arbitrary powers that are in contradiction with
their international status, which requires them to uphold the sovereignty of the
countries in which they operate and to respect the laws and rules of those countries
as well as the human rights of their population in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. These measures, which are unprecedented in the history of the
United Nations and of international relations and the disarmament and arms-control
processes, are actually intended to obstruct the work of the inspectors, sow
confrontation, generate a crisis of confidence with Iraq and reopen the door to

8

S/2002/1294

misuse of inspection activities for purposes that have nothing to do with the
objectives set out in the Security Council resolutions.
The processes of disarmament and arms control are familiar, and there are
criteria established in international conventions for attaining the goal of
disarmament. They in no way provide for such activities as the holding of meetings
with citizens of a country in that country without the presence of representatives of
their Government, the requesting of citizens to leave their country with their
families in order for such meetings to take place in another country, the compiling of
the names of all scholars and researchers in the country, the entry into the country of
United Nations security guards to ensure the security of the facilities provided to the
inspection teams, even though Iraq, in accordance with the law, assumes
responsibility for their safety and pays their salaries, or the bringing in and taking
out of equipment by inspectors without notifying the State in whose territory they
are operating, all at the expense of the State in which the operation is taking place,
without any statement of expenditure being submitted and without telling the State,
once the mission is over, what has been done with the equipment and vehicles used
that are the property of that State.
18. In paragraph 8 of the resolution the Council decides that Iraq shall not take or
threaten hostile acts directed against any representative or personnel of the United
Nations or of any Member State taking action to uphold any Council resolution.
Here again, the resolution gives a distorted picture of Iraq's cooperation. The
members of the former Special Commission and IAEA worked in Iraq for eight
years. While some of them engaged in acts of espionage, provocation and troublemaking in contravention of United Nations regulations and the laws of the host
country, the Iraqi authorities afforded them full protection, and they did not suffer
from any prejudice or harassment. If one considers how numerous they were and
how long they stayed in Iraq without ever experiencing any harm, one can conclude
that Iraq's past behaviour sets an example for the world, something that cannot be
said for the United States, where international civil servants and nationals of other
States are subjected to all sorts of affronts, harassment and attacks, and may even be
robbed or murdered.
19. In paragraph 10 the Council requests UNMOVIC and IAEA to accept
recommendations from Member States with regard to sites to be inspected, persons
to be interviewed, conditions of such interviews, and data to be collected.
All this is designed to undermine cooperation between Iraq and the
UNMOVIC and IAEA inspectors and affords certain States a pretext for interfering
with their work. It also undermines the international status of these two bodies and
makes them subject to the pressures, desires, allegations and intentions of certain
States, foremost of which the United States of America, whose objectives serve their
own interests. At the same time these provisions do not compel the States providing
information to bear the legal, political or financial consequences if the information
they furnish is false and is intended to jeopardize or obstruct operations.
20. In paragraph 11 of the resolution the Council directs the two aforementioned
bodies to report to it immediately what it labels “any interference” by Iraq with
inspection activities, as well as any failure by Iraq to comply with its obligations,
including its obligations regarding inspections.

9

S/2002/1294

This paragraph does not confer upon either UNMOVIC or IAEA the power
requested to assess the state of Iraq’s cooperation but does authorize them to report
to the Council immediately any incident whatsoever, be it something minor, a doubt
or a misunderstanding. This hardly helps to build trust or address concrete practical
problems that may arise in the field, and thus it does not contribute to cooperation or
the attainment of the goals set.
The logic of this paragraph also implies absolute good faith on the part of all
members of the inspection teams and complete bad faith on the part of the Iraqi
authorities, which totally contradicts what the international community knows about
the behaviour of many of the inspectors of the ill-famed and now defunct Special
Commission, as well as what you yourself said in your statement of 27 June 1999
concerning the actions of its members and the remarks made by the former
Chairman of the dissolved Commission, Mr. Ekéus, during an interview with a
Swedish radio station on 28 July 2002 (see S/2002/982). Paragraph 11 of the
resolution seeks a priori to incite wrongdoing, to create unwarranted crises so that
Iraq can be portrayed as failing to cooperate and to provide pretexts for attacking the
country.
21. In paragraph 12 of the resolution the Council decides to convene immediately
when a situation described in paragraph 11 arises, in order to secure international
peace and security.
By considering “any interference by Iraq with inspection activities” to
constitute a threat to international peace and security, the Council is attempting to
provide a broad new interpretation of international peace and security. This runs
counter to the principles set out in Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly when two permanent members of the Security Council are engaged daily
in waging outright military aggression against Iraq, violating its sovereignty and its
territorial integrity, bombing its towns and villages, without the Security Council
deciding that such acts constitute a threat to international peace and security. A host
of serious violations of international peace and security are committed in various
parts of the world, including the ongoing Zionist aggression against the Arab
territories and the possession by the Zionist entity of weapons of mass destruction.
22. Lastly, the Council, before ending the resolution as it began it, recalls in
paragraph 13 that it has repeatedly warned Iraq, distorting reality and threatening
Iraq with war and aggression.
The above-mentioned facts show that those who pushed the Security Council
to adopt resolution 1441 (2002) are aiming at objectives other than ensuring that
Iraq has not produced weapons of mass destruction. In spite of this, and even though
the resolution contains bad provisions, we have decided to cooperate in
implementing this resolution in order to spare our people, the region and the rest of
the world from the unleashing of evil and aggression advocated by the extremists in
the United States Government, and to give the United Nations an opportunity to
implement its resolutions in accordance with international law and the Charter. It is
our hope that the Secretariat and peace-loving States, especially those that are
permanent and non-permanent members of the Security Council, will urge
UNMOVIC and IAEA to compel their inspectors to respect their obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and their mandate while endeavouring to realize
the purposes of the United Nations; this will quickly show how inane are the
tendentious accusations levelled by the United States of America against Iraq to the

10

S/2002/1294

effect that Iraq possess weapons of mass destruction, and it will allow the United
Nations to discharge its obligations under these resolutions in respect of Iraq and the
region in general by lifting the iniquitous embargo, by respecting the sovereignty,
security, territorial integrity and vital national interests of Iraq, and by creating a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, chiefly through the
elimination of the vast arsenal of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons in the
hands of the Zionist entity.
Accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest consideration.
(Signed) Naji Sabri
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq

11
