UNITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-ElGIiTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

NEW

8 OCTOBER

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1743)

. . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.. . . . ,. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . . . . . . . . .

SJPV.1743

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-THIRD
Held in New York on Monday, 8 October
fkesident:

Sir Laurence i@zINTYRE (Australia).

Besent:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Revisional agenda (S/Agenda/1743)
I.

Adoption of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010).
The meet& wascalled to order at 6.10 p.m.
Expressionof thanks to the retiring President

MEETING

1973, at 6 p.m.

At the invitation of the Presidelzt,Mr. M, H. El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. A. Ebun (Israel) and Mr. M. 2. Isrnail (Syrian
Arab Republic) took placesat the Counciltable.
3. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw attention to the
following Security Council documentswhich haverecently
beenissued:letter dated 6 October 1973from the representative of the Syrian Arab Republicto the Presidentof the
Security Council /S/11009 and Corr.l/; letter dated
7 October 1973 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel to the Secretary-General(S/1101 I]; letter dated
7 October 1973 from the representativeof the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to the Secretary-General
[S/11012]; and letter dated 8 October 1973 from the
Secretary-Generalto the Presidentof the Security Council
/S/I 10131.
4. Mr. SCALI (United Statesof America): Before making
my preparedremarks,I shouldlike on behalfof my Mission
to express appreciation to AmbassadorMojsov of Yugoslavia for his servicesas Presidentof the Security Council
during the month of September.

5. Mr. President,I wish to offer my congratulationsalsoto
1. The PRESIDENT: Beforethe Counciltakesup its work
I should like to pay a sinceretribute to my predecessor
as you. This is the first time I have had an opportunity to do
President during the month of September,Ambassador sopublicly. During the busy daysof consultationsthat have
Mojsov of Yugoslavia. We have all cometo know Ambas- just passed,I have already had occasionto recognizeand
appreciate your diplomatic skill, your vast experienceand
sador Mojsov as a distinguishedlawyer, an able diplomat
the fairmindednessand gentlemanlyfirmnessthat you bring
and a most agreeablecolleague,and his performancelast
to the presidency.
month in this chair provided abundant evidenceof those
qualities.
6. The United States has requestedthat the Security
Council be convened today in order that it might deal
Adoption of the agenda
urgently with the current situationin the Middle East.
7Fzeagendawasadopted.
7. For the first time in more than three years, armed
The situation in the Middle East:
hostilities have broken out on a massive
scalein the Middle
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent East. The cease-firewe have sought to maintainhasbeen
Representative of the United Statesof America to the
broken. The recourseto tragic violencewe have soughtto
United Nations addressedto the President of the
avoid is upon us.
Security Council (S/I 1010)
8. Reports based on United Nations sourcesappear to
2. The PRESIDENT: I have received letters from the
indicate that the air attacks in the Golan Heights were
representatives of Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab
initiated by Syrian MIG aircraft andthat the first firing on
Republic requesting participation, without the right to
the Suez front, which took place at the sametime asthe
vote, in the considerationof the questionon the Council’s Syrian attack, was from west to east. The subsequent
agenda in accordancewith the relevant provisionsof the
development of the fighting hasbeenfully coveredin the
provisional rulesof procedureof the Council.Accordingly I
press.
propose, if the Council agreesand in accordancewith the
9. In the days before fighting broke out, we received
usual practice, to invite the representativesI have just
mentioned to participate in the discussion
without the right
reports of intensified military activities in the Middle East
area. We watched these developmentsclosely, but until a
to vote.

16. Second, conditions must be restored in the area that
would be conducive to a settlement of the long-standing
differences in the Middle East. There must be respect rcr
the rights and positions of all the States in the region. A
beginning must be made towards converting the sharp
confrontation of violently opposing claims and counter.
claims, which for over a quarter of a century has made true
stability impossible, to a more reasoned discourse aimedat
genuine reconciliation. The least damaging way to bring tltis
about is to have the parties concerned return to tile
positions held before hostilities broke out.

few hours before military operations started we were
unable to conclude that these activities were a prelude to
actual fighting. This is a region in which alarms and alerts
are fairly frequent, In themselves, military movements
would not necessarily indicate that combat was about to
begin. When, very shortly before the initial attacks took
place, we received indications that this was the fact, we
immediately undertook
intensive diplomatic efforts in
hopes that the outbreak of hostilities might be prevented.
We discussed the situation directly with Israel and Egypt.
We consulted other permanent members and exchanged
views with many Governments represented in this Council.
Others in and outside of the area pursued parallel efforts.
We kept in close touch with the Secretary-General,
Mr. Waldheim, who also lent his great weight and prestige
to the efforts. Unfortunately, those efforts did not prevent
the outbreak, and intensive fighting continues.

17. Third, in all its efforts the Council must be mindful of
the need for universal respect for the integrity of t$og
instruments and principles of settlement for the Middle
Eastern dispute which have received the adherence of tile
interested parties and the support of the Council’s au.
thority. The foundations so laboriously achieved in the past
for negotiations looking towards a Middle Eastern peace
must not be destroyed under the stress of a military
emergency.

10. In so serious a situation we felt that we could not fail
to exercise our responsibility, as a permanent member of
the Security Council to request a meeting of the Council, in
order that it might be seized of the grave situation which
has arisen. Not to have done this would have been to fail in
our obligations under the Charter. We hope that in the days
ahead the Council by its deliberations can restore in some
measure its historic role of constructive ameliorator in the
most critical and explosive area in the world.

18. These principles, in the opinion of my Government,
constitute the framework within which we can act in this
Council to reduce the prevailing tension in the Middle East
snd to prepare for a reinvigoration of the process OT
peacemaking. We are prepared to discuss these principles,
and any others which other members may put forward, asa
basis for our further action.

11. Definitive judgements as to constructive action are
difficult in view of the fluidity of the situation. My
Government has itself made no such judgements. Nor have
we felt it would be constructive to divert the Council’s
energies and attention to the question of assessing blame.

19. What we seek in this Council is not a war of words,
but a broad consensuswhich will enable the Councilto put
the full weight of its influence behind the task of restoring
peace,so that the Middle East can be set on a new course
pointing towardsa better era in the region.

12. Our purpose today is not to sift conflicting reports or
to assess responsibility for what has occurred. Our purpose
is to help promote a solution for the tense and dangerous
situation confronting us.

20. Let us then renounce the sterile gainsof propaganda
and turn to seriousdiscussion.The situation is urgent; the
needis great; and time presses.

13. We recognize that it is difficult to separate proximate
from underlying causes. The former may be clearcut, but
the Iatter are complex, and perceptions of right and wrong
inevitably vary. It has been over six years since the present
abnormal situation was created in the wake of the 1967
Arab-Israeli war. That war in turn followed 18 years of
abnormal armistice. For the failure to move from abnormal
armistice and cease-fire to political accommodation and
peace there is more than enough blame to go around. All
concerned have missed opportunities to make the transition
over the past 25 years.

21. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakersis that of the representativeof Egypt, on whom1
now call.
22. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the other membersof the Council for having granted
methe honour of participating in this debate.
23 Until we heard the beginningof the statementof Ihe
representativeof the LJnitedStatesof America, we Iladno1
intended to ask to be allowedto speak.But he hasasserteli
somefacts and proposedsomeaction. I amvery gratefullo
him and would like to registerour thanks for the assertion
of his responsibilitiesasthe representativeof a permanent
member of the Security Council. According to his letter
[S/IIOIU], in accordancewith Article 24 of the Charl+r
the Membersof the United Nations have conferred primarp
responsibility for the maintenanceof international peai%
and security on the Security Council and havegiven spcci3l
responsibilitiesto the permanentmembersof the Council.
It is good to hear that the permanent membersof L~IU
Council are conscious of their responsibility and of the
Council’sresponsibility.

14. We have given preliminary thought to the direction in
which this Council might move in dealing with this
prqblem, so that new opportunities to make practical
progress towards peace can be created, and the present
tragedy can be made a new beginning rather than simply
another lost opportunity. As we see it, there are a number
of principles which the Council must seek to apply.
15. First, in a situation where fighting is raging unchecked,
the most appropriate means must be found for bringing the
hostilities to an end. Military operations must be halted,
The guns must fall silent so that additional human suffering
may be avoided and the search for peace may proceed.
2

24. But I have been in this Council before. On 6 June this
year{1 717th meeting] I camehere to give a full reviewof
our efforts to securethe implementation of the peaceful
settlement prescribed and endorsedby the principal political
organs of the United Nations. I concluded my
statement by quoting somewords usedby the Emperorof
Ethiopia on 30 June 1936 in his speechbefore the League
of Nations, when his country wasfacing a situation similar
to that which we face. This is what he said:
“The issuebefore the Assemblytoday , . . is a question
of collective security. . . .
“1 ask the great Powers who have promised the
guarantee of collective security to smallStates. . . what
measuresdo they intend to take?

29. Another violent attack was carried on against the
Jarring aide-mbmoire of 8 Februrary 1971 /S/10403,
annex I/. Now we hear that we must respect all the
instruments that were designedto achieve a peaceful
settlement. The one we have in mind-the oneto which we
adhered, the one which the GeneralAssemblysupported,
the one which 14 membersof the Councilsupported-isthe
aide-me’moireaddressedto us and to Israelon 8 February
1971 by Gunnar Jarring, the SpecialRepresentativeof the
Secretary-General, who prepared that document in accordance with resolution 242 (1967), giving him a specific
mission. He received a reply to his aide-mCmoirefrom
Egypt [ibid., annex II], and a reply from Israel [ibid.,
an~exII// describing the aide-mCmoireas a travesty of
international law and callingfor negotiations.

30. We asked: What kind of negotiations?Are they to be
negotiations in which Israel would decide what part of
occupied Egyptian territory was to be returned and what
part of occupied Egyptian territory wasto be annexedto
Israel’?That is the only kind of negotiationsthey propose;
all their talk about negotiationsare accompaniedby the
25. I asked the Security Council in June: What message declaration that Israel will never go back to the interam I to take back to my people as a result of these national borders of Egypt or to the linesfrom which Israel
attacked on 5 June 1967.
meetings? And at the end of the meetingsI saidthat I had
got two messages:the first was that of full support by
31. The policy of violence, aggressionand occupation
world public opinion; the second,unfortunately, wasthat
would then have yielded its ultimate result: the imposition
of the blocking of the Council’saction by the veto of the
of
territorial concession. Were that policy allowed to
representative of the United Statesof America.
succeed,the whole international legal order basedon the
principlesof the Charter would crumble.
26. We came to the Council seekingits support to put an
end to an occupation maintainedand consolidatedfor some 32. Israel’s obstruction of AmbassadorJarring’smandate
six years on a part of Egypt’s land and soil, aswell ason
has been coupled with a systematicpolicy of colonization
parts of two sister States. Fourteen of the 15 members of the occupied territories. United Nationsrecordsare full
around this table firmly supported Egypt’s claim. Egypt’s
of testimony to this effect,
position was fully anchoredin the mostsacredprinciplesof
33. It was only a few weeks after Israel launched its
the Charter. Yet we all witnessedhow the collectivewill of
the members of the Council was paralysedand rendered aggression of 1967 that Arab Jerusalemwas illegally
annexed to Israel, under the pretext of municipalunificainoperative by the veto of the representativeof the United
tion, or electricity and water unification, or whatever it
States of America [I 735th meeting].
was. The last count of Israel’ssettlementsin the occupied
27. Israel advocated the policy of conquest,of occupation territories was given by Israel’sofficial radio on 18 August
as 44, in addition to 5 more to be built in the Golan
and, in the end, territorial expansion; the policy of the
Heights; in the West Bank of Jordan, the areaof Raffah,
fruits of war. Assailingthe principlesof non-acquisitjonof
partly in the Gaza Strip and partly in EgyptianSinaiand in
territory by war and of territorial integrity, Israel’srepreselltative claimed that its occupation of Arab territorieswas southern Sinai. In Slrarm-el-Sheikhthere are hotels and
invitations for tourists to go there,andsomeairlines-I think
an act of defence. He proclaimedthat no principle and no
Scandinavianones-are beinginvited to have regularflights
rule could prejudice the right to self-preservationand
there to bring tourists to the newly acquiredpossession
of
defence. He mentioned Article 51 of the Charter and at
Israel. Sharmel-Sheikh is an Egyptiantown.
that point, the Council will recall, I took note of Article 51
of the Charter.
34. Those settlements were describedby the PrimeMinister of Israel, asreported in the JerusalemPostof 26 July
28. A settlement of the Middle East question could not
and cannot be sought-according to the Israeli represen- 1973, in the following way:
“Representatives of the world, I have cometo Geneva
to dischargein your midst the most painful of the duties
of the Head of a State. What answeram I to take back to
my people? “1

tative-in this very well-lit room. He askedUS to leaveit and
leave the United Nations and go somewhereelse,in the
Middle East, away from the responsibility for the preservation of peaceand security conferred upon the Councilby
the Members of the United Nations-so that, away from the
special responsibility of the permanent membersof the
Council, the conqueror could dealwith the vanquished.

“These outposts and settlementsare seedswhich will
develop in the future, growing in population and becoming more firmly rooted. The settlementactivity has
deepened our roots in the land and strengthenedthe
foundations of the State. Preparationsand plans are
under way for the continuation of this important activity,
whether rural or urban settlement.”
All this in the occupiedland of Egypt, in the occupiedland
of Syria, in the occupied land of Jordan.

35. The policy of territorial expansion was best described
by Israel’s Defence Minister in July 1968. Please, Mr. President and members of the Council, listen attentively to what
he said while standing on the Golan Heights:

on .5June 1967, the following resolutions were adopted by
this Council: First, there was resolution 233 (1967) of
6 June 1967, which inter alia “calls upon the Governments
concerned to take forthwith as a first step”-as a first
step-“all measures for an immediate cease-fire and for a
cessation of all military activities in the area”. Resolution
234 (1967) of 7 June demanded “that the Governments
concerned should as a first step cease fire and discontinue
all military activities at 2000 hours GMT on 7 June 1967”.

“During the last 100 years, our peoples have been in the
process of building up the country and the nation, in the
process of expansion, of giving additional Jews additional
settlements in order to expand the borders here. Let no
Jew say that the process has ended. Let no Jew say that
we are near the end of the road.”

43. The Security Council members, in adopting those
resolutions, stressed that they were provisional in nature
and that they were really only a first step. It was clear from
the debate in the Council that the settlement of the conflict
would require time, at least a few days, and that the most
urgent task was the cessation of hostilities. But later on, on
22 November 1967, the Council decreed [resolution 242
(1967)) withdrawal to the lines from which the attack
had begun; it decreed withdrawal from the territories
occupied by Israel in the recent conflict. 1 am using the
word “the” because all of the other languages use it and
because there is no other way by which the principle of tllc
non-admissibility of the acquisition of territories by force
could be respected.

36. While the policy of colonization was going on in full
swing, Israel was planning for further aggression and acts of
war-so that no one would say that the process had ended.
37. This attack on 6 October, mentioned in my letter to
the General Assembly2 is not an isolated act; it is the
pursuit of the same policy of arrogant power recently
escalated by Israel against all Arab countries neighbouring it.
38. On that day Israeli air formations attacked the
Egyptian forces stationed in the area of El Zaafarana and El
Sukhna on the Western Bank of the Gulf of Suez, while
Israeli naval units were approaching the Western coast of
the Gulf. The time and place for this attack were carefully
and deliberately selected. The attack was aimed at El
Sukhna, where ,the construction of an oil pipeline carrying
oil from Suez to the Mediterranean was to begin. They
chose to make the attack only a few days after the
announcement of an agreement to construct the pipeline.

44. However, what was supposed to be a first step
remained until it was really almost a permission and licence
for the occupation of these lands. But-and this is most
important-on 19 June 1970 the United States Government
made a proposal to both Egypt and Israel to cease fire for
PO days and to start talks with Mr. Jarring, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. That cease-fire was
to end on 5 November 1970. One day earlier, on 4 Novem.
ber, the General Assembly adopted resolution 2628 (XXV),
which, inter alia, recommended

39. I do not want to speak about what holiday this attack
took place on, but it seems that people in the area should
know that this is also the Moslem holy month of Ramadan.
Israel’s latest act of aggression was preceded by the
large-scale aerial attack against Syria on 1.3 September, in
preparation for the co-ordinated further aggression against
the two countries. Israel, having found itself isolated from
world public opinion, resorted to the only language which
it can speak, unfortunately-the
language of war.

“ . . 1to the parties that they extend the cease-fire for a
period of three months in order that they may enter into
talks under the auspices of the Special Representative (of
the Secretary-General] with a view to giving effect to
Security Council resolution 242 (1967);“.
Thus the Assembly clarified once more the close and
integral link between the implementation of the United
Nations resolutions and the observance of the cease-fire.
Furthermore, it laid down a short, defined duration, after
which there would be no cease-fire, of course.

40. The policy of closing all options before the Arabs,
before Egypt, except the option of surrender, the policy of
making despair the element to induce us to kneel and
accept Israel’s diktat, has failed.
41. Following the attack of 6 October, our sons have
responded to the policy of arrogance. They have crossed to
Egyptian territory east of the Suez Canal and raised the flag
of Egypt on the territory of Egypt. They are fighting, and
even while I am speaking now, the town of Port Said is
being heavily bombarded. I wish that the name of Port Said
did not have to be evoked again in the hearts of Egyptians.
But it is a town which has been assailed before and which
has emerged victorious; and it will emerge victorious again.

45. President Sadat announced on 4 February, when the
cease-fire should no longer have been in existence, that
Egypt would refrain from opening fire for a period of 30
days, ending on 7 March 1971. On that date we declared
that our country “no longer considered itself further
committed to a cease-fire or to withholding fire”[S/Z0929,
para. 891.
46. Israel’s attempt to make the cease-fire an established
legal regime, disregarding its obligations under the Charter
and under Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on the political settlement, is not only baseless: it is
really a mockcry of the Charter and of General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, since in the end it means
that this Council has given a country a licence to OCCUPY
the lands of other countries until it desires and agrees tc

42. In the few notes which I took of the speech of the
representative of the United States of America, I see that
there was an assertion that the cease-fire has been broken.
What cease-fire? After Israel had launched its armed attack
2 A/9190.
4

thL’Il1
by a&!KTiIlg
t0 new
borders to be established by
its will, or the will of others, but subject to its will.

kaW

47. This is a situation which cannot really be considered
seriously. Let us take a hypothetical case. Let us say that
Egypt OCCU~~C~ SWC~CII, and then there was a cease-fire
~‘der. Would that mean that Egypt had permiSSiOn
t0
occupy SwCdell eternally’? That is unbelievable, undiscussabI% and, as I said, it makes a mockery of the Charter
of the United Nations, of the Council arid of its resolutions:
48. ‘I’ht this iS exactly
what Israel is seeking is evident
frtlnr the well-established fact that Israel has created a large
1~LllllbCl’
of settlements and colonies in the occupied
territories. a~ 1 said just now. It has also taken measures
tO\M!‘dS
thC
creation Of so-called
new
facts
in the occupied
tt!rritclricS. lt SeCltt~ that, confident in its forces, sure that
Wtllitlg WUld IttOVC it except force and sure also that it
would ~VC all the force it needed and all the assistance it
ncedcd to nliuntain Ihat occupation, it was really building
3s if this Was going to be a part of Israel.
49. Foreign Minister Eban, on television here in the
United States, WL\S told, “The Egyptians say that they are
$c,ing buck to their territories’? ” His reply was, “Yes; they
claim LIISO Jcrusatem to bc their territory, and Israel to be
their territory”-thus equating exactly their positions in
Sinai, the C;ulan,
the West Sank of Jordan and Jerusalem
wi tt1 I sract.
SO. 1t h:rs been said here that no effort is going to be made
to assess blame. We welcome that, although we know where
the blame lies; but perhaps that is a negative thing.
I Iowevcr, I do not know how to marry that assertion with
the statement that United Nations observers have found
that Egypt began attacking and is attacking. May I ask the
Sccrctary-C;cncral,
through you, Mr, President, if his observcrs arc at El Sukhna and El Zaafarana? May I ask him if
Im. in the name of the United Nations, can tell you that
thcrc has been no firing, no attack on El Sukhna and El
%aafarnno’! Why use the name of the United Nations?
Lcavc this to the radio and television stations and other
Intlslujied-mass-information
media, but do not use it in the
Scourity Council. 1 would like the Secretary-General to tell
IIK
whether they really have ascertained whether there was
an irt tack on EI Sukhna and El Zaafarana on 6 October or
nut, arrd if this attack took place prior to the events which I
IIUVC &scribed
to the Council now. Why use the name of
tllc lJnitcd Nations’?
SI. ‘I’hon thcrc were a number of suggestions and principles. one was to return to the positions before hostilities
ijrukc out. lf that means the positions before hostilities
t)roke out in June 1967, then I must say that it was the
H’iStr lr~ the Council in July this year precisely to condemn
tIlc cc)rltirruation of the occupation since that date. That
\Vollld be a VC~Y good sign that the United States was
tvit]rdrnwing
its veto of the draft resolution /s/1@74/. But
,y it l,tc~41ts soIttett)ing else, if it means that we are called
trI,~~lr to glvc up Part of our country for another to occuPY3
IIlcIl I fail to understand it and will not reply to it.
-5’I- .4rr invitation to a country and People to offer part of
tlrcir territory
to be occupied by another Power may come

from the Palaces of emperors or dictators, but it cannot
come from the United Nations, not from this house not
from this hall. The Foreign Minister of Prance has as;<ed:
“Does an attempt to set one’s feet back in one’s own house
constitute SUrpriSe
aggression? “. The Occupied
iand
of
Egypt is our home. The people who are dying today, now,
in Egypt, are our sons, brothers, colleagues; they are dying
so that their Egypt may live intact with its territorial
integrity preserved, so that no territory can be taken as a
result of war, so that war will have no fruit. They are not
dying for Egypt alone; they are dying for us, for YOU, for
the world, for this United Nations,
53. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (iF2terpretQtjOn from
Chinese).’ With the connivance and support of the super
Powers, the Israeli Zionists have been frantically pursuing a
policy of aggression and expansion over a long period. They
have not only maintained the occupation of large tracts of
Arab territories they illegally seized during the 1967 war of
aggression, but flagrantly launched on 6 October fresh
military attacks on a large scale in expanded aggression
against Egypt, Syria and the Palestinian guerillas. This is a
serious provocation not only to the entire Arab people but
to those countries and peoples in Asia, Africa and Latin
‘America and the rest of the world who uphold justice. The
Chinese Government and people express great indignation
at and most strongly condemn these new acts of aggression
committed by the Israefi Zionists.
54. With the support of other Arab countries, the armymen and civilians of Egypt, Syria and Palestine are
heroically resisting Israeli aggression and have dealt blows at
its aggressive arrogance. It is perfectly just for them to rise
in resistance to the invading enemies on their own sacred
territories. The Chinese Government and people admire
them for their bold and just action and express firm
support to them,
5.5. Since 1967 the United Nations has adopted a series of
resolutions, calling for or demanding Israeli withdrawa!
from the large tracts of Arab territories it illegally occupied
during its war of aggression in 1967. TO date, who has ever
seen Israel withdrawing even an inch from the illegally
occupied Arab territories? In Article 1, paragraph 1, the
Charter of the United Nations expressly provides for “the
suppression of acts of aggression”. One may ask: what has
the United Nations done for the “suppression” of ISraeli
acts of aggression? Today, when the Egyptian Syrian and
Palestinian army-men and people are courageously resisting
the Israeli aggressors in face of the fresh aggression by the
Israeli Zionists, some people, under the pretence of fairness,
are pointing their fingers at this or that, instead of
supporting and praising their resistance. Some People have
even made the preposterous proposal that Egypt and Syria
withdraw to their positions prior to their counter-attack
against the aggressors. Is this not an open encouragement to
acts of aggression and permission for the Israeli aggressors
to perpetuate
their
occupation of Arab territories?
56. Overtly and covertly conniving at and supporting the
Israeli policies of expansion and aggression, the two
super-Powers have directly inflated the aggressive arrogance
of the Israeli Zionists. In energetically advertising the
fallacious argument about the so-called “detente”, their

purpose is none other than to lull the will of the Arab and
Palestinian people to fight against aggression. Driven
beyond the limit of their forbearance by the fresh military
aggression launched by the Israeli Zionists, the army-men
and civilians of Egypt, Syria and Palestine this time have
broken through the situation of “no war, no peace”
deliberately maintained by the super-Powers in the Middle
East, and have taken courageous and bold actions for
resistance to and expulsion of the aggressors. This reflects a
new awakening of the Arab countries and the Palestinian
people. Even though they might yet encounter some
temporary difficulties and setbacks in the struggle against
aggression, we are convinced that so long as they persevere
in struggle and strengthen their unity, they will certainly
recover their lost territories and enable the Palestinian
people finally to attain their national rights.
57. If the Security Council is to adopt any resolution at
all, it must condemn all the acts of aggression by the Israeli
Zionists in the strongest terms, give the firmest support to
the Egyptian, Syrian and Palestinian peoples in the just
action they are taking to resist the aggressors, demand the
immediate withdrawal of the Israeli Zionists from all the
Arab territories they have occupied and explicitly provide
for the restoration of the national rights of the Palestinian
people.
5X. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative

secureboundaries. And when I say “negotiation”, I mean
not any unilateral imposition but a detailed, precisestudy
by both parties of what it is that concernsand preoccupies
and afflicts the other, and how those concerns, those
preoccupations and those anxieties may be brought into
maximal harmony.
63. After all, everything elsehasbeen tried. War hasbeen
tried, with nothing but tragic results; fragile, vulnerable,
provisional armisticesandcease-fireshave beentried; public
accusation has been tried; endlessEgyptian statements
threatening Israel’s destruction have been tried. One thing
alonehas not been tried: building peaceby negotiation has
not been tried. Surely the time has come to embark upon
the adventureof negotiated peace.That is what shouldhave
beensaidin June of this year and on many other occasions
before and since, and it is what should be said on the
problemsthat face us as a result of the attacks from the
west and the north-and they came, as has been said
tonight, from the west and the north-as weL’ as on the
perspectiveswhich open out from this crisis.
64. As I have said, Mr. President,I should like to address
the Council more fully at a future meeting.
65. Sir Donald MAITLAND (United Kingdom): Mr. President, 1shouldlike first to extend to you the good wishesof
my delegationon your assumptionof the presidency.Your
skilful handling of the difficult informal consultations
which led up to this meeting has already shown us how
fortunate we are that the presidencyis in suchexperienced
handsaswe embark on this important debate.

of

59, Mr. EBAN (IsraeI): I thank the members of the
Security Council for inviting me to participate in the
Council’s work-and
not for the first time.

66. As soon asmy Government learnedof the outbreak of
hostilities in the Middle Eastlast Saturday, it instructed me
to explore urgently with you and with our colleagueshow
best the Security Council could discharge its responsibilities We were gratified that you set immediate consul.
tations in hand. It is right that this meeting should now be
taking place. The Security Council has primary respom
sibility under the Charter for the maintenance of infernational peace and security, and I do not believe that
responsibleopinion acrossthe world would have understood it if the Council had not becomeactively seizedof
this crisis.

60. I made a statement on Israel’s behalf this mornings in
another organ of the United Nations concerning the massive
armed attack launched against us on the Day of Atonement
from the west and the north, and the very cruel loss and
suffering which have resulted from that attack.
61. After studying the addresses made today by the
representatives of the United States and China and by the
Foreign Minister of Egypt I shall seek to address the
Security Council at a future meeting. It would, I think, be
helpful if at the next meeting the Foreign Minister of Egypt
would bring to the table some evidence for the odious
falsehood about an attack by Israeli naval forces at El
Sukhna and El Zaafarana, an attack which, ashe knows and
as I know, did not take place. I almost think it would be
more courteous to manufacture someevidence than not to
bring any at all, becausehe and I know that no suchthing
took place.

67. The first objective for the Council must be to secure
the earliest possibleend to the fighting. That is the first
concern of my Government. We must all deplore the lossof
young lives that hasalready taken placeand continueseven
aswe talk in this chamber.In addition to our humanitarian
concern, we must recognize that fighting in that vitally
important area of the world carrieswith it grave risks that
the conflagration will spread. The situation is far too
dangerousfor this Council to stand by while large-scale
hostilitiescontinue unchecked,

62. But tonight I would answer only one very fundamental question which the Foreign Minister of Egypt asked
in June of this year and reiterated tonight: What, he asked,
could he have broughi back then to his people? The answer
is, he could have brought back to his people the fact that
the door of negotiation is open to Middle Eastern Governments-negotiation that would replace war by peace,
hostility by co-operation, cease-fire lines by agreed and

68. That is the urgent task that faces us. We should not
allow ourselvesto be deflected from it by engagingnow in
attempts to apportion blame or attribute responsibility.
The ultimate verdict may well be that the basicfactor was
the frustration of the international community in its efforts
to bring about that just and lastingpeacein the Middle East
of which the promise was held oui by Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) nearly six years ago.
6

69. But We should resist the temptation to look backwar -d% Once We have accomplished our first task of bringing
the fi&ting to an end, we may find that we have a new
opportunity
to CWeiTOme the frustration of which I have
spoken, to break the political deadlock.

liberate their lands from the foreign aggressors and, as was
rightly stated today in the General Assembly4
by
MrmEl-Zayyat, Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs, have a
legitimate and just desire to return to their own homes.
77. Mr. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Corn.
fittee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, in his
statement today, 8 October, in Moscow at a luncheon given
in the Kremlin in honour of the official visit to the Soviet
Union of Mr. Tanaka, Prime Minister of Japan, made the
following remarks in connexion with the situation in the
Middle East:

70. On the basic aspects of the problem I wish to malce it
cIear that mY CoVemment’S position is uncllanged. We still
regard the prescription set out in resolution 242 (1967) as
the comt%tOIIe Of any settlement. We maintain the views set
out hY mY Secretary Of State at IIarrogate on 31 October
1970, when he described in detailed terms how a settlement
~~~igllt be achieved.

“The process of international d&~te is gathering force.
But in various parts of the world, it is being interrupted
by fresh outbreaks of conflict and tension. One proof of
this is the war that has now broken out again in the
Middle East. Close fighting is taking place there between
Israel, the aggressor, and Egypt and Syria, the victims of
aggression, which are trying to liberate their lands, It is
only natural that all our sympathies lie with the victims
of aggression. As to the Soviet Union, it has been, and
remains, a convinced advocate of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East and of guaranteed security for all
countries and peoples of that region, which is so close to
our frontiers. As in the past, we are ready to play our part
in ensuring such peace.”

71. Ever since 1967, and particularly over the past three
years, mY Government has been urging on all concerned, at
every OppOrtUnitY, in every possible forum, the overriding
rreccssitY for a peaceful Settlement in accordance with
resolution 242 (1967). If there was anyone who was still
disposed t0 doubt this, surely the present outbreak of
hostilities will have convinced him.
72. What I am suggesting is that this Council has two
immediate responsibilities: first, to issue an urgent call for a
cessation of the fighting; and, secondly, to treat these tragic
~e11t~ as a catalyst for starting a genuine diplomatic process
in order to achieve the peaceful settlement that has for far
too long eluded us.

78. Who, apart from the aggressor himself, would dare to
deny the correctness, the justice and the legitimacy of the
desire and aspiration of the Arabs to drive the foreign
invaders from Arab soil and from Arab homes, and to
return to those homes themselves? It is this which is the
dominant consideration, essential to any appreciation or
understanding of the situation that has arisen in the Middle
East, and it is the determining factor in the search for ways
to solve the Middle East problem.

73. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
ftranslutiorz ~~OHI Russian): Before making my statement on
behalf of the Soviet delegation on the substance of the
qlrcstion
under discussion, I should like to express my
gratitude to our distinguished friend and colleague Ambassador Mojsov, representative of Yugoslavia, for the brilliant
way in which he presided over the Council.
74. I should like to pay a tribute to you, Mr. President, for
your skilful guidance of the Security Council’s work and to
express the wish of the Soviet delegation to co-operate with
you in the performance of the Council’s functions at such
an important time.

79. What should be our way out of this situation and in
which direction should we seek a solution to the problem?
We are profoundly convinced that the way out of this
situation should be sought first and foremost in the
settlement of the question of the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the occupied Arab territories. It should be
perfectly obvious to everyone-and it is high time that this
WSS also understood by the aggressor and by those who
continue to protect him-that the situation in the Middle
East requires no new decision on the Middle East by the
United Nations. What is required is a way of ensuring that
the sound decisions already adopted in the relevant
resolutions of the principal organs of the United Nations-the Security Council and the General Assembly-are put
into effect. What does this require? First of all, this
requires that both sides in the conflict clearly and explicitly
declare before the United Nations and the whole world
their readiness to comply with those decisions. The Arab
Republic
of Egypt-as Mr. El-ZaYyat reminded us in his
statement-has -given its consent. Israel has not given its
consent-at least not yet-and in the statement made today
by Mr. Eban, Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs, we heard
no such consent. However, it is quite obvious that, as a
begin&g,
it is first of all absolutely essential that Israel,

75. The Council is once more required, upon the proposal
of one of its members, to consider the question of the
situation
in the Middle East. The attitude of the Soviet
L!rrion with regard to the convening of the Council on this
question at the present time was expressed in the course of
oortsultations
held by the President of the Security Council
with rnernbers of the Council on 6 October. Our basic view
was,
and still is, that it was inappropriate to Convene the
f’ouncil.
Since, however, a meeting of the Council has been
ct)trvened, the USSR delegation would hke to make the
following
statement.
76. Tllc general approach of the Soviet Union to the
situation
in the Middle East cannot but depend upon such a
&cjsjvc
fact that a war is going on there between Israel,
wlricll has occupied the lands belonging to others, and the
viotirrls of its aggression, the Arab States, which are striving
to recover those lands which belong to them. The war is
oontinuirrg
between the aggressor, Israel, which has invaded
Arab lands and is trying to appropriate them by force, and
tlre Arab States, whose peoples are fully determined to

4 Ibid.
7

which has occupied Arab territories, should clearly and
distinctly state its readiness to withdraw its troops from the
occupied Arab territories, and set about withdrawing them
immediately. In the light of this immutable and undeniable
truth, the discussion in the Security Council on the
situation in the Middle East cannot be separated from the
whole complex of the Middle East problem and particularly
from the substance of the earlier decisions taken by the
Council and the Assembly calling for the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from the Arab territories occupied by them in
1967. This demand by the United Nations for the total
withdrawal
of Israeli troops from the Arab territories
occupied in 1967 is embodied in repeated decisions of the
Council and the Assembly, and only recently was once
again unanimously supported and reaffirmed by all the
countries of the African continent in a resolution adopted
by the Organization of African Unity at its tenth session
[see S/10943/, and also by all the non-aligned countriesor, as they are otherwise known in United Nations circles,
the countries of the third world-in
the decisions of the
Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries at Algiers.

again be utilized by the aggressor, as in the past, merelyto
divert attention from this key issue and to continue the
occupation, appropriation and annexation of the lands
belonging to others which are occupied by the Israeli
aggressors.
81. That is the position of the Soviet Union. It has once
again been reaffirmed by the Soviet Government in its
statement of 7 October, which T consider it necessary to
bring to the attention of the Security Council and all its
members.
Allow me, Mr. President, to read out the text of that
statement.
[The speaker read out the text of the statement which is
containedin document S/l 1012.1
82. The PRESIDENT: I wish to refer to the letter from
the Secretary-General[S/11013J, which concernsa request
received by the Secretary-Generalin connexion with the
United Nations military observersin the Suez Canalarea.
As this appearsto be of someurgency, I would, with sunle
apology consideringthe latenessof the hour, invite mernbersof the Council into the President’soffice immediately
following the adjournment of this meeting for brief
consultationson the issueraisedin that letter.

80. Without a solution of this fundamental, cardinal
question and without a clear statement by Israel that it is
prepared to withdraw
all its troops from the occupied
territories,
the Security Council cannot take a single
constructive decision in the present circumstances in the
Middle East. The adoption of any new resolution, in the
absence of a settlement of this major, key issue, would once

The meetingroseat 7.40 p.m.

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite I Nations
publications
throu,‘hout
the world.
Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may

be obtained

yaw

bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: IJnited
Nations.
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNlES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans lea librairies
et les agences
ddpoaitaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
k : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGWIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicsciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero o dirijase
a: Nariones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

7%82001-June

1979-2,200
