S/2014/333

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution
2103 (2013), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and requested me to
submit regular reports to it on the implementation of the mandate every 180 days.
The report focuses exclusively on the status of implementation of the mandate of
UNIOGBIS since my report of 19 November 2013 (S/2013/681). Information on
major political, security, human rights, humanitarian and socioeconomic
developments in Guinea-Bissau is contained in my report of 12 May 2014 on the
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/332).

II. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Assisting in the creation of an environment conducive to the
holding of free, fair and transparent elections
2.
During the period under review, UNIOGBIS assisted national stakeholders in
preparing for the conduct of presidential and legislative elections, which took place
on 13 April. Detailed reporting on the electoral process is provided in my report of
13 May 2014 (S/2014/332). From 14 to 19 December 2013, UNIOGBIS held a
training workshop for 30 members of civil society organizations in the region of
Quinara, central Guinea-Bissau, aimed at strengthening the capacity of participants
to promote and monitor the human rights to freedom of expression, information,
assembly, association and political participation during the electoral process. On
21 March, UNIOGBIS and the National Electoral Commission jointly published a
practical guide on human rights and elections, which was widely distributed.
3.
UNIOGBIS supported the Ministries of Interior and Defence of the
Transitional Government in developing the national electoral security plan for 2014.
The plan provided for the two Ministries to jointly co mmand and oversee the

14-32226 (E)

130514

*1432226*

S/2014/333

deployment of officers from the National Guard (2,004), the Public Order Police
(2,059), Civil Protection (161), the National Central Bureau of the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) (2), the Judiciary Police (2) an d the
Transnational Crime Unit (1). In addition, 700 armed forces were on call as a
reserve force for contingencies.
4.
From 3 to 14 February, UNIOGBIS implemented the first phase of a training of-trainers programme on electoral security for 62 police offi cers from the Public
Order Police and the National Guard. The training focused on the Constitution and
the Electoral Law of Guinea-Bissau, international human rights standards, gender
mainstreaming for law enforcement, the role of the police and civilian p rotection
officers in the electoral process, as well as demonstrations and riot control
procedures. Six trainers from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) also attended the training. From
17 March to 4 April, UNIOGBIS completed the second and third phases of the
training, which targeted 1,283 police officers in all regions of the country, with the
support of the Peacebuilding Fund under the Immediate Response Facility. The aim
of the training was to educate law enforcement officers on principles of electoral
security and crowd control, in accordance with human rights norms and taking into
consideration the United Nations human rights due diligence policy.
5.
On 24 March, UNIOGBIS deployed three United Nations police officers to
Bubaque Island in the Bijagós archipelago off the coast of Guinea -Bissau to assist
national authorities in enhancing the presence of security institutions during the
electoral period. The police officers were responsible for mentoring , training and
monitoring the activities of national security and law enforcement institutions in the
archipelago and for interacting with residents, as necessary. In addition, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) deployed two United Nations vol unteers
to each of the nine regions of Guinea-Bissau to support the regional electoral
commissions.

B.

Assisting in strengthening democratic institutions and
enhancing the capacity of State organs to function effectively
and constitutionally
6.
The United Nations system continued to support the implementation of
reforms in public administration during the reporting period. UNDP launched the
second phase of the reform process, focusing on two priorities: (a) creating a pilot
unit within the Ministry of Civil Service and Reforms, including renovation of the
facilities (from 13 December 2013 to 14 January 2014); and ( b) advocating for
reforms and sensitizing the key actors involved in the reform process on appropriate
policies, strategies and tools. The support provided by UNDP focused on building
consensus and ensuring wide participation in the implementation of public
administration reforms. In November and December 2013, 55 civil servants,
including 6 women, were trained in public service management. In addition, key
legislation, which had been approved to regulate public administration functioning
and management, was disseminated to 225 regional and sectoral public
administration offices.
7.
The United Nations system assisted the Ministry of Economy and Regional
Integration in scaling up knowledge of results-based management concepts and tools

2/10

14-32226

S/2014/333

to create a critical mass of competent managers and to strengthen national capacity
in monitoring and evaluation. Some 50 senior officers from 15 public administr ation
departments received training in this area from 25 to 29 November 2013.

C.

Support for the establishment of effective and efficient law
enforcement and criminal justice and penitentiary systems
8.
From 1 December 2013 to 28 February 2014, a total of 378 people, 21 per cent
of whom were women, benefitted from free legal aid provided by the UNDPsupported Access to Justice Centres in the Bissau Autonomous Sector, the western
region of Cacheu and the north-central regions of Oio and Bafatá. Legal aid
technicians and civil servants from the Ministry of Justice at the Access to Justice
Centres resolved over 65 per cent of the cases, mostly through alternative dispute
resolution mechanisms. UNIOGBIS police advisers deployed to the UNIOGBIS
regional offices in those areas provided technical assistance to the Access to Justice
Centres.
9.
From 24 to 28 March, UNIOGBIS provided support to a field assessment
mission of the United Nations Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and
Corrections, which visited Guinea-Bissau to review progress in implementing this
arrangement. The mission assessed, inter alia, the work of the United Nations in
integrated planning processes, political strategy, human resources planning and
financing methods in the areas of police, justice and corrections. The mission’s
report is expected to contribute to the strengthening of United Nations joint
programming and execution in those areas.

D.

Support for security sector reform and the rule of law
10. The national security sector reform steering committee held a series of six
workshops for 16 security sector reform experts from government institutions, civil
society organizations, the African Union, ECOWAS and the United Nations, from
11 to 18 December 2013, with the support of UNIOGBIS. The experts reviewed and
updated the security sector reform strategy document, the national action plan on
security sector reform, legislation for the special pension fund for members of the
defence and security institutions, as well as the terms of reference for the
commissions that will be established to follow up progress made in th ose areas. The
workshops will culminate in a national conference on the modernization and
restructuring of the security sector, which is scheduled to be held in June 2014 with
the technical and financial support of UNIOGBIS.
11. The National Defence Institute, supported by UNIOGBIS, organized four
conferences in Bissau and the cities of Quebo, Gabú and Mansoa, in southern,
eastern and north-central Guinea-Bissau respectively, between 18 and 27 February.
The conferences brought together more than 320 military personnel, police officers,
community leaders, government officials and media representatives to discuss the
role of the armed forces in democratic systems and in socioeconomic development.
12. On 10 March, the Ambassador of Morocco to Guinea-Bissau delivered a
donation of 2,000 military uniforms from Morocco to the Transitional Government.

14-32226

3/10

S/2014/333

The donation was granted following the good offices of my Special Representativ e,
José Ramos-Horta, at the request of the armed forces leadership.

E.

Assisting national authorities to combat drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime
13. The expert on transnational organized crime from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) continued to assist national partners with the
implementation of the West Africa Coast Initiative in the country and with capacitybuilding to counter drug trafficking. At a strategic level, UNODC undertook a
comparative assessment of the achievements of the Transnational Crime Unit
between 2012 and 2013 to identify areas requiring specific intervention by UNODC
and UNIOGBIS. Joint efforts by UNODC and UNIOGBIS contributed to ensuring
the functioning of the Transnational Crime Unit and enhanced capacity-building
across the regions of the country. Lack of sufficient donor support continued to
hinder the successful implementation of the West Africa Coast Initiative in GuineaBissau.
14. From 25 to 28 November 2013, 30 police officers from the National Guard and
the Public Order Police in Buba, Quinara region (central Guinea-Bissau), attended a
training course within the framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative, which
focused on techniques of criminal investigation, crime scene man agement, technical
surveillance and operational planning and techniques for the collection and analysis
of criminal information. On 19 December, 49 police officers from the Transnational
Crime Unit, the Judiciary Police and INTERPOL received training on the same
topics, in addition to techniques relating to risk assessment in organized crime.
From 24 February to 21 March 2014, 4 officers from the Transnational Crime Unit
and 24 police officers from the Judiciary Police attended a series of comprehensive
and intensive training courses on information management and reporting,
international human rights standards for law enforcement agencies, specialized
tactical skills, mobile surveillance and criminal investigation on human trafficking.
All the courses were conducted with the technical and financial support of UNODC
and UNIOGBIS.
15. Between 3 December 2013 and 21 March 2014, the Judiciary Police and the
Transnational Crime Unit conducted five joint operations, resulting in seizures
totalling 6.5 kgs of cocaine and the arrests of six nationals of Guinea-Bissau, two
Senegalese and one Nigerian. However, some elements of other law enforcement
bodies continued to interfere in the judicial process, hampering the work of the
Judiciary Police and the Transnational Crime Unit in combating drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. On 26 January, three Judiciary Police investigators
detained a man at the international airport of Bissau on suspicion of drug
trafficking. The suspect, who had arrived reportedly from Brazil on a commercial
flight, was being transported to the Judiciary Police premises for questioning when a
group of approximately 15 Rapid Intervention Police officers arrived and took him
away by force. The whereabouts of the suspect remain unknown to date.

4/10

14-32226

S/2014/333

F.

Undertaking human rights promotion, protection, monitoring and
reporting activities
16. From 28 November to 15 December 2013, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), UNDP, UNIOGBIS, the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and national non-governmental organizations held a series of human
rights activities, in coordination with the Transitional Government, to celebrate
Human Rights Day, the 16 Days of Activism against Gender Violence and the
twentieth anniversary of OHCHR. These events were held in the cities of Bissau,
Bafatá, Mansoa and São Domingos. During the open debates that accompanied the
activities, participants emphasized the need to address impunity, nepotism, political
and military interference in the justice system, gender di scrimination, domestic
violence and the exploitation of talibé children.
17. Following the establishment of the national Human Rights Defenders Network
in September 2013, members of the Network organized a follow-up conference on
19 and 20 December 2013, which was attended by 43 human rights defenders from
all regions of the country. The conference, which was held with the support of
UNIOGBIS, enabled participants to confirm the constituent general assembly and
approve the internal statutes of the Network. The Human Rights Defenders Network
was officially launched and its Executive Board sworn in on 24 April.
18. Through its rule of law and justice project, UNDP, in cooperation with
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office for West Africa, facilitated a “Human
rights-based approach and results-based management” workshop for United Nations
personnel, government officials, members of the judiciary and human rights
defenders, on 22 and 23 January. The training, aimed at strengthening national
capacities for mainstreaming human rights in policies and programmes, was
delivered by the United Nations System Staff College in cooperation with UNDP,
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office for West Africa.
19. On 29 January, the Transitional President, Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo,
promulgated the Law against Domestic Violence, which was approved by the
National Assembly on 18 July 2013. The enactment of this law had been a key
recommendation of the universal periodic review and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
20. From 23 February to 2 March, the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and
human rights, Magdalena Sepúlveda Carmona, visited Guinea-Bissau. This was the
first time an independent human rights expert had come to the country. She met with
the transitional authorities, civil society organizations, international partners and
United Nations representatives. She also travelled to the regions of Biombo, Oio and
Bolama-Bijagos, in western, north-central and western Guinea-Bissau respectively.
During her visit, the Special Rapporteur emphasized the situation of women and
children living in poverty and recommended the political participation of women at
all levels. She called upon the future elected Government to prioritize the equality
of women in all spheres of life and to consolidate a legal framework that would
increase the role of women in decision-making bodies. She also drew particular
attention to the need to revise the laws on inheritance, land tenure and ownership
and to increase women’s access to health-care services. The final report of the

14-32226

5/10

S/2014/333

Special Rapporteur will be presented at the twenty-sixth session of the Human
Rights Council in June 2014.
21. On 6 February, the Ministry of Women, Family and Social Solidarity and the
National Committee for the Abandonment of Traditional Harmful Practices against
Women and Children celebrated the International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female
Genital Mutilation, in the eastern region of Gabú, with the support of UNIOGBIS
and the United Nations country team. The celebration included a sensitization event
highlighting the harmful physiological effects of genital mutilation. On 25 February,
the National Committee for the Abandonment of Traditional Harmful Practices
against Women and Children organized a training workshop for law enforcement
authorities on the prevention of harmful practices against women, in collaboration
with the Ministry of Justice and with the support of UNIOGBIS.
22. Moreover, 58 religious and traditional leaders publicly disassociated
themselves from female genital mutilation on five separate occasions in February
and March. In addition, 180 women opinion leaders, including former female genital
mutilation practitioners, made public declarations on 21 November 2013 and
30 January and 6 February 2014 to end the harmful practice. They also set up
regional networks to accelerate efforts to end female genital mutilation in their
respective regions.
23. Efforts to strengthen the national child protection systems and response
mechanisms to support child victims of violence, abuse and exploitation also
continued during the reporting period.
24. To promote access to birth registration, especially by the most disadvantaged
children, UNICEF fostered strategic partnerships between the Ministry of Justice
and civil society organizations, which resulted in agreements on mobile birth
registration in rural areas. As a result, more than 18,000 people were sensitized and
informed of their right to birth registration, and approximately 8,000 children
received birth certificates. Under this initiative, on 22 January, the Ministries of
Justice and Health signed a protocol to implement joint interventions to increase
birth registration rates through early registration at health -care facilities.

G.

Mainstreaming a gender perspective in peacebuilding, in line with
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
25. On 9 and 10 December 2013, UNIOGBIS and the National Islamic Council
organized a validation workshop to endorse the conclusio ns of the first phase of a
study on the role of women and men within the Council leadership and on the role
of women in mediation and conflict resolution. In January, a second phase of the
study was conducted in the regions of Bafatá, Gabú and Quinara, in north-central,
eastern and central Guinea-Bissau respectively. The study, which is expected to be
validated and finalized in June, was aimed at identifying possible entry points to
support a programme on gender equality and mediation for women in the National
Islamic Council.
26. The Institute for Women and Children, with the support of UNFPA,
UN-Women and UNICEF, finalized a national plan to end gender-based violence,
for the period from 2014 to 2017, following a dialogue process involving women ’s
organizations, human rights defenders and civil society organizations. The plan,

6/10

14-32226

S/2014/333

which was formally adopted by the Transitional Government on 23 December 2013,
outlines three pillars for combating gender-based violence, namely, (a) prevention;
(b) promotion of an integrated system of victim support; and (c) institutional and
organizational capacity development.
27. On 22 January, the Association of Women in Economic Activity and the
National Commission of Women Workers of the National Union of Guinean
Workers launched a quick-impact project to promote the creation of an environment
conducive to women’s economic participation, in collaboration with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, UNICEF and UN-Women. The
Peacebuilding Fund provided a financial contribution to the project.
28. On 23 January, UNIOGBIS organized a training workshop on gender
mainstreaming and gender equality for 21 senior police officers, including 9 women,
from the National Guard, the Public Order Police and the Fire Brigad e.
29. On 29 January, the UNIOGBIS regional office located in Bafatá organized a
conference on women and peace and security that was attended by 53 women police
and military officers. The conference focused on efforts to achieve gender equality
and enhance the competencies of women for positions currently held by men.
30. On 8 March, UNIOGBIS and UN-Women celebrated International Women’s
Day, in partnership with the Ministry of Economy and Regional Integration, by
organizing a seminar to reflect on women’s political status in Guinea-Bissau. The
Women’s Inter-ministerial Committee for Defence and Security and the ECOWAS
Women’s Peace and Security Network organized two seminars, on 19 and 20 March
respectively, within the framework of International Women ’s Day. The first seminar
focused on the role of women in security and defence institutions during the
electoral and post-electoral period and was attended by 60 participants, including
43 women from the policing institutions and armed forces. The second semina r,
entitled “The four pillars of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)”, was attended
by 70 participants, including 50 women.
31. On 18 March, the Transitional Government and the Women’s Political
Platform, with the support of UNIOGBIS, launched the official publication of a
study entitled “Participation of women in politics and decision-making in GuineaBissau: from awareness and perception to political practice”, covering the period
between 1964 and 2013. The study highlighted that women’s political participation
had been steadily declining since the country’s independence. It noted that the
representation of women in parliament had decreased from 20 per cent in the period
from 1998 to 2004 to 10 per cent in 2013. The study was the culmination of a
national participative research programme launched in November 2011.

H.

Working with the Peacebuilding Commission in support of the
peacebuilding priorities of Guinea-Bissau
32. The reporting period was marked by intense engagement by the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund in Guinea-Bissau. The Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations and Chair of the Guinea -Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, visited the country between 20 and 24 January, along with the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, Judy Cheng-Hopkins. The objective

14-32226

7/10

S/2014/333

of the mission was to identify new peacebuilding challenges and priorities in the
light of progress made towards the restoration of constitutional order in Guinea Bissau. It was also part of an initiative to support United Nations efforts to assist the
country in returning to constitutional order, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions and statements of the Security Council. Ambassador Patriota debriefed
the members of the configuration on the outcome of the visit on 10 March in New
York.
33. On 4 February, on the basis of information contained in the quarterly reviews
on the status of the Peacebuilding Fund in Guinea-Bissau and in the light of the
suspension of the Fund’s commitments following the coup d’état of April 2012, the
Peacebuilding Support Office requested all recipient United Nations organizations
to return the unspent balance of the $16.8 million previously allocated for the
Peacebuilding Fund priority plan covering 2012 and 2013. The unspent funds
include $1.2 million for the special pension fund for members of the defence and
security institutions, which had been transferred to the Government prior to the coup
d’état. A new peacebuilding strategy is expected to be developed in the aftermath of
the elections.

I.

Mobilization, harmonization and coordination of international
assistance, including for the implementation of national security
sector reform and the rule of law strategies
34. During the reporting period, my Special Representative continued to make
efforts to mobilize resources and coordinate international assistance. As described in
my concurrent report on the restoration of constitutional order (S/2014/332), he
maintained constant dialogue with all international partners to ensure disbursement
of the necessary funds for the electoral process. The Office also supported the visit
of a high-level delegation of the Group of Seven Plus fragile States from 9 to
15 March 2014.

III. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
35. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS and the United Natio ns agencies,
funds and programmes finalized the report on the implementation of their joint
annual workplan for 2013 and developed a new joint workplan for 2014 under the
United Nations Peacebuilding and Development Assistance Framework covering
2013 and 2014. A new United Nations Peacebuilding and Development Assistance
Framework covering 2016 to 2020 is expected to be available by the end of 2014.

B.

Public information
36. During the period under review, media activities were focused mainly on
coverage of the electoral process. State-owned radio and television stations went on
strike several times, including for a month prior to the start of elections, demanding
payment of unpaid salary arrears and better working conditions. The strikes had a

8/10

14-32226

S/2014/333

negative impact on the State radio and television. With assistance from the United
Nations, the strikes were lifted on 24 March, enabling the national radio and
television stations to cover the electoral campaigning. Despite a persistent shortage
of basic equipment and supplies, as well as precarious working conditions, the State
and private media provided relatively balanced information on the campaigning.

C.

Staff safety and security
37. During the reporting period, there were no direct threats against Unite d
Nations staff in Guinea-Bissau. There were two separate incidents of burglary at the
homes of an international staff member and a national staff member in March 2014.
All security measures applicable to United Nations staff continued to be strictly
enforced.

IV. Observations
38. The conclusion of legislative and presidential elections in Guinea -Bissau and
the swearing-in of a new administration will provide the citizens of Guinea-Bissau
with an opportunity to close the page on a negative chapter in t heir country’s history
and to usher in a new era of political stability and economic growth. The
expectations in respect of the new democratically elected Government will be
significant. It will have to deliver immediate dividends to the population, in
particular with respect to the payment of salaries and the delivery of basic services.
It will also be expected to address effectively the complex political, socioeconomic,
development and human rights challenges facing the country. It is critical that the
Government be supported in its efforts by national and international stakeholders,
through a process of consensus and in a spirit of inclusivity, placing the higher
interests of the country’s stabilization and socioeconomic development above
personal ambitions.
39. As I have noted in the past, one of the core challenges facing Guinea -Bissau is
its weak State institutions, which has contributed to undermine the country ’s ability
to translate its rich natural resources into economic growth and development for the
welfare of its population. Building the State institutions of Guinea-Bissau should
therefore be one of the first steps in creating conditions conducive to sustainable
peace and stability. The elected authorities will need to accelerate the development
and implementation of key reforms, including in the public administration, public
finance, justice and social sectors. The successful implementation of these reforms
will reinforce State institutions and assist in making them more functional and
accountable to the citizens of Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, I welcome the public
statements made by all political parties reiterating their commitment to focus on
rebuilding the State. I also appeal to the international community to support the
country’s reform processes.
40. I welcome the ongoing discussion aimed at developing a governance efficacy
amelioration programme, described in my concurrent report on the restoration of
constitutional order (S/2014/332). It will facilitate the management of public
resources and international financial assistance and, at the same time, promote
transparency and accountability. The convening of an international donor pledging
conference, immediately following the inauguration of the new government, in close

14-32226

9/10

S/2014/333

consultation with regional, subregional and development partners, will assist in
mobilizing resources for the implementation of the governance efficacy
amelioration programme. I urge the country’s international partners to work with
national stakeholders to make the conference a success and contribute to the
rebuilding of the State.
41. I would recommend that the mandate of UNIOGBIS, which will expire on
31 May 2014, be renewed for another year, until 31 May 2015. This will enabl e the
Office to support the efforts of the new Government as it settles into office and
commences the complex task of rebuilding State institutions. I would recommend
that a comprehensive review of the mandate of the Office be conducted in early
2015, prior to its expiration, to ensure that it is aligned with the priorities identified
by the new Government and effectively streamlined with the programmes being
implemented by other international partners.
42. In the meantime, UNIOGBIS must continue to support national efforts to
maintain constitutional order and resolve political tensions through, inter alia, the
facilitation of a multilayered national dialogue. The Office must also continue to
focus its efforts on promoting the development of sound civil-military relations and
supporting the implementation of the national security sector reform, which will
modernize and professionalize the defence and security sectors, in close partnership
with relevant regional and international partners.
43. As highlighted in my concurrent report on the restoration of constitutional
order (S/2014/332), the continuing human rights violations and prevailing culture of
impunity in the country remains of serious concern. It is theref ore crucial that
UNIOGBIS continue its work to promote, protect, monitor and report on human
rights and to support national efforts to reform the justice sector. UNIOGBIS will
also continue to work closely with UNODC to implement joint capacity-building
programmes to combat drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. In that
regard, it is critical that the international community provide sustained financial and
technical support for those efforts.
44. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team, under the leadership of my Special Representative,
José Ramos-Horta, as well as to the regional and international partners of GuineaBissau for their contributions to the efforts to restore constitutional order and
promote peacebuilding in the country.

10/10

14-32226
