~I

UNITED

NATIONS

Distr.
GENERAL

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

A/3678

{(3.§Q1
, September 1957
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

Twelfth session
Agenda item 16
ELECTION OF FIVE ~JEMBERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL
CCURT OF JUSTICE
Memorandum by the SecretarY-General
I.

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The names and nationalities of the present members of the International
Court of Justice, and the years in which their present terms expire, are as

1.

follows:

Name

Nationality

Green H. Ha ckworth, President

United States of
America
Egypt

Abdel Hamid Badawi, VicePresident
J.G. Guerrero
J. Basdevant
B. Hiniarski
M. Zoricic
H. Klaestad
J.E. Read
E.C. Armand-Ugon
F.I. Kojevnikov
Sir Muhammad Zafrulla Khan
Sir Hersch Lauterpacht

57-26427

El Salvador
France
Puland
Yugoslavia
Norway
Canada
Uruguay
Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics
Pakistan
United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

Expiration of
present term
(on 5 ]'ebruary)
1961

1958
1964

1964
1958
1958
1961
1958
19 61
1961

/

...

-,

A/3678
s/389l
English
P'age 2

2.

Name

Nationality

Expiration of
present term
(on 5 February)

L.M. Moreno ~uintana

Argentina

1964

R. Cordova

Mexico

1964

V.K. Wellington Koo

China

1958

In view of the fact that terms of office of five judges are due to expire

on 5 February 1958, it is necessary for the General Assembly and the Security
Council, during the twelfth session of the Assembly, to elect five judges for a
term of office of nine years beginning on 6 February 1958. '
3.

The Secretary-General has requested nominations from the national groups of

States parties to the Statute of the Court.

The nominations which he has

received have been transmitted in documents A/3653 - S/3879 and Adds. 1 and 2.
The list of candidates will be printed in the Journal of the United Nations, and
the names of the candidates will also appear on the ballot papers which will be
distributed at the time of the elections.
II.
4.

PROCEDURl:: IN THE GENERl\L ASSEMBLY AND IN
THE SECURITY COUNCIL

The elections will take place in accordance with the following:
(a)

The statute of the Court, in particular Articles 2 to 4 and 8 to 12;

(b)

Rules 151 and 152 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;

(c)

Rules 40 and 61 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security

Council.

5.

In accordance with General Assembly resolution 264 (Ill) of 8 October 1948,

Liechtenstein, San Marino and SWitzerland, which are parties to the Statute of
the Court but not Members of the United Nations, will participate, in the General
Assembly, in electing the members of the Court in the same manner as the Members
of the United Nations.
6.

On the day of the eJ~ctions the General Assembly and the Security Council

will proceed, independently of one 9.nother, to elect five members of the Court
(Article 8 of the Statute).

/ ...

A/3678
S/3891
English
Page 3

7,

According to Article 2 of the Statute, the judges are to be elected,

regardless of their nationality, from among persons of high moral character who
possess the qualifications required in their respective countries for
appointment to the highest judicial offices, or are jurisconsults of recognized
competence in international law.

Article 9 requires electors to bear in mind

not only that the persons to be elected should individually possess the
qualifications required, but also that in the body as a whole the representation
of the main forms of civilization and of the principal legal systems of the world
should be assured.

8.

Those candidates who obtain an absolute majority of votes both in the General

Assembly and in the Security Council will be considered as elected (Article 10,
paragraph 1, of the Statute).

9.

The consistent practice of the United Nations has been to interpret the

words "'3.bsolute majority" as meaning a majority of all the qualified electors,
whether or not they vote.

The qualified electors in the General Assembly are

all the Members, together with the three non-member States mentioned in
paragraph 5 above which are parties to the Statute of the Court.

With the

present number of Members of the United Nations and non-members parties to the
Statute, forty-three votes constitute an absolute majority in the General Assembly.
10.

In the Security Council, six votes constitute an absolute majority and no

distinction is to be made between permanent and non-permanent members of the
Council (Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Statute).

11.

Not more than one national of the same State may be elected; if more than

one national of the same State obtains an absolute majority of votes in the two
bodies, the eldest of them only will be considered as elected (Article 10,
paragraph 3, of the Statute).
12.

The electors in the General Assembly and in the Security Council will

indicate the candidates for whom they wish to vote by placing crosses against
their names on the ballot papers.

Each elector may vote for not more than five

candidates on the first ballot, and on later ballots fur five less the number
who have already received absolute majorities.

Under Article 7 of the Statute,

only those candidates whose names appear in the list prepared by the SecretaryGeneral are eligible for election) unless the procedure outlined in Article 12,
paragraph 2, is used.

A/3 678
S/389l
English
Page 4
13.

If in the first ballot in either the General Assembly or the Security Council

less than five candidates receive an absolute majority, a second ballot will be
taken for the remaining seats, and balloting will continue in the same meeting
until five of the candidates have received the required majority.

~~en this

occurs in either organ (and not until that time), the President of that organ will
notify the President of the other organ of the names of these five candidates;
such lists are not communicated by the President to the members of an organ
until that organ has completed its own list of five candidates.

After receipt of

the corresponding list of candidates from the Security Council, the President of
the General Assembly will announce the election of those candidates who have
received an absolute majority of votes in both the Assembly and the Council.
14.

Cases have arisen in which more than the required number of candidates

have received an absolute majority on the same ballot.

In the election of five

judges at the 567th meeting of the Security Council on 6 December 1951, on the
first ballot six candidates received an absolute majority.

After a discussion, the

Council voted to hold a new vote on all the candidates, and a second ballot
produced an absolute majority for only five.

In the election of five judges at

the 68lst meeting of the Security Council on 7 October 1954, three ballots
produced absolute majorities for six candidates; the fourth ballot produced an
absolute majority for only four.

In both cases the President of the Security

Council made no notification to the President uf the General Assembly until only
five candidates, and no more, had received an absolute majority in the Council.
15.

If, upon comparison of the lists of the General Assembly a, ~ the Security

Council, less than five candidates have been thus elected, the Assembly and the
Council ~nll proceed, again independently of one another

j

in a second meeting, and

if necessary a third meeting, to elect by further ballots the candidates for
the remaining vacancies (Article 11 of the Statute).
16.

The above procedure will be continued until the two bodies have elected five

candidates.

If, however) after the third of these meetings one or mOTe seats

are still unfilled, the General Assembly and the Security Council may at any time,
at the request of either body, form a joint conference consisting of six members,
three appointed by each body.

This joint conference may) by an absolute

majority) agree upon one candidate for each seat still vacant anQ submit his

I .. ·

A/3678
S/389l
English
Page 5
name for the approval of the Assembly and of the Council.

If unanimously agreed,

the joint conference may submit the name of a candidate not included in the
list of nominations provided that candidate fulfils the required conditions
(Article 12 of the statute).
17.

If the joint conference is satisfied that it will not be successful in

procuring an election, those members of the Court who have already been elected
will, within a period to be fixed by the Security Council, proceed to fill the
vacant seats by selection from among those candidates who have obtained votes
either in the General Assembly or in the Security Council.

In the event of an

equality of votes among the judges, the eldest judge will have a casting vote
(Article 12 of the Statute).
