United Nations

A/RES/66/288*

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 September 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 19

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 27 July 2012
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/66/L.56)]

66/288. The future we want
*

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/236 of 24 December 2009, in which it decided to
organize, in 2012, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development at
the highest possible level, as well as its resolution 66/197 of 22 December 2011,
Expresses its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of
1.
Brazil for hosting the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in
Rio de Janeiro from 20 to 22 June 2012, and for providing all the necessary support;
Endorses the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
2.
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, annexed to the present
resolution.
123rd plenary meeting
27 July 2012

Annex
The future we want
I.

Our common vision

1.
We, the Heads of State and Government and high-level representatives, having
met at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, with the full participation of
civil society, renew our commitment to sustainable development and to ensuring the
promotion of an economically, socially and environmentally sustainable future for
our planet and for present and future generations.
2.
Poverty eradication is the greatest global challenge facing the world today and
an indispensable requirement for sustainable development. In this regard, we are
committed to freeing humanity from poverty and hunger as a matter of urgency.

_______________
* Reissued for technical reasons on 17 January 2013.

11-47610*

*1147610*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/288

3.
We therefore acknowledge the need to further mainstream sustainable
development at all levels, integrating economic, social and environmental aspects
and recognizing their interlinkages, so as to achieve sustainable development in all
its dimensions.
4.
We recognize that poverty eradication, changing unsustainable and promoting
sustainable patterns of consumption and production and protecting and managing
the natural resource base of economic and social development are the overarching
objectives of and essential requirements for sustainable development. We also
reaffirm the need to achieve sustainable development by promoting sustained,
inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social
development and inclusion, and promoting the integrated and sustainable
management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia, economic,
social and human development while facilitating ecosystem conservation,
regeneration and restoration and resilience in the face of new and emerging
challenges.
5.
We reaffirm our commitment to make every effort to accelerate the
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
6.
We recognize that people are at the centre of sustainable development and, in
this regard, we strive for a world that is just, equitable and inclusive, and we
commit to work together to promote sustained and inclusive economic growth,
social development and environmental protection and thereby to benefit all.
7.
We reaffirm that we continue to be guided by the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, with full respect for international law and its
principles.
8.
We also reaffirm the importance of freedom, peace and security, respect for all
human rights, including the right to development and the right to an adequate
standard of living, including the right to food, the rule of law, gender equality,
women’s empowerment and the overall commitment to just and democratic societies
for development.
9.
We reaffirm the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 as
well as other international instruments relating to human rights and international
law. We emphasize the responsibilities of all States, in conformity with the Charter,
to respect, protect and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
without distinction of any kind as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, political
or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth, disability or other status.
10. We acknowledge that democracy, good governance and the rule of law, at the
national and international levels, as well as an enabling environment, are essential
for sustainable development, including sustained and inclusive economic growth,
social development, environmental protection and the eradication of poverty and
hunger. We reaffirm that, to achieve our sustainable development goals, we need
institutions at all levels that are effective, transparent, accountable and democratic.
11. We reaffirm our commitment to strengthen international cooperation to address
the persistent challenges related to sustainable development for all, in particular in

_______________
1

2

Resolution 217 A (III).

A/RES/66/288

developing countries. In this regard, we reaffirm the need to achieve economic
stability, sustained economic growth, the promotion of social equity and the
protection of the environment, while enhancing gender equality, women’s
empowerment and equal opportunities for all, and the protection, survival and
development of children to their full potential, including through education.
12. We resolve to take urgent action to achieve sustainable development. We
therefore renew our commitment to sustainable development, assessing the progress
to date and the remaining gaps in the implementation of the outcomes of the major
summits on sustainable development and addressing new and emerging challenges.
We express our determination to address the themes of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, namely, a green economy in the context of
sustainable development and poverty eradication, and the institutional framework
for sustainable development.
13. We recognize that opportunities for people to influence their lives and future,
participate in decision-making and voice their concerns are fundamental for
sustainable development. We underscore that sustainable development requires
concrete and urgent action. It can only be achieved with a broad alliance of people,
governments, civil society and the private sector, all working together to secure the
future we want for present and future generations.
II.

Renewing political commitment

A.

Reaffirming the Rio Principles and past action plans

14. We recall the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment, adopted at Stockholm on 16 June 1972. 2
15. We reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development, 3 including, inter alia, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, as set out in principle 7 thereof.
16. We reaffirm our commitment to fully implement the Rio Declaration,
Agenda 21, 4 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 5 the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation) 6 and the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development, 7 the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States (Barbados Programme of Action) 8 and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the

_______________
2

See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972
(A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1), part one, chap. I.
3
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
4
Ibid., annex II.
5
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
6
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
2, annex.
7
Ibid., resolution 1, annex.
8
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

3

A/RES/66/288

Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. 9 We also reaffirm our
commitment to the full implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020 (Istanbul Programme of Action), 10
the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked
Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport
Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries, 11 the political
declaration on Africa’s development needs 12 and the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. 13 We recall as well our commitments in the outcomes of all the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and environmental
fields, including the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 14 the 2005 World
Summit Outcome, 15 the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development, 16 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development:
outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for
Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, 17 the
outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on
the Millennium Development Goals, 18 the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development, 19 the key actions for the further
implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development 20 and the Beijing Declaration 21 and Platform for
Action. 22
17. We recognize the importance of the three Rio conventions for advancing
sustainable development, and in this regard we urge all parties to fully implement
their commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, 23 the Convention on Biological Diversity 24 and the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 25 in accordance with their

_______________
9

Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
10
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
11
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
12
See resolution 63/1.
13
A/57/304, annex.
14
See resolution 55/2.
15
See resolution 60/1.
16
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–
22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
17
Resolution 63/239, annex.
18
See resolution 65/1.
19
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
20
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
21
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
22
Ibid., annex II.
23
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
24
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
25
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.

4

A/RES/66/288

respective principles and provisions, as well as to take effective and concrete
actions and measures at all levels and enhance international cooperation.
18. We are determined to reinvigorate political will and to raise the level of
commitment by the international community to move the sustainable development
agenda forward, through the achievement of the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. We further reaffirm our
respective commitments to other relevant internationally agreed goals in the
economic, social and environmental fields since 1992. We therefore resolve to take
concrete measures that accelerate implementation of sustainable development
commitments.
B.

Advancing integration, implementation and coherence: assessing the
progress to date and the remaining gaps in the implementation of the
outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development and
addressing new and emerging challenges

19. We recognize that the twenty years since the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in 1992 have seen uneven progress, including in
sustainable development and poverty eradication. We emphasize the need to make
progress in implementing previous commitments. We also recognize the need to
accelerate progress in closing development gaps between developed and developing
countries, and to seize and create opportunities to achieve sustainable development
through economic growth and diversification, social development and
environmental protection. To this end, we underscore the continued need for an
enabling environment at the national and international levels, as well as continued
and strengthened international cooperation, particularly in the areas of finance, debt,
trade and technology transfer, as mutually agreed, and innovation, entrepreneurship,
capacity-building, transparency and accountability. We recognize the diversification
of actors and stakeholders engaged in the pursuit of sustainable development. In this
context, we affirm the continued need for the full and effective participation of all
countries, in particular developing countries, in global decision-making.
20. We acknowledge that, since 1992, there have been areas of insufficient
progress and setbacks in the integration of the three dimensions of sustainable
development, aggravated by multiple financial, economic, food and energy crises,
which have threatened the ability of all countries, in particular developing countries,
to achieve sustainable development. In this regard, it is critical that we do not
backtrack from our commitment to the outcome of the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development. We also recognize that one of the current major
challenges for all countries, particularly for developing countries, is the impact from
the multiple crises affecting the world today.
21. We are deeply concerned that one in five people on this planet, or over 1 billion
people, still live in extreme poverty, and that one in seven — or 14 per cent — is
undernourished, while public health challenges, including pandemics and epidemics,
remain omnipresent threats. In this context, we note the ongoing discussions in the
General Assembly on human security. We acknowledge that with the world’s
population projected to exceed 9 billion by 2050, with an estimated two thirds living
in cities, we need to increase our efforts to achieve sustainable development and, in
particular, the eradication of poverty, hunger and preventable diseases.
22. We recognize examples of progress in sustainable development at the regional,
national, subnational and local levels. We note that efforts to achieve sustainable
development have been reflected in regional, national and subnational policies and
plans, and that governments have strengthened their commitment to sustainable
5

A/RES/66/288

development since the adoption of Agenda 21 through legislation and institutions,
and the development and implementation of international, regional and subregional
agreements and commitments.
23. We reaffirm the importance of supporting developing countries in their efforts
to eradicate poverty and promote empowerment of the poor and people in vulnerable
situations, including removing barriers to opportunity, enhancing productive
capacity, developing sustainable agriculture and promoting full and productive
employment and decent work for all, complemented by effective social policies,
including social protection floors, with a view to achieving the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals.
24. We express deep concern about the continuing high levels of unemployment
and underemployment, particularly among young people, and note the need for
sustainable development strategies to proactively address youth employment at all
levels. In this regard, we recognize the need for a global strategy on youth and
employment building on the work of the International Labour Organization.
25. We acknowledge that climate change is a cross-cutting and persistent crisis,
and express our concern that the scale and gravity of the negative impacts of climate
change affect all countries and undermine the ability of all countries, in particular,
developing countries, to achieve sustainable development and the Millennium
Development Goals, and threaten the viability and survival of nations. Therefore,
we underscore that combating climate change requires urgent and ambitious action,
in accordance with the principles and provisions of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.
26. States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international
law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of economic and social
development, particularly in developing countries.
27. We reiterate our commitment, expressed in the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, the 2005 World Summit Outcome and the outcome document of the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium
Development Goals of 2010, to take further effective measures and actions, in
conformity with international law, to remove the obstacles to the full realization of
the right of self-determination of peoples living under colonial and foreign
occupation, which continue to adversely affect their economic and social
development as well as their environment, are incompatible with the dignity and
worth of the human person and must be combated and eliminated.
28. We reaffirm that, in accordance with the Charter, this shall not be construed as
authorizing or encouraging any action against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State.
29. We resolve to take further effective measures and actions, in conformity with
international law, to remove obstacles and constraints, strengthen support and meet
the special needs of people living in areas affected by complex humanitarian
emergencies and in areas affected by terrorism.
30. We recognize that many people, especially the poor, depend directly on
ecosystems for their livelihoods, their economic, social and physical well-being, and
their cultural heritage. For this reason, it is essential to generate decent jobs and
incomes that decrease disparities in standards of living in order to better meet
people’s needs and promote sustainable livelihoods and practices and the sustainable
use of natural resources and ecosystems.
6

A/RES/66/288

31. We emphasize that sustainable development must be inclusive and peoplecentred, benefiting and involving all people, including youth and children. We
recognize that gender equality and women’s empowerment are important for
sustainable development and our common future. We reaffirm our commitments to
ensure women’s equal rights, access and opportunities for participation and
leadership in the economy, society and political decision-making.
32. We recognize that each country faces specific challenges to achieve
sustainable development, and we underscore the special challenges facing the most
vulnerable countries and, in particular, African countries, least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well as the
specific challenges facing the middle-income countries. Countries in situations of
conflict also need special attention.
33. We reaffirm our commitment to take urgent and concrete action to address the
vulnerability of small island developing States, including through the sustained
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy,
and underscore the urgency of finding additional solutions to the major challenges
facing small island developing States in a concerted manner so as to support them in
sustaining momentum realized in implementing the Barbados Programme of Action
and the Mauritius Strategy and achieving sustainable development.
34. We reaffirm that the Istanbul Programme of Action outlines the priorities of
least developed countries for sustainable development and defines a framework for
renewed and strengthened global partnership to implement them. We commit to
assist the least developed countries with the implementation of the Istanbul
Programme of Action as well as in their efforts to achieve sustainable development.
35. We recognize that more attention should be given to Africa and the
implementation of previously agreed commitments related to its development needs
that were made at major United Nations summits and conferences. We note that aid
to Africa has increased in recent years. However, it still lags behind commitments
that were previously made. We underscore the key priority for the international
community of supporting Africa’s sustainable development efforts. In this regard,
we recommit to fully implement the internationally agreed commitments related to
Africa’s development needs, particularly those contained in the Millennium
Declaration, the United Nations Declaration on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, 26 the Monterrey Consensus, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation
and the 2005 World Summit Outcome, as well as the 2008 political declaration on
Africa’s development needs.
36. We recognize the serious constraints to achieving sustainable development in
all its three dimensions in landlocked developing countries. In this regard, we
reaffirm our commitment to address the special development needs and the
challenges faced by landlocked developing countries through the full, timely and
effective implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action, as contained in the
declaration on the midterm review of the Almaty Programme of Action. 27
37. We recognize the progress made by middle-income countries in improving the
well-being of their people, as well as the specific development challenges they face
in their efforts to eradicate poverty, reduce inequalities and achieve their

_______________
26
27

See resolution 57/2.
See resolution 63/2.

7

A/RES/66/288

development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and to achieve
sustainable development in a comprehensive manner integrating the economic,
social and environmental dimensions. We reiterate that these efforts should be
adequately supported by the international community, in various forms, taking into
account the needs and the capacity to mobilize domestic resources of these
countries.
38. We recognize the need for broader measures of progress to complement gross
domestic product in order to better inform policy decisions, and in this regard we
request the United Nations Statistical Commission, in consultation with relevant
United Nations system entities and other relevant organizations, to launch a
programme of work in this area, building on existing initiatives.
39. We recognize that planet Earth and its ecosystems are our home and that
“Mother Earth” is a common expression in a number of countries and regions, and
we note that some countries recognize the rights of nature in the context of the
promotion of sustainable development. We are convinced that in order to achieve a
just balance among the economic, social and environmental needs of present and
future generations, it is necessary to promote harmony with nature.
40. We call for holistic and integrated approaches to sustainable development that
will guide humanity to live in harmony with nature and lead to efforts to restore the
health and integrity of the Earth’s ecosystem.
41. We acknowledge the natural and cultural diversity of the world, and recognize
that all cultures and civilizations can contribute to sustainable development.
C.

Engaging major groups and other stakeholders

42. We reaffirm the key role of all levels of government and legislative bodies in
promoting sustainable development. We further acknowledge efforts and progress
made at the local and subnational levels, and recognize the important role that such
authorities and communities can play in implementing sustainable development,
including by engaging citizens and stakeholders and providing them with relevant
information, as appropriate, on the three dimensions of sustainable development. We
further acknowledge the importance of involving all relevant decision makers in the
planning and implementation of sustainable development policies.
43. We underscore that broad public participation and access to information and
judicial and administrative proceedings are essential to the promotion of sustainable
development. Sustainable development requires the meaningful involvement and
active participation of regional, national and subnational legislatures and judiciaries,
and all major groups: women, children and youth, indigenous peoples,
non-governmental organizations, local authorities, workers and trade unions,
business and industry, the scientific and technological community, and farmers, as
well as other stakeholders, including local communities, volunteer groups and
foundations, migrants and families, as well as older persons and persons with
disabilities. In this regard, we agree to work more closely with the major groups and
other stakeholders, and encourage their active participation, as appropriate, in
processes that contribute to decision-making, planning and implementation of
policies and programmes for sustainable development at all levels.
44. We acknowledge the role of civil society and the importance of enabling all
members of civil society to be actively engaged in sustainable development. We
recognize that improved participation of civil society depends upon, inter alia,
strengthening access to information and building civil society capacity and an
8

A/RES/66/288

enabling environment. We recognize that information and communications
technology is facilitating the flow of information between governments and the
public. In this regard, it is essential to work towards improved access to information
and communications technology, especially broadband networks and services, and
bridge the digital divide, recognizing the contribution of international cooperation in
this regard.
45. We underscore that women have a vital role to play in achieving sustainable
development. We recognize the leadership role of women, and we resolve to
promote gender equality and women’s empowerment and to ensure their full and
effective participation in sustainable development policies, programmes and
decision-making at all levels.
46. We acknowledge that the implementation of sustainable development will
depend on the active engagement of both the public and the private sectors. We
recognize that the active participation of the private sector can contribute to the
achievement of sustainable development, including through the important tool of
public-private partnerships. We support national regulatory and policy frameworks
that enable business and industry to advance sustainable development initiatives,
taking into account the importance of corporate social responsibility. We call upon
the private sector to engage in responsible business practices, such as those
promoted by the United Nations Global Compact.
47. We acknowledge the importance of corporate sustainability reporting, and
encourage companies, where appropriate, especially publicly listed and large
companies, to consider integrating sustainability information into their reporting
cycle. We encourage industry, interested governments and relevant stakeholders,
with the support of the United Nations system, as appropriate, to develop models for
best practice and facilitate action for the integration of sustainability reporting,
taking into account experiences from already existing frameworks and paying
particular attention to the needs of developing countries, including for capacitybuilding.
48. We recognize the important contribution of the scientific and technological
community to sustainable development. We are committed to working with and
fostering collaboration among the academic, scientific and technological
community, in particular in developing countries, to close the technological gap
between developing and developed countries and strengthen the science-policy
interface, as well as to foster international research collaboration on sustainable
development.
49. We stress the importance of the participation of indigenous peoples in the
achievement of sustainable development. We also recognize the importance of the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 28 in the context of
global, regional, national and subnational implementation of sustainable
development strategies.
50. We stress the importance of the active participation of young people in
decision-making processes, as the issues we are addressing have a deep impact on
present and future generations and as the contribution of children and youth is vital
to the achievement of sustainable development. We also recognize the need to
promote intergenerational dialogue and solidarity by recognizing their views.

_______________
28

Resolution 61/295, annex.

9

A/RES/66/288

51. We stress the importance of the participation of workers and trade unions in
the promotion of sustainable development. As the representatives of working
people, trade unions are important partners in facilitating the achievement of
sustainable development, in particular the social dimension. Information, education
and training on sustainability at all levels, including in the workplace, are key to
strengthening the capacity of workers and trade unions to support sustainable
development.
52. We recognize that farmers, including small-scale farmers and fisherfolk,
pastoralists and foresters, can make important contributions to sustainable
development through production activities that are environmentally sound, enhance
food security and the livelihood of the poor and invigorate production and sustained
economic growth.
53. We note the valuable contributions that non-governmental organizations could
and do make in promoting sustainable development through their well-established
and diverse experience, expertise and capacity, especially in the area of analysis, the
sharing of information and knowledge, promotion of dialogue and support of
implementation of sustainable development.
54. We recognize the central role of the United Nations in advancing the
sustainable development agenda. We acknowledge as well, in this regard, the
contributions of other relevant international organizations, including international
financial institutions and multilateral development banks, and stress the importance
of cooperation among them and with the United Nations, within their respective
mandates, recognizing their role in mobilizing resources for sustainable
development.
55. We commit ourselves to reinvigorating the global partnership for sustainable
development that we launched in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. We recognize the need to
impart new momentum to our cooperative pursuit of sustainable development, and
commit to work together with major groups and other stakeholders in addressing
implementation gaps.
III. Green economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty
eradication
56. We affirm that there are different approaches, visions, models and tools
available to each country, in accordance with its national circumstances and
priorities, to achieve sustainable development in its three dimensions which is our
overarching goal. In this regard, we consider green economy in the context of
sustainable development and poverty eradication as one of the important tools
available for achieving sustainable development and that it could provide options
for policymaking but should not be a rigid set of rules. We emphasize that it should
contribute to eradicating poverty as well as sustained economic growth, enhancing
social inclusion, improving human welfare and creating opportunities for
employment and decent work for all, while maintaining the healthy functioning of
the Earth’s ecosystems.
57. We affirm that policies for green economy in the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication should be guided by and in accordance with
all the Rio Principles, Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and
contribute towards achieving relevant internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals.

10

A/RES/66/288

58. We affirm that green economy policies in the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication should:
(a)

Be consistent with international law;

(b) Respect each country’s national sovereignty over their natural resources,
taking into account its national circumstances, objectives, responsibilities, priorities
and policy space with regard to the three dimensions of sustainable development;
(c) Be supported by an enabling environment and well-functioning
institutions at all levels, with a leading role for governments and with the
participation of all relevant stakeholders, including civil society;
(d) Promote sustained and inclusive economic growth, foster innovation and
provide opportunities, benefits and empowerment for all and respect for all human
rights;
(e) Take into account the needs of developing countries, particularly those in
special situations;
(f) Strengthen international cooperation, including the provision of financial
resources, capacity-building and technology transfer to developing countries;
(g) Effectively avoid unwarranted conditionalities on official development
assistance and finance;
(h) Not constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a
disguised restriction on international trade, avoid unilateral actions to deal with
environmental challenges outside the jurisdiction of the importing country and
ensure that environmental measures addressing transboundary or global
environmental problems, as far as possible, are based on international consensus;
(i) Contribute to closing technology gaps between developed and
developing countries and reduce the technological dependence of developing
countries, using all appropriate measures;
(j) Enhance the welfare of indigenous peoples and their communities, other
local and traditional communities and ethnic minorities, recognizing and supporting
their identity, culture and interests, and avoid endangering their cultural heritage,
practices and traditional knowledge, preserving and respecting non-market
approaches that contribute to the eradication of poverty;
(k) Enhance the welfare of women, children, youth, persons with disabilities,
smallholder and subsistence farmers, fisherfolk and those working in small and
medium-sized enterprises, and improve the livelihoods and empowerment of the
poor and vulnerable groups, in particular in developing countries;
(l) Mobilize the full potential and ensure the equal contribution of both
women and men;
(m) Promote productive activities in developing countries that contribute to
the eradication of poverty;
(n) Address the concern about inequalities and promote social inclusion,
including social protection floors;
(o)

Promote sustainable consumption and production patterns;

(p) Continue efforts to strive for inclusive,
approaches to overcome poverty and inequality.

equitable

development

11

A/RES/66/288

59. We view the implementation of green economy policies by countries that seek
to apply them for the transition towards sustainable development as a common
undertaking, and we recognize that each country can choose an appropriate
approach in accordance with national sustainable development plans, strategies and
priorities.
60. We acknowledge that green economy in the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication will enhance our ability to manage natural
resources sustainably and with lower negative environmental impacts, increase
resource efficiency and reduce waste.
61. We recognize that urgent action on unsustainable patterns of production and
consumption where they occur remains fundamental in addressing environmental
sustainability and promoting conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and
ecosystems, regeneration of natural resources and the promotion of sustained,
inclusive and equitable global growth.
62. We encourage each country to consider the implementation of green economy
policies in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication, in a
manner that endeavours to drive sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
and job creation, particularly for women, youth and the poor. In this respect, we
note the importance of ensuring that workers are equipped with the necessary skills,
including through education and capacity-building, and are provided with the
necessary social and health protections. In this regard, we encourage all
stakeholders, including business and industry, to contribute, as appropriate. We
invite governments to improve knowledge and statistical capacity on job trends,
developments and constraints and integrate relevant data into national statistics,
with the support of relevant United Nations agencies within their mandates.
63. We recognize the importance of the evaluation of the range of social,
environmental and economic factors, and encourage, where national circumstances
and conditions allow, their integration into decision-making. We acknowledge that it
will be important to take into account the opportunities and challenges, as well as
the costs and benefits, of green economy policies in the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication, using the best available scientific data and
analysis. We acknowledge that a mix of measures, including regulatory, voluntary
and others applied at the national level and consistent with obligations under
international agreements, could promote green economy in the context of
sustainable development and poverty eradication. We reaffirm that social policies
are vital to promoting sustainable development.
64. We acknowledge that involvement of all stakeholders and their partnerships,
networking and experience-sharing at all levels could help countries to learn from
one another in identifying appropriate sustainable development policies, including
green economy policies. We note the positive experiences in some countries,
including in developing countries, in adopting green economy policies in the context
of sustainable development and poverty eradication through an inclusive approach,
and welcome the voluntary exchange of experiences, as well as capacity-building, in
the different areas of sustainable development.
65. We recognize the power of communications technologies, including
connection technologies and innovative applications, to promote knowledge
exchange, technical cooperation and capacity-building for sustainable development.
These technologies and applications can build capacity and enable the sharing of
experiences and knowledge in the different areas of sustainable development in an
open and transparent manner.
12

A/RES/66/288

66. Recognizing the importance of linking financing, technology, capacitybuilding and national needs for sustainable development policies, including green
economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication, we
invite the United Nations system, in cooperation with relevant donors and
international organizations, to coordinate and provide information upon request on:
(a) Matching interested countries with the partners that are best suited to
provide requested support;
(b) Toolboxes and/or best practices in applying policies on green economy in
the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication at all levels;
(c) Models or good examples of policies on green economy in the context of
sustainable development and poverty eradication;
(d) Methodologies for evaluation of policies on green economy in the
context of sustainable development and poverty eradication;
(e)

Existing and emerging platforms that contribute in this regard.

67. We underscore the importance of governments taking a leadership role in
developing policies and strategies through an inclusive and transparent process. We
also take note of the efforts of those countries, including developing countries, that
have already initiated processes to prepare national green economy strategies and
policies in support of sustainable development.
68. We invite relevant stakeholders, including the United Nations regional
commissions, United Nations organizations and bodies, other relevant
intergovernmental and regional organizations, international financial institutions and
major groups involved in sustainable development, according to their respective
mandates, to support developing countries, upon request, to achieve sustainable
development, including through, inter alia, green economy policies in the context of
sustainable development and poverty eradication, in particular in least developed
countries.
69. We also invite business and industry as appropriate and in accordance with
national legislation to contribute to sustainable development and to develop
sustainability strategies that integrate, inter alia, green economy policies.
70. We acknowledge the role of cooperatives and microenterprises in contributing
to social inclusion and poverty reduction, in particular in developing countries.
71. We encourage existing and new partnerships, including public-private
partnerships, to mobilize public financing complemented by the private sector,
taking into account the interests of local and indigenous communities when
appropriate. In this regard, governments should support initiatives for sustainable
development, including promoting the contribution of the private sector to support
green economy policies in the context of sustainable development and poverty
eradication.
72. We recognize the critical role of technology as well as the importance of
promoting innovation, in particular in developing countries. We invite governments,
as appropriate, to create enabling frameworks that foster environmentally sound
technology, research and development, and innovation, including in support of green
economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication.
73. We emphasize the importance of technology transfer to developing countries,
and recall the provisions on technology transfer, finance, access to information and
intellectual property rights, as agreed in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
13

A/RES/66/288

in particular its call to promote, facilitate and finance, as appropriate, access to and
the development, transfer and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies and
corresponding know-how, in particular to developing countries, on favourable
terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed. We also
take note of the further evolution of discussions and agreements on these issues
since the adoption of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation.
74. We recognize that the efforts of developing countries that choose to implement
green economy policies in the context of sustainable development and poverty
eradication should be supported through technical and technological assistance.
IV.

Institutional framework for sustainable development

A.

Strengthening the three dimensions of sustainable development

75. We underscore the importance of a strengthened institutional framework for
sustainable development which responds coherently and effectively to current and
future challenges and efficiently bridges gaps in the implementation of the
sustainable development agenda. The institutional framework for sustainable
development should integrate the three dimensions of sustainable development in a
balanced manner and enhance implementation by, inter alia, strengthening
coherence and coordination, avoiding duplication of efforts and reviewing progress
in implementing sustainable development. We also reaffirm that the framework
should be inclusive, transparent and effective and that it should find common
solutions related to global challenges to sustainable development.
76. We recognize that effective governance at the local, subnational, national,
regional and global levels representing the voices and interests of all is critical for
advancing sustainable development. The strengthening and reform of the
institutional framework should not be an end in itself, but a means to achieve
sustainable development. We recognize that an improved and more effective
institutional framework for sustainable development at the international level should
be consistent with the Rio Principles, build on Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation, and its objectives on the institutional framework for
sustainable development, contribute to the implementation of our commitments in
the outcomes of United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields and take into account national priorities and the
development strategies and priorities of developing countries. We therefore resolve
to strengthen the institutional framework for sustainable development, which will,
inter alia:
(a) Promote the balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable
development;
(b) Be based on an action- and result-oriented approach giving due regard to
all relevant cross-cutting issues with the aim to contribute to the implementation of
sustainable development;
(c) Underscore the importance of interlinkages among key issues and
challenges and the need for a systematic approach to them at all relevant levels;
(d) Enhance coherence, reduce fragmentation and overlap and increase
effectiveness, efficiency and transparency, while reinforcing coordination and
cooperation;
(e) Promote full and effective participation of all countries in decisionmaking processes;
14

A/RES/66/288

(f) Engage high-level political leaders, provide policy guidance and identify
specific actions to promote effective implementation of sustainable development,
including through voluntary sharing of experiences and lessons learned;
(g) Promote the science-policy interface through inclusive, evidence-based
and transparent scientific assessments, as well as access to reliable, relevant and
timely data in areas related to the three dimensions of sustainable development,
building on existing mechanisms, as appropriate; in this regard, strengthen
participation of all countries in international sustainable development processes and
capacity-building especially for developing countries, including in conducting their
own monitoring and assessments;
(h) Enhance the participation and effective engagement of civil society and
other relevant stakeholders in the relevant international forums and, in this regard,
promote transparency and broad public participation and partnerships to implement
sustainable development;
(i) Promote the review and stocktaking of progress in the implementation of
all sustainable development commitments, including commitments related to means
of implementation.
B.

Strengthening intergovernmental arrangements for sustainable
development

77. We acknowledge the vital importance of an inclusive, transparent, reformed,
strengthened and effective multilateral system in order to better address the urgent
global challenges of sustainable development today, recognizing the universality
and central role of the United Nations and reaffirming our commitment to promote
and strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations system.
78. We underscore the need to strengthen United Nations system-wide coherence
and coordination, while ensuring appropriate accountability to Member States, by,
inter alia, enhancing coherence in reporting and reinforcing cooperative efforts
under existing inter-agency mechanisms and strategies to advance the integration of
the three dimensions of sustainable development within the United Nations system,
including through exchange of information among its agencies, funds and
programmes, and also with the international financial institutions and other relevant
organizations such as the World Trade Organization, within their respective
mandates.
79. We emphasize the need for an improved and more effective institutional
framework for sustainable development which should be guided by the specific
functions required and mandates involved; address the shortcomings of the current
system; take into account all relevant implications; promote synergies and
coherence; seek to avoid duplication and eliminate unnecessary overlaps within the
United Nations system; and reduce administrative burdens and build on existing
arrangements.
General Assembly
80. We reaffirm the role and authority of the General Assembly on global matters
of concern to the international community, as set out in the Charter.
81. We further reaffirm the central position of the General Assembly as the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of the United Nations. In this
regard, we call for the Assembly to further integrate sustainable development as a
key element of the overarching framework for United Nations activities and
15

A/RES/66/288

adequately address sustainable development in its agenda-setting, including through
periodic high-level dialogues.
Economic and Social Council
82. We reaffirm that the Economic and Social Council is a principal body for
policy review, policy dialogue and recommendations on issues of economic and
social development and for the follow-up to the Millennium Development Goals,
and is a central mechanism for the coordination of the United Nations system and
supervision of the subsidiary bodies of the Council, in particular its functional
commissions, and for promoting the implementation of Agenda 21 by strengthening
system-wide coherence and coordination. We also reaffirm the major role the
Council plays in the overall coordination of funds, programmes and specialized
agencies, ensuring coherence among them and avoiding duplication of mandates and
activities.
83. We commit to strengthen the Economic and Social Council within its mandate
under the Charter, as a principal organ in the integrated and coordinated follow-up
of the outcomes of all major United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social, environmental and related fields, and recognize its key role in
achieving a balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable
development. We look forward to the review of the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006 on the strengthening of the
Council.
High-level political forum
84. We decide to establish a universal, intergovernmental, high-level political
forum, building on the strengths, experiences, resources and inclusive participation
modalities of the Commission on Sustainable Development, and subsequently
replacing the Commission. The high-level political forum shall follow up on the
implementation of sustainable development and should avoid overlap with existing
structures, bodies and entities in a cost-effective manner.
85.

The high-level forum could:

(a) Provide political leadership, guidance and recommendations
sustainable development;

for

(b) Enhance integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development
in a holistic and cross-sectoral manner at all levels;
(c) Provide a dynamic platform for regular dialogue and for stocktaking and
agenda-setting to advance sustainable development;
(d) Have a focused, dynamic and action-oriented agenda, ensuring the
appropriate consideration of new and emerging sustainable development challenges;
(e) Follow up and review progress in the implementation of sustainable
development commitments contained in Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the
outcome of the present Conference and, as appropriate, relevant outcomes of other
United Nations summits and conferences, including the outcome of the Fourth

16

A/RES/66/288

United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, 29 as well as their
respective means of implementation;
(f) Encourage high-level system-wide participation of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and invite to participate, as appropriate, other
relevant multilateral financial and trade institutions and treaty bodies, within their
respective mandates and in accordance with United Nations rules and provisions;
(g) Improve cooperation and coordination within the United Nations system
on sustainable development programmes and policies;
(h) Promote transparency and implementation by further enhancing the
consultative role and participation of major groups and other relevant stakeholders
at the international level in order to better make use of their expertise, while
retaining the intergovernmental nature of discussions;
(i) Promote the sharing of best practices and experiences relating to the
implementation of sustainable development and, on a voluntary basis, facilitate
sharing of experiences, including successes, challenges and lessons learned;
(j) Promote system-wide coherence and coordination of sustainable
development policies;
(k) Strengthen the science-policy interface through review of documentation,
bringing together dispersed information and assessments, including in the form of a
global sustainable development report, building on existing assessments;
(l) Enhance evidence-based decision-making at all levels and contribute to
strengthening ongoing capacity-building for data collection and analysis in
developing countries.
86. We decide to launch an intergovernmental and open, transparent and inclusive
negotiation process under the General Assembly to define the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level forum, with the aim of convening the first
high-level forum at the beginning of the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly. We
will also consider the need for promoting intergenerational solidarity for the
achievement of sustainable development, taking into account the needs of future
generations, including by inviting the Secretary-General to present a report on this
issue.
C.

Environmental pillar in the context of sustainable development

87. We reaffirm the need to strengthen international environmental governance
within the context of the institutional framework for sustainable development in
order to promote a balanced integration of the economic, social and environmental
dimensions of sustainable development, as well as coordination within the United
Nations system.
88. We are committed to strengthening the role of the United Nations Environment
Programme as the leading global environmental authority that sets the global
environmental agenda, promotes the coherent implementation of the environmental
dimension of sustainable development within the United Nations system and serves
as an authoritative advocate for the global environment. We reaffirm General
Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972 establishing the United
_______________
29

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chaps. I and II.

17

A/RES/66/288

Nations Environment Programme and other relevant resolutions that reinforce its
mandate, as well as the Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of the United
Nations Environment Programme of 7 February 1997 30 and the Malmö Ministerial
Declaration of 31 May 2000. 31 In this regard, we invite the Assembly, at its sixtyseventh session, to adopt a resolution strengthening and upgrading the United
Nations Environment Programme in the following manner:
(a) Establish universal membership in the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme, as well as other measures to strengthen its
governance as well as its responsiveness and accountability to Member States;
(b) Have secure, stable, adequate and increased financial resources from the
regular budget of the United Nations and voluntary contributions to fulfil its
mandate;
(c) Enhance the voice of the United Nations Environment Programme and its
ability to fulfil its coordination mandate within the United Nations system by
strengthening its engagement in key United Nations coordination bodies and
empowering it to lead efforts to formulate United Nations system-wide strategies on
the environment;
(d) Promote a strong science-policy interface, building on existing
international instruments, assessments, panels and information networks, including
the Global Environment Outlook, as one of the processes aimed at bringing together
information and assessment to support informed decision-making;
(e) Disseminate and share evidence-based environmental information, and
raise public awareness on critical, as well as emerging, environmental issues;
(f) Provide capacity-building to countries, as well as support, and facilitate
access to technology;
(g) Progressively consolidate headquarters functions in Nairobi, as well as
strengthen its regional presence, in order to assist countries, upon request, in the
implementation of their national environmental policies, collaborating closely with
other relevant entities of the United Nations system;
(h) Ensure the active participation of all relevant stakeholders, drawing on
best practices and models from relevant multilateral institutions and exploring new
mechanisms to promote transparency and the effective engagement of civil society.
89. We recognize the significant contributions to sustainable development made
by the multilateral environmental agreements. We acknowledge the work already
undertaken to enhance synergies among the three conventions in the chemicals and
waste cluster (Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of
Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, 32 Rotterdam Convention on the Prior
Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in
International Trade 33 and Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants 34).
We encourage parties to multilateral environmental agreements to consider further
_______________
30

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/52/25), annex,
decision 19/1, annex.
31
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/55/25), annex I, decision SS.VI/1, annex.
32
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1673, No. 28911.
33
Ibid., vol. 2244, No. 39973.
34
Ibid., vol. 2256, No. 40214.

18

A/RES/66/288

measures, in these and other clusters, as appropriate, to promote policy coherence at
all relevant levels, improve efficiency, reduce unnecessary overlap and duplication
and enhance coordination and cooperation among the multilateral environmental
agreements, including the three Rio conventions, as well as with the United Nations
system in the field.
90. We stress the need for the continuation of a regular review of the state of the
Earth’s changing environment and its impact on human well-being, and in this
regard we welcome such initiatives as the Global Environment Outlook process
aimed at bringing together environmental information and assessments and building
national and regional capacity to support informed decision-making.
D.

International financial institutions and United Nations operational
activities

91. We recognize that sustainable development should be given due consideration
by the programmes, funds and specialized agencies of the United Nations system
and other relevant entities such as international financial institutions and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in accordance with their respective
existing mandates. In this regard, we invite them to further enhance the
mainstreaming of sustainable development in their respective mandates,
programmes, strategies and decision-making processes, in support of the efforts of
all countries, in particular developing countries, in the achievement of sustainable
development.
92. We reaffirm the importance of broadening and strengthening the participation
of developing countries in international economic decision-making and normsetting, and in this regard take note of recent important decisions on reform of the
governance structures, quotas and voting rights of the Bretton Woods institutions,
better reflecting current realities and enhancing the voice and participation of
developing countries, and reiterate the importance of the reform of the governance
of those institutions in order to deliver more effective, credible, accountable and
legitimate institutions.
93. We call for the further mainstreaming of the three dimensions of sustainable
development throughout the United Nations system, and request the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social
Council, on the progress made in this regard. We also call for and recognize the
importance of the strengthening of policy coordination within key structures of the
Secretariat of the United Nations so as to ensure system-wide coherence in support
of sustainable development, while ensuring accountability to Member States.
94. We invite the governing bodies of the funds, programmes and specialized
agencies of the United Nations development system to consider appropriate
measures for integrating the social, economic and environmental dimensions across
the operational activities of the United Nations system. We also emphasize that
increasing the financial contributions to the United Nations development system is
key to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard we recognize the mutually
reinforcing links among increased effectiveness, efficiency and coherence of the
United Nations development system, achieving concrete results in assisting
developing countries in eradicating poverty and achieving sustained economic
growth and sustainable development.
95. We emphasize the need to strengthen operational activities for development of
the United Nations system in the field that are well aligned with national sustainable
19

A/RES/66/288

development priorities of developing countries. In this regard, we emphasize that
the fundamental characteristics and principles of United Nations operational
activities set forth in the relevant General Assembly resolutions provide the
overarching framework for all matters pertaining to the United Nations development
assistance operations in the field. We recognize the importance of strengthening
United Nations system coordination. We look forward to receiving the outcome of
the independent evaluation of the “Delivering as one” initiative.
96. We call upon the United Nations system to improve the management of
facilities and operations, by taking into account sustainable development practices,
building on existing efforts and promoting cost effectiveness, and in accordance
with legislative frameworks, including financial rules and regulations, while
maintaining accountability to Member States.
E.

Regional, national, subnational and local levels

97. We acknowledge the importance of the regional dimension of sustainable
development. Regional frameworks can complement and facilitate effective
translation of sustainable development policies into concrete action at the national
level.
98. We encourage regional, national, subnational and local authorities, as
appropriate, to develop and utilize sustainable development strategies as key
instruments for guiding decision-making and implementation of sustainable
development at all levels, and in this regard we recognize that integrated social,
economic and environmental data and information, as well as effective analysis and
assessment of implementation, are important in decision-making processes.
99. We encourage action at the regional, national, subnational and local levels to
promote access to information, public participation and access to justice in
environmental matters, as appropriate.
100. We emphasize that regional and subregional organizations, including the
United Nations regional commissions and their subregional offices, have a
significant role to play in promoting a balanced integration of the economic, social
and environmental dimensions of sustainable development in their respective
regions. We underscore the need to support these institutions, including through the
United Nations system, in the effective operationalization and implementation of
sustainable development, and to facilitate institutional coherence and harmonization
of relevant development policies, plans and programmes. In this regard, we urge
these institutions to prioritize sustainable development through, inter alia, more
efficient and effective capacity-building, development and implementation of
regional agreements and arrangements as appropriate, and exchange of information,
best practices and lessons learned. We also welcome regional and cross-regional
initiatives for sustainable development. We, furthermore, recognize the need to
ensure effective linkage among global, regional, subregional and national processes
to advance sustainable development. We encourage the enhancement of the United
Nations regional commissions and their subregional offices in their respective
capacities to support Member States in implementing sustainable development.
101. We underline the need for more coherent and integrated planning and decisionmaking at the national, subnational and local levels as appropriate, and to this end
we call upon countries to strengthen national, subnational and/or local institutions
or relevant multi-stakeholder bodies and processes, as appropriate, dealing with
sustainable development, including to coordinate on matters of sustainable

20

A/RES/66/288

development and to enable effective integration of the three dimensions of
sustainable development.
102. We welcome regional and cross-regional initiatives for sustainable
development, such as the Green Bridge Partnership Programme, which is voluntary
and open for participation by all partners.
103. We underscore the need to ensure long-term political commitment to
sustainable development taking into account national circumstances and priorities,
and in this regard we encourage all countries to undertake the necessary actions and
measures to achieve sustainable development.
V.

Framework for action and follow-up

A.

Thematic areas and cross-sectoral issues

104. We recognize that in order to achieve the objective of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, namely to secure renewed political
commitment for sustainable development, as well as to address the themes of a
green economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication
and the institutional framework for sustainable development, we commit to address
remaining gaps in the implementation of the outcomes of the major summits on
sustainable development, to address new and emerging challenges and to seize new
opportunities through the actions enumerated below in this framework for action,
supported, as appropriate, through provision of means of implementation. We
recognize that goals, targets and indicators, including, where appropriate, gendersensitive indicators, are valuable in measuring and accelerating progress. We further
note that progress in the implementation of the actions stipulated below can be
enhanced by voluntarily sharing information, knowledge and experience.
Poverty eradication
105. We recognize that, three years from the 2015 target date of the Millennium
Development Goals, while there has been progress in reducing poverty in some
regions, this progress has been uneven and the number of people living in poverty in
some countries continues to increase, with women and children constituting the
majority of the most affected groups, especially in the least developed countries and
particularly in Africa.
106. We recognize that sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth in
developing countries is a key requirement for eradicating poverty and hunger and
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. In this regard, we emphasize that
national efforts of developing countries should be complemented by an enabling
environment aimed at expanding the development opportunities of developing
countries. We also emphasize the need to accord the highest priority to poverty
eradication within the United Nations development agenda, addressing the root
causes and challenges of poverty through integrated, coordinated and coherent
strategies at all levels.
107. We recognize that promoting universal access to social services can make an
important contribution to consolidating and achieving development gains. Social
protection systems that address and reduce inequality and social exclusion are
essential for eradicating poverty and advancing the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. In this regard, we strongly encourage initiatives aimed at
enhancing social protection for all people.

21

A/RES/66/288

Food security and nutrition and sustainable agriculture
108. We reaffirm our commitments regarding the right of everyone to have access
to safe, sufficient and nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and
the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger. We acknowledge that
food security and nutrition has become a pressing global challenge and, in this
regard, we further reaffirm our commitment to enhancing food security and access
to adequate, safe and nutritious food for present and future generations in line with
the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food Security, adopted on
16 November 2009, 35 including for children under the age of 2, and through, as
appropriate, national, regional and global food security and nutrition strategies.
109. We recognize that a significant portion of the world’s poor live in rural areas,
and that rural communities play an important role in the economic development of
many countries. We emphasize the need to revitalize the agricultural and rural
development sectors, notably in developing countries, in an economically, socially
and environmentally sustainable manner. We recognize the importance of taking the
necessary actions to better address the needs of rural communities by, inter alia,
enhancing access by agricultural producers, in particular small producers, women,
indigenous peoples and people living in vulnerable situations, to credit and other
financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health care, social services,
education, training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable technologies,
including for efficient irrigation, reuse of treated wastewater and water harvesting
and storage. We reiterate the importance of empowering rural women as critical
agents for enhancing agricultural and rural development and food security and
nutrition. We also recognize the importance of traditional sustainable agricultural
practices, including traditional seed supply systems, including for many indigenous
peoples and local communities.
110. Noting the diversity of agricultural conditions and systems, we resolve to
increase sustainable agricultural production and productivity globally, including by
improving the functioning of markets and trading systems and strengthening
international cooperation, particularly for developing countries, by increasing public
and private investment in sustainable agriculture, land management and rural
development. Key areas for investment and support include sustainable agricultural
practices; rural infrastructure, storage capacities and related technologies; research
and development on sustainable agricultural technologies; development of strong
agricultural cooperatives and value chains; and the strengthening of urban-rural
linkages. We also recognize the need to significantly reduce post-harvest and other
food losses and waste throughout the food supply chain.
111. We reaffirm the necessity to promote, enhance and support more sustainable
agriculture, including crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture, that
improves food security, eradicates hunger and is economically viable, while
conserving land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, biodiversity and
ecosystems and enhancing resilience to climate change and natural disasters. We
also recognize the need to maintain natural ecological processes that support food
production systems.
112. We stress the need to enhance sustainable livestock production systems,
including by improving pasture land and irrigation schemes in line with national
policies, legislation, rules and regulations, enhanced sustainable water management
_______________
35

22

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.

A/RES/66/288

systems and efforts to eradicate and prevent the spread of animal diseases,
recognizing that the livelihoods of farmers, including pastoralists, and the health of
livestock are intertwined.
113. We also stress the crucial role of healthy marine ecosystems, sustainable
fisheries and sustainable aquaculture for food security and nutrition and in
providing for the livelihoods of millions of people.
114. We resolve to take action to enhance agricultural research, extension services,
training and education to improve agricultural productivity and sustainability
through the voluntary sharing of knowledge and good practices. We further resolve
to improve access to information, technical knowledge and know-how, including
through new information and communications technologies that empower farmers,
fisherfolk and foresters to choose among diverse methods of achieving sustainable
agricultural production. We call for the strengthening of international cooperation
on agricultural research for development.
115. We reaffirm the important work and inclusive nature of the Committee on
World Food Security, including through its role in facilitating country-initiated
assessments on sustainable food production and food security, and we encourage
countries to give due consideration to implementing the Committee on World Food
Security Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security. We take note of the
ongoing discussions on responsible agricultural investment in the framework of the
Committee on World Food Security, as well as the principles for responsible
agricultural investment.
116. We stress the need to address the root causes of excessive food price volatility,
including its structural causes, at all levels, and the need to manage the risks linked
to high and excessively volatile prices in agricultural commodities and their
consequences for global food security and nutrition, as well as for smallholder
farmers and poor urban dwellers.
117. We underline the importance of timely, accurate and transparent information in
helping to address excessive food price volatility, and in this regard take note of the
Agricultural Market Information System hosted by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and urge the participating international
organizations, private sector actors and governments to ensure the public
dissemination of timely and quality food market information products.
118. We reaffirm that a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and
equitable multilateral trading system will promote agricultural and rural
development in developing countries and contribute to world food security. We urge
national, regional and international strategies to promote the participation of
farmers, especially smallholder farmers, including women, in community, domestic,
regional and international markets.
Water and sanitation
119. We recognize that water is at the core of sustainable development as it is
closely linked to a number of key global challenges. We therefore reiterate the
importance of integrating water into sustainable development, and underline the
critical importance of water and sanitation within the three dimensions of
sustainable development.
120. We reaffirm the commitments made in the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation and the Millennium Declaration regarding halving by 2015 the
23

A/RES/66/288

proportion of people without access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation and
the development of integrated water resource management and water efficiency
plans, ensuring sustainable water use. We commit to the progressive realization of
access to safe and affordable drinking water and basic sanitation for all, as
necessary for poverty eradication, women’s empowerment and to protect human
health, and to significantly improve the implementation of integrated water resource
management at all levels as appropriate. In this regard, we reiterate the
commitments to support these efforts, in particular for developing countries, through
the mobilization of resources from all sources, capacity-building and technology
transfer.
121. We reaffirm our commitments regarding the human right to safe drinking
water and sanitation, to be progressively realized for our populations, with full
respect for national sovereignty. We also highlight our commitment to the
International Decade for Action, “Water for Life”, 2005–2015.
122. We recognize the key role that ecosystems play in maintaining water quantity
and quality, and support actions within respective national boundaries to protect and
sustainably manage these ecosystems.
123. We underline the need to adopt measures to address floods, droughts and water
scarcity, addressing the balance between water supply and demand, including, where
appropriate, non-conventional water resources, and to mobilize financial resources
and investment in infrastructure for water and sanitation services, in accordance
with national priorities.
124. We stress the need to adopt measures to significantly reduce water pollution
and increase water quality, significantly improve wastewater treatment and water
efficiency and reduce water losses. In order to achieve this, we stress the need for
international assistance and cooperation.
Energy
125. We recognize the critical role that energy plays in the development process, as
access to sustainable modern energy services contributes to poverty eradication,
saves lives, improves health and helps to provide for basic human needs. We stress
that these services are essential to social inclusion and gender equality, and that
energy is also a key input to production. We commit to facilitate support for access
to these services by 1.4 billion people worldwide who are currently without them.
We recognize that access to these services is critical for achieving sustainable
development.
126. We emphasize the need to address the challenge of access to sustainable
modern energy services for all, in particular for the poor, who are unable to afford
these services even when they are available. We emphasize the need to take further
action to improve this situation, including by mobilizing adequate financial
resources, so as to provide these services in a reliable, affordable, economically
viable and socially and environmentally acceptable manner in developing countries.
127. We reaffirm support for the implementation of national and subnational
policies and strategies, based on individual national circumstances and development
aspirations, using an appropriate energy mix to meet developmental needs,
including through increased use of renewable energy sources and other lowemission technologies, the more efficient use of energy, greater reliance on
advanced energy technologies, including cleaner fossil fuel technologies, and the
sustainable use of traditional energy resources. We commit to promoting sustainable
24

A/RES/66/288

modern energy services for all through national and subnational efforts, inter alia,
on electrification and dissemination of sustainable cooking and heating solutions,
including through collaborative actions to share best practices and adopt policies, as
appropriate. We urge governments to create enabling environments that facilitate
public and private sector investment in relevant and needed cleaner energy
technologies.
128. We recognize that improving energy efficiency, increasing the share of
renewable energy and cleaner and energy-efficient technologies are important for
sustainable development, including in addressing climate change. We also recognize
the need for energy efficiency measures in urban planning, buildings and
transportation and in the production of goods and services and the design of
products. We also recognize the importance of promoting incentives in favour of,
and removing disincentives to, energy efficiency and the diversification of the
energy mix, including promoting research and development in all countries,
including developing countries.
129. We note the launching of the “Sustainable Energy for All” initiative by the
Secretary-General, which focuses on access to energy, energy efficiency and
renewable energies. We are all determined to act to make sustainable energy for all a
reality and, through this, help to eradicate poverty and lead to sustainable
development and global prosperity. We recognize that the activities of countries in
broader energy-related matters are of great importance and are prioritized according
to their specific challenges, capacities and circumstances, including their energy
mix.
Sustainable tourism
130. We emphasize that well-designed and managed tourism can make a significant
contribution to the three dimensions of sustainable development, has close linkages
to other sectors and can create decent jobs and generate trade opportunities. We
recognize the need to support sustainable tourism activities and relevant capacitybuilding that promote environmental awareness, conserve and protect the
environment, respect wildlife, flora, biodiversity, ecosystems and cultural diversity,
and improve the welfare and livelihoods of local communities by supporting their
local economies and the human and natural environment as a whole. We call for
enhanced support for sustainable tourism activities and relevant capacity-building in
developing countries in order to contribute to the achievement of sustainable
development.
131. We encourage the promotion of investment in sustainable tourism, including
ecotourism and cultural tourism, which may include creating small and mediumsized enterprises and facilitating access to finance, including through microcredit
initiatives for the poor, indigenous peoples and local communities in areas with high
ecotourism potential. In this regard, we underline the importance of establishing,
where necessary, appropriate guidelines and regulations, in accordance with national
priorities and legislation, for promoting and supporting sustainable tourism.
Sustainable transport
132. We note that transportation and mobility are central to sustainable
development. Sustainable transportation can enhance economic growth and improve
accessibility. Sustainable transport achieves better integration of the economy while
respecting the environment. We recognize the importance of the efficient movement
of people and goods and access to environmentally sound, safe and affordable
25

A/RES/66/288

transportation as a means to improve social equity, health, resilience of cities,
urban-rural linkages and productivity of rural areas. In this regard, we take into
account road safety as part of our efforts to achieve sustainable development.
133. We support the development of sustainable transport systems, including
energy-efficient multimodal transport systems, notably public mass transportation
systems, clean fuels and vehicles, as well as improved transportation systems in
rural areas. We recognize the need to promote an integrated approach to
policymaking at the national, regional and local levels for transport services and
systems to promote sustainable development. We also recognize that the special
development needs of landlocked and transit developing countries need to be taken
into account while establishing sustainable transit transport systems. We
acknowledge the need for international support to developing countries in this
regard.
Sustainable cities and human settlements
134. We recognize that, if they are well planned and developed, including through
integrated planning and management approaches, cities can promote economically,
socially and environmentally sustainable societies. In this regard, we recognize the
need for a holistic approach to urban development and human settlements that
provides for affordable housing and infrastructure and prioritizes slum upgrading
and urban regeneration. We commit to work towards improving the quality of
human settlements, including the living and working conditions of both urban and
rural dwellers in the context of poverty eradication so that all people have access to
basic services, housing and mobility. We also recognize the need for conservation,
as appropriate, of the natural and cultural heritage of human settlements, the
revitalization of historic districts and the rehabilitation of city centres.
135. We commit to promote an integrated approach to planning and building
sustainable cities and urban settlements, including by supporting local authorities,
increasing public awareness and enhancing participation of urban residents,
including the poor, in decision-making. We also commit to promote sustainable
development policies that support inclusive housing and social services; a safe and
healthy living environment for all, particularly children, youth, women and the
elderly and disabled; affordable and sustainable transport and energy; the
promotion, protection and restoration of safe and green urban spaces; safe and clean
drinking water and sanitation; healthy air quality; the generation of decent jobs; and
improved urban planning and slum upgrading. We further support the sustainable
management of waste through the application of the 3Rs (reduce, reuse and recycle).
We underline the importance of considering disaster risk reduction, resilience and
climate risks in urban planning. We recognize the efforts of cities to balance
development with rural regions.
136. We emphasize the importance of increasing the number of metropolitan
regions, cities and towns that are implementing policies for sustainable urban
planning and design in order to respond effectively to the expected growth of urban
populations in the coming decades. We note that sustainable urban planning benefits
from the involvement of multiple stakeholders as well as from full use of
information and sex-disaggregated data, including on demographic trends, income
distribution and informal settlements. We recognize the important role of municipal
governments in setting a vision for sustainable cities, from the initiation of city
planning through to revitalization of older cities and neighbourhoods, including by
adopting energy efficiency programmes in building management and developing
sustainable, locally appropriate transport systems. We further recognize the
26

A/RES/66/288

importance of mixed-use planning and of encouraging non-motorized mobility,
including by promoting pedestrian and cycling infrastructures.
137. We recognize that partnerships among cities and communities play an
important role in promoting sustainable development. In this regard, we stress the
need to strengthen existing cooperation mechanisms and platforms, partnership
arrangements and other implementation tools to advance the coordinated
implementation of the Habitat Agenda 36 with the active involvement of all relevant
United Nations entities and with the overall aim of achieving sustainable urban
development. We further recognize the continuing need for adequate and predictable
financial contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements
Foundation so as to ensure timely, effective and concrete global implementation of
the Habitat Agenda.
Health and population
138. We recognize that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of
all three dimensions of sustainable development. We understand the goals of
sustainable development can only be achieved in the absence of a high prevalence of
debilitating communicable and non-communicable diseases, and where populations
can reach a state of physical, mental and social well-being. We are convinced that
action on the social and environmental determinants of health, both for the poor and
the vulnerable and for the entire population, is important to create inclusive,
equitable, economically productive and healthy societies. We call for the full
realization of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health.
139. We also recognize the importance of universal health coverage to enhancing
health, social cohesion and sustainable human and economic development. We
pledge to strengthen health systems towards the provision of equitable universal
coverage. We call for the involvement of all relevant actors for coordinated
multisectoral action to address urgently the health needs of the world’s population.
140. We emphasize that HIV and AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, influenza, polio and
other communicable diseases remain serious global concerns, and we commit to
redouble efforts to achieve universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and
support and to eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HIV, as well as to renew
and strengthen the fight against malaria, tuberculosis and neglected tropical
diseases.
141. We acknowledge that the global burden and threat of non-communicable
diseases constitutes one of the major challenges for sustainable development in the
twenty-first century. We commit to strengthen health systems towards the provision
of equitable, universal coverage and promote affordable access to prevention,
treatment, care and support related to non-communicable diseases, especially
cancer, cardiovascular diseases, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes. We also
commit to establish or strengthen multisectoral national policies for the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases. We recognize that reducing, inter alia,
air, water and chemical pollution leads to positive effects on health.
142. We reaffirm the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in
the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
_______________
36
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

27

A/RES/66/288

Agreement), 37 the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, 38
the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of 30 August
2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration, 39 and, when
formal acceptance procedures are completed, the amendment to article 31 of the
TRIPS Agreement, which provide flexibilities for the protection of public health,
and in particular to promote access to medicines for all and encourage the provision
of assistance to developing countries in this regard.
143. We call for further collaboration and cooperation at the national and
international levels to strengthen health systems through increased health financing,
recruitment, development and training and retention of the health workforce,
through improved distribution and access to safe, affordable, effective and quality
medicines, vaccines and medical technologies, and by improving health
infrastructure. We support the leadership role of the World Health Organization as
the directing and coordinating authority on international health work.
144. We commit to systematically consider population trends and projections in our
national, rural and urban development strategies and policies. Through forwardlooking planning, we can seize the opportunities and address the challenges
associated with demographic change, including migration.
145. We call for the full and effective implementation of the Beijing Platform for
Action and the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development, and the outcomes of their review conferences, including the
commitments leading to sexual and reproductive health and the promotion and
protection of all human rights in this context. We emphasize the need for the
provision of universal access to reproductive health, including family planning and
sexual health, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and
programmes.
146. We commit to reduce maternal and child mortality and to improve the health
of women, youth and children. We reaffirm our commitment to gender equality and
to protect the rights of women, men and youth to have control over and decide
freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality, including access to
sexual and reproductive health, free from coercion, discrimination and violence. We
will work actively to ensure that health systems provide the necessary information
and health services addressing the sexual and reproductive health of women,
including by working towards universal access to safe, effective, affordable and
acceptable modern methods of family planning, as this is essential for women’s
health and advancing gender equality.
Promoting full and productive employment, decent work for all and social
protection
147. We recognize that poverty eradication, full and productive employment and
decent work for all, and social integration and protection are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing, and that enabling environments to promote them need to be
created at all levels.

_______________
37
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7).
38
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2.
39
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/540 and Corr.1.

28

A/RES/66/288

148. We are concerned about labour market conditions and widespread deficits of
available decent work opportunities, especially for young women and men. We urge
all governments to address the global challenge of youth employment by developing
and implementing strategies and policies that provide young people everywhere
access to decent and productive work, as over the coming decades, decent jobs will
need to be created to be able to ensure sustainable and inclusive development and
reduce poverty.
149. We recognize the importance of job creation by investing in and developing
sound, effective and efficient economic and social infrastructure and productive
capacities for sustainable development and sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth. We call upon countries to enhance infrastructure investment for
sustainable development, and we agree to support United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies to help to assist and promote the efforts of developing
countries, particularly the least developed countries, in this regard.
150. We recognize the importance of job creation by adopting forward-looking
macroeconomic policies that promote sustainable development and lead to
sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, increase productive
employment opportunities and promote agricultural and industrial development.
151. We emphasize the need to enhance employment and income opportunities for
all, especially for women and men living in poverty, and in this regard we support
national efforts to provide new job opportunities to the poor in both rural and urban
areas, including support to small and medium-sized enterprises.
152. We recognize that workers should have access to education, skills, health care,
social security, fundamental rights at work, social and legal protections, including
occupational safety and health, and decent work opportunities. Governments, trade
unions, workers and employers all have a role to play in promoting decent work for
all, and all should help young people to gain access to needed skills and
employment opportunities, including in new and emerging sectors. Women and men
should have equal access to opportunities to acquire job skills, as well as to worker
protections. We recognize the importance of a just transition, including programmes
to help workers to adjust to changing labour market conditions.
153. We also recognize that informal unpaid work, performed mostly by women,
contributes substantially to human well-being and sustainable development. In this
regard, we commit to work towards safe and decent working conditions and access
to social protection and education.
154. We recognize that opportunities for decent work for all and job creation can be
generated through, inter alia, public and private investments in scientific and
technological innovation, public works in restoring, regenerating and conserving
natural resources and ecosystems, and social and community services. We are
encouraged by government initiatives to create jobs for poor people in restoring and
managing natural resources and ecosystems, and we encourage the private sector to
contribute to decent work for all and job creation for both women and men, and
particularly for young people, including through partnerships with small and
medium-sized enterprises and cooperatives. In this regard, we acknowledge the
importance of efforts to promote the exchange of information and knowledge on
decent work for all and job creation, including green jobs initiatives and related
skills, and to facilitate the integration of relevant data into national economic and
employment policies.

29

A/RES/66/288

155. We encourage the sharing of experiences and best practices on ways to address
the high levels of unemployment and underemployment, in particular among young
people.
156. We stress the need to provide social protection to all members of society,
fostering growth, resilience, social justice and cohesion, including those who are not
employed in the formal economy. In this regard, we strongly encourage national and
local initiatives aimed at providing social protection floors for all citizens. We
support global dialogue on best practices for social protection programmes that
takes into account the three dimensions of sustainable development and, in this
regard, we note International Labour Organization Recommendation No. 202 concerning
national floors of social protection.
157. We call upon States to promote and protect effectively the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants regardless of migration status, especially
those of women and children, and to address international migration through
international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and a comprehensive
and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of
origin, transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human rights of all
migrants, and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their vulnerability.
Oceans and seas
158. We recognize that oceans, seas and coastal areas form an integrated and
essential component of the Earth’s ecosystem and are critical to sustaining it, and
that international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, 40 provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable use of
the oceans and their resources. We stress the importance of the conservation and
sustainable use of the oceans and seas and of their resources for sustainable
development, including through their contributions to poverty eradication, sustained
economic growth, food security and creation of sustainable livelihoods and decent
work, while at the same time protecting biodiversity and the marine environment
and addressing the impacts of climate change. We therefore commit to protect, and
restore, the health, productivity and resilience of oceans and marine ecosystems, to
maintain their biodiversity, enabling their conservation and sustainable use for
present and future generations, and to effectively apply an ecosystem approach and
the precautionary approach in the management, in accordance with international
law, of activities having an impact on the marine environment, to deliver on all three
dimensions of sustainable development.
159. We recognize the importance of the Convention on the Law of the Sea to
advancing sustainable development and its near universal adoption by States, and in
this regard we urge all its parties to fully implement their obligations under the
Convention.
160. We recognize the importance of building the capacity of developing countries
to be able to benefit from the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and
seas and their resources, and in this regard we emphasize the need for cooperation in
marine scientific research to implement the provisions of the Convention on the
Law of the Sea and the outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development,
as well as for the transfer of technology, taking into account the Intergovernmental

_______________
40

30

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.

A/RES/66/288

Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine
Technology. 41
161. We support the Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the
State of the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects, established
under the auspices of the General Assembly, and look forward to the completion of
its first global integrated assessment of the state of the marine environment by 2014
and the subsequent consideration by the Assembly. We encourage consideration by
States of the assessment findings at appropriate levels.
162. We recognize the importance of the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction. We note the ongoing work under
the auspices of the General Assembly of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group to study issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction. Building on the work of
the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group and before the end of the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly, we commit to address, on an urgent basis,
the issue of the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, including by taking a decision on the development
of an international instrument under the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
163. We note with concern that the health of oceans and marine biodiversity are
negatively affected by marine pollution, including marine debris, especially plastic,
persistent organic pollutants, heavy metals and nitrogen-based compounds, from a
number of marine and land-based sources, including shipping and land run-off. We
commit to take action to reduce the incidence and impacts of such pollution on
marine ecosystems, including through the effective implementation of relevant
conventions adopted in the framework of the International Maritime Organization,
and the follow-up of relevant initiatives such as the Global Programme of Action for
the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities, 42 as well as
the adoption of coordinated strategies to this end. We further commit to take action
to, by 2025, based on collected scientific data, achieve significant reductions in
marine debris to prevent harm to the coastal and marine environment.
164. We note the significant threat that alien invasive species pose to marine
ecosystems and resources, and commit to implement measures to prevent the
introduction and manage the adverse environmental impacts of alien invasive
species, including, as appropriate, those adopted in the framework of the
International Maritime Organization.
165. We note that sea-level rise and coastal erosion are serious threats for many
coastal regions and islands, particularly in developing countries, and in this regard
we call upon the international community to enhance its efforts to address these
challenges.
166. We call for support to initiatives that address ocean acidification and the impacts
of climate change on marine and coastal ecosystems and resources. In this regard,
we reiterate the need to work collectively to prevent further ocean acidification, as
well as to enhance the resilience of marine ecosystems and of the communities
whose livelihoods depend on them, and to support marine scientific research,

_______________
41
42

See Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, document IOC/INF-1203.
See A/51/116, annex II.

31

A/RES/66/288

monitoring and observation of ocean acidification and particularly vulnerable
ecosystems, including through enhanced international cooperation in this regard.
167. We stress our concern about the potential environmental impacts of ocean
fertilization. In this regard, we recall the decisions related to ocean fertilization
adopted by the relevant intergovernmental bodies, and resolve to continue
addressing ocean fertilization with utmost caution, consistent with the precautionary
approach.
168. We commit to intensify our efforts to meet the 2015 target as agreed to in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation to maintain or restore stocks to levels that can
produce maximum sustainable yield on an urgent basis. In this regard, we further
commit to urgently take the measures necessary to maintain or restore all stocks at
least to levels that can produce the maximum sustainable yield, with the aim of
achieving these goals in the shortest time feasible, as determined by their biological
characteristics. To achieve this, we commit to urgently develop and implement
science-based management plans, including by reducing or suspending fishing catch
and fishing effort commensurate with the status of the stock. We further commit to
enhance action to manage by-catch, discards and other adverse ecosystem impacts
from fisheries, including by eliminating destructive fishing practices. We also
commit to enhance actions to protect vulnerable marine ecosystems from significant
adverse impacts, including through the effective use of impact assessments. Such
actions, including those through competent organizations, should be undertaken
consistent with international law, the applicable international instruments and
relevant General Assembly resolutions and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.
169. We urge States parties to the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks 43 to fully implement that Agreement and to give, in
accordance with Part VII of the Agreement, full recognition to the special
requirements of developing States. Furthermore, we call upon all States to
implement the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries 44 and the international
plans of action and technical guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations.
170. We acknowledge that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing deprive many
countries of a crucial natural resource and remain a persistent threat to their
sustainable development. We recommit to eliminate illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing as advanced in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, and to
prevent and combat these practices, including by the following: developing and
implementing national and regional action plans in accordance with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations International Plan of Action to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing;
implementing, in accordance with international law, effective and coordinated
measures by coastal States, flag States, port States, chartering nations and the States
of nationality of the beneficial owners and others who support or engage in illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing by identifying vessels engaged in such fishing
and by depriving offenders of the benefits accruing from it; as well as cooperating
_______________
43

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2167, No. 37924.
International Fisheries Instruments with Index (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.98.V.11),
sect. III.

44

32

A/RES/66/288

with developing countries to systematically identify needs and build capacity,
including support for monitoring, control, surveillance, compliance and enforcement
systems.
171. We call upon States that have signed the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and
Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing 45 to expedite procedures for
its ratification with a view to its early entry into force.
172. We recognize the need for transparency and accountability in fisheries
management by regional fisheries management organizations. We recognize the
efforts already made by those regional fisheries management organizations that have
undertaken independent performance reviews, and call upon all regional fisheries
management organizations to regularly undertake such reviews and make the results
publicly available. We encourage implementation of the recommendations of such
reviews and recommend that the comprehensiveness of those reviews be
strengthened over time, as necessary.
173. We reaffirm our commitment in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation to
eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and
overcapacity, taking into account the importance of this sector to developing
countries, and we reiterate our commitment to conclude multilateral disciplines on
fisheries subsidies that will give effect to the mandates of the World Trade
Organization Doha Development Agenda 46 and the Hong Kong Ministerial
Declaration 47 to strengthen disciplines on subsidies in the fisheries sector, including
through the prohibition of certain forms of fisheries subsidies that contribute to
overcapacity and overfishing, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and
differential treatment for developing and least developed countries should be an
integral part of World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation, taking into
account the importance of the sector to development priorities, poverty reduction
and livelihood and food security concerns. We encourage States to further improve
the transparency and reporting of existing fisheries subsidies programmes through
the World Trade Organization. Given the state of fisheries resources, and without
prejudicing the Doha and Hong Kong ministerial mandates on fisheries subsidies or
the need to conclude these negotiations, we encourage States to eliminate subsidies
that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, and to refrain from introducing new
such subsidies or from extending or enhancing existing ones.
174. We urge the identification and mainstreaming by 2014 of strategies that further
assist developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small
island developing States, in developing their national capacity to conserve,
sustainably manage and realize the benefits of sustainable fisheries, including
through improved market access for fish products from developing countries.
175. We commit to observe the need to ensure access to fisheries and the
importance of access to markets, by subsistence, small-scale and artisanal fisherfolk
and women fish workers, as well as indigenous peoples and their communities,
particularly in developing countries, especially small island developing States.

_______________
45

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the Conference of FAO, Thirty-sixth
Session, Rome, 18–23 November 2009 (C 2009/REP and Corr.1–3), appendix E.
46
See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
47
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(05)/DEC.

33

A/RES/66/288

176. We also recognize the significant economic, social and environmental
contributions of coral reefs, in particular to islands and other coastal States, as well
as the significant vulnerability of coral reefs and mangroves to impacts, including
from climate change, ocean acidification, overfishing, destructive fishing practices
and pollution. We support international cooperation with a view to conserving coral
reef and mangrove ecosystems and realizing their social, economic and
environmental benefits, as well as facilitating technical collaboration and voluntary
information-sharing.
177. We reaffirm the importance of area-based conservation measures, including
marine protected areas, consistent with international law and based on best available
scientific information, as a tool for conservation of biological diversity and
sustainable use of its components. We note decision X/2 of the tenth meeting of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, held in
Nagoya, Japan, from 18 to 29 October 2010, that, by 2020, 10 per cent of coastal
and marine areas, especially areas of particular importance for biodiversity and
ecosystem services, are to be conserved through effectively and equitably managed,
ecologically representative and well-connected systems of protected areas and other
effective area-based conservation measures. 48
Small island developing States
178. We reaffirm that small island developing States remain a special case for
sustainable development in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities,
including their small size, remoteness, narrow resource and export base, and
exposure to global environmental challenges and external economic shocks,
including to a large range of impacts from climate change and potentially more
frequent and intense natural disasters. We note with concern that the outcome of the
five-year review of the Mauritius Strategy 49 concluded that small island developing
States have made less progress than most other groupings, or even regressed, in
economic terms, especially in terms of poverty reduction and debt sustainability.
Sea-level rise and other adverse impacts of climate change continue to pose a
significant risk to small island developing States and their efforts to achieve
sustainable development and, for many, represent the gravest of threats to their
survival and viability, including for some through the loss of territory. We also
remain concerned that, while small island developing States have progressed in the
areas of gender, health, education and the environment, their overall progress
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals has been uneven.
179. We call for continued and enhanced efforts to assist small island developing
States in implementing the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy. We also call for a strengthening of United Nations system support to small
island developing States in keeping with the multiple ongoing and emerging
challenges faced by these States in achieving sustainable development.
180. Building on the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy, we
call for the convening in 2014 of a third international conference on small island
developing States, recognizing the importance of coordinated, balanced and
integrated actions to address the sustainable development challenges facing small
island developing States, and we invite the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session to determine the modalities of the conference.
_______________
48
49

34

See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
See resolution 65/2.

A/RES/66/288

Least developed countries
181. We agree to effectively implement the Istanbul Programme of Action and to
fully integrate its priority areas into the present framework for action, the broader
implementation of which will contribute to the overarching goal of the Istanbul
Programme of Action of enabling half the least developed countries to meet the
criteria for graduation by 2020.
Landlocked developing countries
182. We invite Member States, including development partners, organizations of the
United Nations system and other relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, to speed up further the implementation of the specific actions in the
five priorities agreed upon in the Almaty Programme of Action and those contained
in the declaration on the midterm review of the Almaty Programme of Action, in a
better coordinated manner, in particular for the construction, maintenance and
improvement of their transport, storage and other transit-related facilities, including
alternative routes, completion of missing links and improved communications and
energy infrastructure, so as to support the sustainable development of landlocked
developing countries.
Africa
183. While we acknowledge that some progress has been made towards the
fulfilment of international commitments related to Africa’s development needs, we
emphasize that significant challenges remain in achieving sustainable development
on the continent.
184. We call upon the international community to enhance support and fulfil
commitments to advance action in areas critical to Africa’s sustainable development,
and welcome the efforts by development partners to strengthen cooperation with the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development. We also welcome the progress made by
African countries in deepening democracy, human rights, good governance and
sound economic management, and encourage African countries to continue their
efforts in this regard. We invite all Africa’s development partners, in particular
developed countries, to support African countries in strengthening human capacities
and democratic institutions, consistent with their priorities and objectives, with a
view to furthering Africa’s development at all levels, including by facilitating the
transfer of technology needed by African countries as mutually agreed. We
recognize the continued efforts by African countries to create enabling environments
for inclusive growth in support of sustainable development and the need for the
international community to make continued efforts to increase the flow of new and
additional resources for financing for development from all sources, public and
private, domestic and foreign, to support these development efforts by African
countries, and welcome the various important initiatives established between
African countries and their development partners in this regard.
Regional efforts
185. We encourage coordinated regional actions to promote sustainable
development. We recognize, in this regard, that important steps have been taken to
promote sustainable development, in particular in the Arab region, Latin America
and the Caribbean and the Asia-Pacific region, through relevant forums, including
within the United Nations regional commissions. While noting that challenges
remain in several areas, the international community welcomes these efforts, and the
35

A/RES/66/288

results already achieved, and calls for actions at all levels for their further
development and implementation.
Disaster risk reduction
186. We reaffirm our commitment to the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015:
Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters, 50 and call for
States, the United Nations system, the international financial institutions,
subregional, regional and international organizations and civil society to accelerate
implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action and the achievement of its
goals. We call for disaster risk reduction and the building of resilience to disasters to
be addressed with a renewed sense of urgency in the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication and, as appropriate, to be integrated into
policies, plans, programmes and budgets at all levels and considered within relevant
future frameworks. We invite governments at all levels, as well as relevant
subregional, regional and international organizations, to commit to adequate, timely
and predictable resources for disaster risk reduction in order to enhance the
resilience of cities and communities to disasters, according to their own
circumstances and capacities.
187. We recognize the importance of early warning systems as part of effective
disaster risk reduction at all levels in order to reduce economic and social damages,
including the loss of human life, and in this regard encourage States to integrate
such systems into their national disaster risk reduction strategies and plans. We
encourage donors and the international community to enhance international
cooperation in support of disaster risk reduction in developing countries, as
appropriate, through technical assistance, technology transfer as mutually agreed,
capacity-building and training programmes. We further recognize the importance of
comprehensive hazard and risk assessments, and knowledge- and informationsharing, including reliable geospatial information. We commit to undertake and
strengthen in a timely manner risk assessment and disaster risk reduction
instruments.
188. We stress the importance of stronger interlinkages among disaster risk
reduction, recovery and long-term development planning, and call for more
coordinated and comprehensive strategies that integrate disaster risk reduction and
climate change adaptation considerations into public and private investment,
decision-making and the planning of humanitarian and development actions, in
order to reduce risk, increase resilience and provide a smoother transition between
relief, recovery and development. In this regard, we recognize the need to integrate
a gender perspective into the design and implementation of all phases of disaster
risk management.
189. We call for all relevant stakeholders, including governments, international,
regional and subregional organizations, the private sector and civil society, to take
appropriate and effective measures, taking into account the three dimensions of
sustainable development, including by strengthening coordination and cooperation
to reduce exposure to risk for the protection of people, and infrastructure and other
national assets, from the impact of disasters, in line with the Hyogo Framework for
Action and any post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction.

_______________
50

36

A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2.

A/RES/66/288

Climate change
190. We reaffirm that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time,
and we express profound alarm that emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise
globally. We are deeply concerned that all countries, particularly developing
countries, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change and are already
experiencing increased impacts, including persistent drought and extreme weather
events, sea-level rise, coastal erosion and ocean acidification, further threatening
food security and efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development.
In this regard, we emphasize that adaptation to climate change represents an
immediate and urgent global priority.
191. We underscore that the global nature of climate change calls for the widest
possible cooperation by all countries and their participation in an effective and
appropriate international response, with a view to accelerating the reduction of
global greenhouse gas emissions. We recall that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change provides that parties should protect the climate
system for the benefit of present and future generations of humankind on the basis
of equity and in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capabilities. We note with grave concern the significant gap between
the aggregate effect of mitigation pledges by parties in terms of global annual
emissions of greenhouse gases by 2020 and aggregate emission pathways consistent
with having a likely chance of holding the increase in global average temperature
below 2° C, or 1.5° C above pre-industrial levels. We recognize the importance of
mobilizing funding from a variety of sources, public and private, bilateral and
multilateral, including innovative sources of finance, to support nationally
appropriate mitigation actions, adaptation measures, technology development and
transfer and capacity-building in developing countries. In this regard, we welcome
the launching of the Green Climate Fund, and call for its prompt operationalization
so as to have an early and adequate replenishment process.
192. We urge parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and parties to the Kyoto Protocol thereto 51 to fully implement their
commitments, as well as decisions adopted under those agreements. In this regard,
we will build upon the progress achieved, including at the seventeenth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention and the seventh session of the
Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol, held in Durban, South Africa, from 28 November to 9 December 2011.
Forests
193. We highlight the social, economic and environmental benefits of forests to
people and the contributions of sustainable forest management to the themes and
objective of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. We
support cross-sectoral and cross-institutional policies promoting sustainable forest
management. We reaffirm that the wide range of products and services that forests
provide creates opportunities to address many of the most pressing sustainable
development challenges. We call for enhanced efforts to achieve the sustainable
management of forests, reforestation, restoration and afforestation, and we support
all efforts that effectively slow, halt and reverse deforestation and forest
degradation, including promoting trade in legally harvested forest products. We note

_______________
51

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2303, No. 30822.

37

A/RES/66/288

the importance of such ongoing initiatives as reducing emissions from deforestation
and forest degradation in developing countries, and the role of conservation,
sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in
developing countries. We call for increased efforts to strengthen forest governance
frameworks and means of implementation, in accordance with the non-legally
binding instrument on all types of forests, 52 in order to achieve sustainable forest
management. To this end, we commit to improving the livelihoods of people and
communities by creating the conditions needed for them to sustainably manage
forests, including by strengthening cooperation arrangements in the areas of finance,
trade, transfer of environmentally sound technologies, capacity-building and
governance, as well as by promoting secure land tenure, particularly with regard to
decision-making and benefit-sharing, in accordance with national legislation and
priorities.
194. We call for urgent implementation of the non-legally binding instrument on all
types of forests and the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the ninth
session of the United Nations Forum on Forests on the occasion of the launch of the
International Year of Forests. 53
195. We recognize that the United Nations Forum on Forests, with its universal
membership and comprehensive mandate, plays a vital role in addressing forestrelated issues in a holistic and integrated manner and promoting international policy
coordination and cooperation to achieve sustainable forest management. We invite
the Collaborative Partnership on Forests to continue its support to the Forum and
encourage stakeholders to remain actively engaged in the work of the Forum.
196. We stress the importance of integrating sustainable forest management
objectives and practices into the mainstream of economic policy and decisionmaking, and to that end we commit to working through the governing bodies of
member organizations of the Collaborative Partnership on Forests to integrate, as
appropriate, the sustainable management of all types of forests into their strategies
and programmes.
Biodiversity
197. We reaffirm the intrinsic value of biological diversity, as well as the
ecological, genetic, social, economic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational
and aesthetic values of biological diversity and its critical role in maintaining
ecosystems that provide essential services, which are critical foundations for
sustainable development and human well-being. We recognize the severity of the
global loss of biodiversity and the degradation of ecosystems, and emphasize that
these undermine global development, affecting food security and nutrition, the
provision of and access to water and the health of the rural poor and of people
worldwide, including present and future generations. This highlights the importance
of the conservation of biodiversity, enhancing habitat connectivity and building
ecosystem resilience. We recognize that the traditional knowledge, innovations and
practices of indigenous peoples and local communities make an important
contribution to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and their wider
application can support social well-being and sustainable livelihoods. We further
recognize that indigenous peoples and local communities are often the most directly
_______________
52

Resolution 62/98, annex.
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 22 (E/2011/42), chap. I,
sect. A, draft decision I; see also decision 66/543.
53

38

A/RES/66/288

dependent on biodiversity and ecosystems and thus are often the most immediately
affected by their loss and degradation.
198. We reiterate our commitment to the achievement of the three objectives of the
Convention on Biological Diversity, and call for urgent actions that effectively
reduce the rate of, halt and reverse the loss of biodiversity. In this context, we affirm
the importance of implementing the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and
achieving the Aichi Biodiversity Targets adopted by the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention at its tenth meeting.48
199. We note the adoption of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources
and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization to the
Convention on Biological Diversity,48 and we invite parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity to ratify or accede to the Protocol, so as to ensure its entry into
force at the earliest possible opportunity. We acknowledge the role of access and
benefit-sharing arising from the utilization of genetic resources in contributing to
the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, poverty eradication and
environmental sustainability.
200. We welcome the strategy for resource mobilization in support of the
achievement of the three objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity,
including the commitment to substantially increasing resources from all sources in
support of biodiversity, in accordance with decisions taken at the Conference of the
Parties at its tenth meeting.
201. We support mainstreaming the consideration of the socioeconomic impacts and
benefits of the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and its components,
as well as ecosystems that provide essential services, into relevant programmes and
policies at all levels, in accordance with national legislation, circumstances and
priorities. We encourage investments, through appropriate incentives and policies,
which support the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and
restoration of degraded ecosystems, consistent and in harmony with the Convention
on Biological Diversity and other relevant international obligations.
202. We agree to promote international cooperation and partnerships, as
appropriate, and information exchange, and in this context we welcome the United
Nations Decade on Biodiversity, 2011–2020, for the purpose of encouraging the
active involvement of all stakeholders in the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity, as well as access to and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits
arising from the utilization of genetic resources, with the vision of living in
harmony with nature.
203. We recognize the important role of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, 54 an international agreement that
stands at the intersection between trade, the environment and development,
promotes the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, should contribute to
tangible benefits for local people and ensures that no species entering into
international trade is threatened with extinction. We recognize the economic, social
and environmental impacts of illicit trafficking in wildlife, where firm and
strengthened action needs to be taken on both the supply and demand sides. In this
regard, we emphasize the importance of effective international cooperation among
relevant multilateral environmental agreements and international organizations. We
further stress the importance of basing the listing of species on agreed criteria.
_______________
54

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.

39

A/RES/66/288

204. We take note of the establishment of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, and invite an early
commencement of its work in order to provide the best available policy-relevant
information on biodiversity to assist decision makers.
Desertification, land degradation and drought
205. We recognize the economic and social significance of good land management,
including soil, particularly its contribution to economic growth, biodiversity,
sustainable agriculture and food security, eradicating poverty, women’s
empowerment, addressing climate change and improving water availability. We
stress that desertification, land degradation and drought are challenges of a global
dimension and continue to pose serious challenges to the sustainable development
of all countries, in particular developing countries. We also stress the particular
challenges this poses for Africa, the least developed countries and the landlocked
developing countries. In this regard, we express deep concern at the devastating
consequences of cyclical drought and famine in Africa, in particular in the Horn of
Africa and the Sahel region, and call for urgent action through short-, medium- and
long-term measures at all levels.
206. We recognize the need for urgent action to reverse land degradation. In view of
this, we will strive to achieve a land-degradation-neutral world in the context of
sustainable development. This should act to catalyse financial resources from a
range of public and private sources.
207. We reaffirm our resolve, in accordance with the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification, to take coordinated action nationally, regionally and
internationally, to monitor, globally, land degradation and restore degraded lands in
arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas. We resolve to support and strengthen the
implementation of the Convention and the ten-year strategic plan and framework to
enhance its implementation (2008–2018), 55 including by mobilizing adequate,
predictable and timely financial resources. We note the importance of mitigating the
effects of desertification, land degradation and drought, including by preserving and
developing oases, restoring degraded lands, improving soil quality and improving
water management, in order to contribute to sustainable development and poverty
eradication. In this regard, we encourage and recognize the importance of
partnerships and initiatives for the safeguarding of land resources. We also
encourage capacity-building, extension training programmes and scientific studies
and initiatives aimed at deepening understanding and raising awareness of the
economic, social and environmental benefits of sustainable land management
policies and practices.
208. We stress the importance of the further development and implementation of
scientifically based, sound and socially inclusive methods and indicators for
monitoring and assessing the extent of desertification, land degradation and drought,
as well as the importance of efforts under way to promote scientific research and
strengthen the scientific base of activities to address desertification and drought in
accordance with the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification. In this
respect, we take note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention at its tenth session, held in Changwon City, Republic of Korea, from
10 to 21 October 2011, to establish an ad hoc working group, taking into account

_______________
55

40

A/C.2/62/7, annex.

A/RES/66/288

regional balance, to discuss specific options for the provision of scientific advice to
its parties. 56
209. We reiterate the need for cooperation through the sharing of climate and
weather information and forecasting and early warning systems related to
desertification, land degradation and drought, as well as to dust storms and
sandstorms, at the global, regional and subregional levels. In this regard, we invite
States and relevant organizations to cooperate in the sharing of related information,
forecasting and early warning systems.
Mountains
210. We recognize that the benefits derived from mountain regions are essential for
sustainable development. Mountain ecosystems play a crucial role in providing
water resources to a large portion of the world’s population; fragile mountain
ecosystems are particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change,
deforestation and forest degradation, land use change, land degradation and natural
disasters; and mountain glaciers around the world are retreating and getting thinner,
with increasing impacts on the environment and human well-being.
211. We further recognize that mountains are often home to communities, including
indigenous peoples and local communities, that have developed sustainable uses of
mountain resources. These communities are, however, often marginalized, and we
therefore stress that continued effort will be required to address poverty, food
security and nutrition, social exclusion and environmental degradation in these
areas. We invite States to strengthen cooperative action with effective involvement
and sharing of experience of all relevant stakeholders, by strengthening existing
arrangements, agreements and centres of excellence for sustainable mountain
development, as well as exploring new arrangements and agreements, as
appropriate.
212. We call for greater efforts towards the conservation of mountain ecosystems,
including their biodiversity. We encourage States to adopt a long-term vision and
holistic approaches, including by incorporating mountain-specific policies into
national sustainable development strategies, which could include, inter alia, poverty
reduction plans and programmes for mountain areas, particularly in developing
countries. In this regard, we call for international support for sustainable mountain
development in developing countries.
Chemicals and waste
213. We recognize that the sound management of chemicals is crucial for the
protection of human health and the environment. We further recognize that growing
global production and use of chemicals and their prevalence in the environment
calls for increased international cooperation. We reaffirm our aim to achieve, by
2020, the sound management of chemicals throughout their life cycle and of
hazardous waste in ways that lead to minimization of significant adverse effects on
human health and the environment, as set out in the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation. We also reaffirm our commitment to an approach for the sound
management of chemicals and waste, at all levels, that responds in an effective,
efficient, coherent and coordinated manner to new and emerging issues and

_______________
56

See ICCD/COP(10)/31/Add.1, decision 20/COP.10.

41

A/RES/66/288

challenges, and encourage further progress across countries and regions in order to
fill the gaps in the implementation of commitments.
214. We call for the effective implementation and strengthening of the Strategic
Approach to International Chemicals Management 57 as part of a robust, coherent,
effective and efficient system for the sound management of chemicals throughout
their life cycle, including to respond to emerging challenges.
215. We are deeply concerned that many countries, in particular the least developed
countries, lack the capacity for sound management of chemicals and waste
throughout their life cycles. Additional efforts are needed to enhance work towards
strengthening capacities, including through partnerships, technical assistance and
improved governance structures. We encourage countries and organizations which
have made progress towards achieving the goal of sound management of chemicals
by 2020 to assist other countries by sharing knowledge, experience and best
practices.
216. We commend the increased coordination and cooperation among chemical and
waste conventions, namely the Basel Convention, the Rotterdam Convention and the
Stockholm Convention, and encourage continued enhanced coordination and
cooperation among them and with the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals
Management. We take note of the important role of the regional and coordinating
centres of the Basel Convention and of those of the Stockholm Convention.
217. We commend existing public-private partnerships, and call for continued, new
and innovative public-private partnerships among industry, governments, academia
and other non-governmental stakeholders, aiming to enhance capacity and
technology for environmentally sound chemicals and waste management, including
for waste prevention.
218. We recognize the importance of adopting a life-cycle approach and of further
development and implementation of policies for resource efficiency and
environmentally sound waste management. We therefore commit to further reduce,
reuse and recycle waste (the 3Rs) and to increase energy recovery from waste, with
a view to managing the majority of global waste in an environmentally sound
manner and, where possible, as a resource. Solid wastes, such as electronic waste
and plastics, pose particular challenges, which should be addressed. We call for the
development and enforcement of comprehensive national and local waste
management policies, strategies, laws and regulations.
219. We urge countries and other stakeholders to take all possible measures to
prevent the unsound management of hazardous wastes and their illegal dumping,
particularly in countries where the capacity to deal with these wastes is limited, in a
manner consistent with the obligations of countries under relevant international
instruments. In this context, we welcome the relevant decisions taken at the tenth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention, held in Cartagena,
Colombia, from 17 to 21 October 2011. 58
220. We recognize the importance of science-based assessments of the risks posed
by chemicals to human beings and the environment and of reducing human and
environmental exposure to hazardous chemicals. We encourage the development of
_______________
57
See the report of the International Conference on Chemicals Management on the work of its first session
(SAICM/ICCM.1/7), annexes I–III.
58
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CHW.10/28, annex I.

42

A/RES/66/288

environmentally sound and safer alternatives to hazardous chemicals in products
and processes. To this end, we encourage, inter alia, life-cycle assessment, public
information, extended producer responsibility, research and development,
sustainable design and knowledge-sharing, as appropriate.
221. We welcome the ongoing negotiating process on a global legally binding
instrument on mercury to address the risks to human health and the environment,
and call for a successful outcome to the negotiations.
222. We recognize that the phase-out of ozone-depleting substances is resulting in a
rapid increase in the use and release of high global warming potential hydrofluorocarbons
to the environment. We support a gradual phase-down in the consumption and
production of hydrofluorocarbons.
223. We acknowledge that sustainable and adequate long-term funding is a key
element for the sound management of chemicals and waste, in particular in
developing countries. In this regard, we welcome the consultative process on
financing options for chemicals and waste, initiated to consider the need for
heightened efforts to increase the political priority accorded to sound management
of chemicals and waste, and the increased need for sustainable, predictable,
adequate and accessible financing for the chemicals and waste agenda. We look
forward to the forthcoming proposals by the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, which will be considered by the International
Conference on Chemicals Management and at the twenty-seventh session of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, which will be
held in Nairobi, from 18 to 22 February 2013.
Sustainable consumption and production
224. We recall the commitments made in the Rio Declaration, Agenda 21 and the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation on sustainable consumption and production
and, in particular, the request in chapter III of the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation to encourage and promote the development of a ten-year framework
of programmes. We recognize that fundamental changes in the way societies
consume and produce are indispensable for achieving global sustainable
development.
225. Countries reaffirm the commitments they have made to phase out harmful and
inefficient fossil fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption and undermine
sustainable development. We invite others to consider rationalizing inefficient fossil
fuel subsidies by removing market distortions, including restructuring taxation and
phasing out harmful subsidies, where they exist, to reflect their environmental
impacts, with such policies taking fully into account the specific needs and
conditions of developing countries, with the aim of minimizing the possible adverse
impacts on their development and in a manner that protects the poor and the affected
communities.
226. We adopt the ten-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption
and production patterns, 59 and highlight the fact that the programmes included in the
framework are voluntary. We invite the General Assembly, at its sixty-seventh
session, to designate a Member State body to take any necessary steps to fully
operationalize the framework.

_______________
59

A/CONF.216/5, annex.

43

A/RES/66/288

Mining
227. We acknowledge that minerals and metals make a major contribution to the
world economy and modern societies. We note that mining industries are important
to all countries with mineral resources, in particular developing countries. We also
note that mining offers the opportunity to catalyse broad-based economic
development, reduce poverty and assist countries in meeting internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, when managed
effectively and properly. We acknowledge that countries have the sovereign right to
develop their mineral resources according to their national priorities and a
responsibility regarding the exploitation of resources, as described in the Rio
Principles. We further acknowledge that mining activities should maximize social
and economic benefits, as well as effectively address negative environmental and
social impacts. In this regard, we recognize that governments need strong capacities
to develop, manage and regulate their mining industries, in the interest of
sustainable development.
228. We recognize the importance of strong and effective legal and regulatory
frameworks, policies and practices for the mining sector that deliver economic and
social benefits and include effective safeguards that reduce social and environmental
impacts, as well as conserve biodiversity and ecosystems, including during postmining closure. We call upon governments and businesses to promote the
continuous improvement of accountability and transparency, as well as the
effectiveness of the relevant existing mechanisms to prevent illicit financial flows
from mining activities.
Education
229. We reaffirm our commitments to the right to education, and in this regard we
commit to strengthen international cooperation to achieve universal access to
primary education, particularly for developing countries. We further reaffirm that
full access to quality education at all levels is an essential condition for achieving
sustainable development, poverty eradication, gender equality and women’s
empowerment, as well as human development, for the attainment of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals, and for the full participation of both women and men, in particular young
people. In this regard, we stress the need for ensuring equal access to education for
persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples, local communities, ethnic minorities
and people living in rural areas.
230. We recognize that the younger generations are the custodians of the future, and
the need for better quality and access to education beyond the primary level. We
therefore resolve to improve the capacity of our education systems to prepare people
to pursue sustainable development, including through enhanced teacher training, the
development of sustainability curricula, the development of training programmes
that prepare students for careers in fields related to sustainability, and more effective
use of information and communications technologies to enhance learning outcomes.
We call for enhanced cooperation among schools, communities and authorities in
efforts to promote access to quality education at all levels.
231. We encourage Member States to promote sustainable development awareness
among youth, inter alia by promoting programmes for non-formal education in
accordance with the goals of the United Nations Decade of Education for
Sustainable Development (2005–2014).

44

A/RES/66/288

232. We emphasize the importance of greater international cooperation to improve
access to education, including by building and strengthening education
infrastructure and increasing investment in education, particularly investment to
improve the quality of education for all in developing countries. We encourage
international educational exchanges and partnerships, including the creation of
fellowships and scholarships to help to achieve global education goals.
233. We resolve to promote education for sustainable development and to integrate
sustainable development more actively into education beyond the Decade of
Education for Sustainable Development.
234. We strongly encourage educational institutions to consider adopting good
practices in sustainability management on their campuses and in their communities,
with the active participation of, inter alia, students, teachers and local partners, and
teaching sustainable development as an integrated component across disciplines.
235. We underscore the importance of supporting educational institutions,
especially higher educational institutions in developing countries, to carry out
research and innovation for sustainable development, including in the field of
education, and to develop quality and innovative programmes, including
entrepreneurship and business skills training, professional, technical and vocational
training and lifelong learning, geared to bridging skills gaps for advancing national
sustainable development objectives.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
236. We reaffirm the vital role of women and the need for their full and equal
participation and leadership in all areas of sustainable development, and decide to
accelerate the implementation of our respective commitments in this regard as
contained in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 60 as well as Agenda 21, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the United Nations Millennium Declaration.
237. We recognize that, although progress on gender equality has been made in
some areas, the potential of women to engage in, contribute to and benefit from
sustainable development as leaders, participants and agents of change has not been
fully realized, owing to, inter alia, persistent social, economic and political
inequalities. We support prioritizing measures to promote gender equality and
women’s empowerment in all spheres of our societies, including the removal of
barriers to their full and equal participation in decision-making and management at
all levels, and we emphasize the impact of setting specific targets and implementing
temporary measures, as appropriate, for substantially increasing the number of
women in leadership positions, with the aim of achieving gender parity.
238. We resolve to unlock the potential of women as drivers of sustainable
development, including through the repeal of discriminatory laws and the removal
of formal barriers, ensuring equal access to justice and legal support, the reform of
institutions to ensure competence and capacity for gender mainstreaming and the
development and adoption of innovative and special approaches to address informal,
harmful practices that act as barriers to gender equality. In this regard, we commit to
creating an enabling environment for improving the situation of women and girls

_______________
60

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.

45

A/RES/66/288

everywhere, particularly in rural areas and local communities and among indigenous
peoples and ethnic minorities.
239. We commit to actively promote the collection, analysis and use of gendersensitive indicators and sex-disaggregated data in policy, programme design and
monitoring frameworks, in accordance with national circumstances and capacities,
in order to deliver on the promise of sustainable development for all.
240. We are committed to equal rights and opportunities for women in political and
economic decision-making and resource allocation and to removing any barriers that
prevent women from being full participants in the economy. We resolve to undertake
legislative and administrative reforms to give women equal rights with men to
economic resources, including access to ownership and control over land and other
forms of property, credit, inheritance, natural resources and appropriate new
technology.
241. We are committed to promote the equal access of women and girls to
education, basic services, economic opportunities and health-care services,
including addressing women’s sexual and reproductive health, and ensuring
universal access to safe, effective, affordable and acceptable modern methods of
family planning. In this regard, we reaffirm our commitment to implement the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development and the key actions for the further implementation of the Programme
of Action.
242. We recognize that gender equality and the effective participation of women are
important for effective action on all aspects of sustainable development.
243. We support the work of the United Nations system, including the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),
in promoting and achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment in all
aspects of life, including with respect to the linkages between gender equality and
women’s empowerment and the promotion of sustainable development. We support
the work of UN-Women in leading, coordinating and promoting the accountability
of the United Nations system in this regard.
244. We invite donors and international organizations, including the United Nations
system organizations, as well as the international financial institutions, regional
banks and major groups, including the private sector, to integrate fully commitments
and considerations on gender equality and women’s empowerment and to ensure the
participation of women and effective gender mainstreaming in their decisionmaking and full programming cycle. We invite them to play a supportive role in the
efforts of developing countries to integrate fully commitments and considerations on
gender equality and women’s empowerment and ensure the participation of women
and effective gender mainstreaming in their decision-making, programme planning,
budgeting and implementation, in accordance with national legislation, priorities
and capacities.
B.

Sustainable development goals

245. We underscore that the Millennium Development Goals are a useful tool in
focusing achievement of specific development gains as part of a broad development
vision and framework for the development activities of the United Nations, for
national priority-setting and for mobilization of stakeholders and resources towards
common goals. We therefore remain firmly committed to their full and timely
achievement.
46

A/RES/66/288

246. We recognize that the development of goals could also be useful for pursuing
focused and coherent action on sustainable development. We further recognize the
importance and utility of a set of sustainable development goals, based on Agenda 21
and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, which fully respect all the Rio
Principles, taking into account different national circumstances, capacities and
priorities, are consistent with international law, build upon commitments already made
and contribute to the full implementation of the outcomes of all major summits in the
economic, social and environmental fields, including the present outcome document.
The goals should address and incorporate in a balanced way all three dimensions of
sustainable development and their interlinkages. They should be coherent with and
integrated into the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015, thus
contributing to the achievement of sustainable development and serving as a driver for
implementation and mainstreaming of sustainable development in the United Nations
system as a whole. The development of these goals should not divert focus or effort
from the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
247. We also underscore that sustainable development goals should be actionoriented, concise and easy to communicate, limited in number, aspirational, global
in nature and universally applicable to all countries, while taking into account
different national realities, capacities and levels of development and respecting
national policies and priorities. We also recognize that the goals should address and
be focused on priority areas for the achievement of sustainable development, being
guided by the present outcome document. Governments should drive
implementation with the active involvement of all relevant stakeholders, as
appropriate.
248. We resolve to establish an inclusive and transparent intergovernmental process
on sustainable development goals that is open to all stakeholders, with a view to
developing global sustainable development goals to be agreed by the General
Assembly. An open working group shall be constituted no later than at the opening
of the sixty-seventh session of the Assembly and shall comprise thirty
representatives, nominated by Member States from the five United Nations regional
groups, with the aim of achieving fair, equitable and balanced geographical
representation. At the outset, this open working group will decide on its methods of
work, including developing modalities to ensure the full involvement of relevant
stakeholders and expertise from civil society, the scientific community and the
United Nations system in its work, in order to provide a diversity of perspectives
and experience. It will submit a report, to the Assembly at its sixty-eighth session,
containing a proposal for sustainable development goals for consideration and
appropriate action.
249. The process needs to be coordinated and coherent with the processes to
consider the post-2015 development agenda. The initial input to the work of the
working group will be provided by the Secretary-General, in consultation with
national Governments. In order to provide technical support to the process and to
the work of the working group, we request the Secretary-General to ensure all
necessary input and support to this work from the United Nations system, including
by establishing an inter-agency technical support team and expert panels, as needed,
drawing on all relevant expert advice. Reports on the progress of work will be made
regularly to the General Assembly.
250. We recognize that progress towards the achievement of the goals needs to be
assessed and accompanied by targets and indicators, while taking into account
different national circumstances, capacities and levels of development.

47

A/RES/66/288

251. We recognize that there is a need for global, integrated and scientifically based
information on sustainable development. In this regard, we request the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, to support
the regional economic commissions in collecting and compiling national inputs in
order to inform this global effort. We further commit to mobilizing financial
resources and capacity-building, particularly for developing countries, to achieve
this endeavour.
VI. Means of implementation
252. We reaffirm that the means of implementation identified in Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration on Financing
for Development are indispensable for achieving the full and effective translation of
sustainable development commitments into tangible sustainable development
outcomes. We reiterate that each country has primary responsibility for its own
economic and social development and that the role of national policies, domestic
resources and development strategies cannot be overemphasized. We reaffirm that
developing countries need additional resources for sustainable development. We
recognize the need for significant mobilization of resources from a variety of
sources and the effective use of financing in order to promote sustainable
development. We acknowledge that good governance and the rule of law at the
national and international levels are essential for sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth, sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and
hunger.
A.

Finance

253. We call upon all countries to prioritize sustainable development in the
allocation of resources in accordance with national priorities and needs, and we
recognize the crucial importance of enhancing financial support from all sources for
sustainable development for all countries, in particular developing countries. We
recognize the importance of international, regional and national financial
mechanisms, including those accessible to subnational and local authorities, to the
implementation of sustainable development programmes, and call for their
strengthening and implementation. New partnerships and innovative sources of
financing can play a role in complementing sources of financing for sustainable
development. We encourage their further exploration and use, alongside the
traditional means of implementation.
254. We recognize the need for significant mobilization of resources from a variety
of sources and the effective use of financing, in order to give strong support to
developing countries in their efforts to promote sustainable development, including
through actions undertaken in accordance with the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development and for achieving sustainable development
goals.
255. We agree to establish an intergovernmental process under the auspices of the
General Assembly, with technical support from the United Nations system and in
open and broad consultation with relevant international and regional financial
institutions and other relevant stakeholders. The process will assess financing needs,
consider the effectiveness, consistency and synergies of existing instruments and
frameworks and evaluate additional initiatives, with a view to preparing a report
proposing options on an effective sustainable development financing strategy to

48

A/RES/66/288

facilitate the mobilization of resources and their effective use in achieving
sustainable development objectives.
256. An intergovernmental committee, comprising thirty experts nominated by
regional groups, with equitable geographical representation, will implement this
process, concluding its work by 2014.
257. We request the General Assembly to consider
intergovernmental committee and take appropriate action.

the

report

of

the

258. We recognize that the fulfilment of all commitments related to official
development assistance is crucial, including the commitments by many developed
countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product for official
development assistance to developing countries by 2015, as well as a target of 0.15
to 0.20 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance to the
least developed countries. To reach their agreed timetables, donor countries should
take all necessary and appropriate measures to raise the rate of aid disbursements in
order to meet their existing commitments. We urge those developed countries that
have not yet done so to make additional concrete efforts towards the target of
0.7 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance to
developing countries, including the specific target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross
national product for official development assistance to the least developed countries,
in accordance with their commitments. To build on progress achieved in ensuring
that official development assistance is used effectively, we stress the importance of
democratic governance, improved transparency and accountability, and managing
for results. We strongly encourage all donors to establish, as soon as possible,
rolling indicative timetables that illustrate how they aim to reach their goals, in
accordance with their respective budget allocation process. We stress the importance
of mobilizing greater domestic support in developed countries towards the
fulfilment of their commitments, including by raising public awareness, providing
data on the development impact of aid provided and demonstrating tangible results.
259. We welcome increasing efforts to improve the quality of official development
assistance and to increase its development impact. We also recognize the need to
improve development effectiveness, increase programme-based approaches, use
country systems for activities managed by the public sector, reduce transaction costs
and improve mutual accountability and transparency, and in this regard we call upon
all donors to untie aid to the maximum extent. We will further make development
more effective and predictable by providing developing countries with regular and
timely indicative information on planned support in the medium term. We recognize
the importance of efforts by developing countries to strengthen leadership of their
own development, national institutions, systems and capacity to ensure the best
results for effective development by engaging with parliaments and citizens in
shaping those policies and deepening engagement with civil society organizations.
We should also bear in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that will
guarantee development effectiveness. The specific situation of each country needs to
be fully considered.
260. We note that the aid architecture has changed significantly in the current
decade. New aid providers and novel partnership approaches, which utilize new
modalities of cooperation, have contributed to increasing the flow of resources.
Further, the interplay of development assistance with private investment, trade and
new development actors provides new opportunities for aid to leverage private
resource flows. We reiterate our support for South-South cooperation, as well as
triangular cooperation, which provide much-needed additional resources to the
49

A/RES/66/288

implementation of development programmes. We recognize the importance and
different history and particularities of South-South cooperation, and stress that
South-South cooperation should be seen as an expression of solidarity and
cooperation between countries, based on their shared experiences and objectives.
Both forms of cooperation support a development agenda that addresses the
particular needs and expectations of developing countries. We also recognize that
South-South cooperation complements rather than substitutes for North-South
cooperation. We acknowledge the role played by middle-income developing
countries as providers and recipients of development cooperation.
261. We invite the international financial institutions, within their respective
mandates, to continue providing financial resources, including through specific
mechanisms for the promotion of sustainable development and poverty eradication
in developing countries.
262. We recognize that greater coherence and coordination among the various
funding mechanisms and initiatives related to sustainable development are crucial.
We reiterate the importance of ensuring that developing countries have steady and
predictable access to adequate financing from all sources to promote sustainable
development.
263. We recognize that ongoing serious global financial and economic challenges
carry the possibility of undoing years of hard work and gains made in relation to the
debt of developing countries. We further recognize the need to assist developing
countries in ensuring long-term debt sustainability through coordinated policies
aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief and debt restructuring, as appropriate.
264. We stress the need for adequate funding for the operational activities of the
United Nations development system, as well as the need to make funding more
predictable, effective and efficient as part of wider efforts to mobilize new,
additional and predictable resources to achieve the objectives that we have set forth
in the present outcome document.
265. We recognize the important achievements of the Global Environment Facility
over the past twenty years in funding environmental projects and welcome
important reform processes that the Facility has carried out during recent years, and
we call for its further improvement and encourage the Facility to take additional
steps, within its mandate, to make resources more accessible to meet country needs
for the national implementation of their international environmental commitments.
We support further simplification of procedures and assistance to developing
countries, in particular in assisting the least developed countries, Africa and small
island developing States in accessing resources from the Facility, and enhanced
coordination with other instruments and programmes focusing on environmentally
sustainable development.
266. We stress that fighting corruption and illicit financial flows at both the national
and international levels is a priority and that corruption is a serious barrier to
effective resource mobilization and allocation, and diverts resources away from
activities that are vital for poverty eradication, the fight against hunger and
sustainable development. We are determined to take urgent and decisive steps to
continue to combat corruption in all its manifestations, which requires strong
institutions at all levels, and urge all States that have not yet done so to consider

50

A/RES/66/288

ratifying or acceding to the United Nations Convention against Corruption 61 and
begin its implementation.
267. We consider that innovative financing mechanisms can make a positive
contribution in assisting developing countries to mobilize additional resources for
financing for development on a voluntary basis. Such financing should supplement
and not be a substitute for traditional sources of financing. While recognizing the
considerable progress in innovative sources of financing for development, we call
for a scaling-up of present initiatives, where appropriate.
268. We recognize that a dynamic, inclusive, well-functioning and socially and
environmentally responsible private sector is a valuable instrument that can offer a
crucial contribution to economic growth and reducing poverty and promoting
sustainable development. In order to foster private sector development, we shall
continue to pursue appropriate national policy and regulatory frameworks in a
manner consistent with national laws to encourage public and private initiatives,
including at the local level, to foster a dynamic and well-functioning business
sector, and to facilitate entrepreneurship and innovation, including among women,
the poor and the vulnerable. We will work to improve income growth and
distribution, inter alia, by raising productivity, empowering women, protecting
labour rights and taxation. We recognize that the appropriate role of government in
relation to the promotion and regulation of the private sector will vary from country
to country, depending on national circumstances.
B.

Technology

269. We emphasize the importance of technology transfer to developing countries,
and recall the provisions on technology transfer, finance, access to information and
intellectual property rights as agreed in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, in
particular its call to promote, facilitate and finance, as appropriate, access to and the
development, transfer and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies and
corresponding know-how, in particular to developing countries, on favourable
terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed. We also
take note of the further evolution of discussions and agreements on these issues
since the adoption of the Plan of Implementation.
270. We stress the importance of access by all countries to environmentally sound
technologies, new knowledge, know-how and expertise. We further stress the
importance of cooperative action on technology innovation, research and
development. We agree to explore modalities in the relevant forums for enhanced
access to environmentally sound technologies by developing countries.
271. We underline the need for enabling environments for the development,
adaptation, dissemination and transfer of environmentally sound technologies. In
this context, we note the role of foreign direct investment, international trade and
international cooperation in the transfer of environmentally sound technologies. We
engage in our countries as well as through international cooperation to promote
investment in science, innovation and technology for sustainable development.
272. We recognize the importance of strengthened national, scientific and
technological capacities for sustainable development. This can help countries,
especially developing countries, to develop their own innovative solutions,

_______________
61

Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

51

A/RES/66/288

scientific research and new, environmentally sound technologies, with the support of
the international community. To this end, we support building science and
technology capacity, with both women and men as contributors and beneficiaries,
including through collaboration among research institutions, universities, the private
sector, governments, non-governmental organizations and scientists.
273. We request relevant United Nations agencies to identify options for a
facilitation mechanism that promotes the development, transfer and dissemination of
clean and environmentally sound technologies by, inter alia, assessing the
technology needs of developing countries, options to address those needs and
capacity-building. We request the Secretary-General, on the basis of the options
identified and taking into account existing models, to make recommendations
regarding the facilitation mechanism to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session.
274. We recognize the importance of space-technology-based data, in situ
monitoring and reliable geospatial information for sustainable development
policymaking, programming and project operations. In this context, we note the
relevance of global mapping, and recognize the efforts in developing global
environmental observing systems, including by the Eye on Earth network and
through the Global Earth Observation System of Systems. We recognize the need to
support developing countries in their efforts to collect environmental data.
275. We recognize the importance of strengthening international, regional and
national capacities in research and technology assessment, especially in view of the
rapid development and possible deployment of new technologies that may also have
unintended negative impacts, in particular on biodiversity and health, or other
unforeseen consequences.
276. We recognize the need to facilitate informed policy decision-making on
sustainable development issues and, in this regard, to strengthen the science-policy
interface.
C.

Capacity-building

277. We emphasize the need for enhanced capacity-building for sustainable
development and, in this regard, we call for the strengthening of technical and
scientific cooperation, including North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation. We reiterate the importance of human resource development, including
training, the exchange of experiences and expertise, knowledge transfer and
technical assistance for capacity-building, which involves strengthening institutional
capacity, including planning, management and monitoring capacities.
278. We call for the continued and focused implementation of the Bali Strategic
Plan for Technology Support and Capacity-building, adopted by the United Nations
Environment Programme. 62
279. We encourage the participation and representation of men and women
scientists and researchers from developing and developed countries in processes
related to global environmental and sustainable development assessment and
monitoring, with the purpose of enhancing national capabilities and the quality of
research for policy- and decision-making processes.

_______________
62

52

UNEP/GC.23/6/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex.

A/RES/66/288

280. We invite all relevant agencies of the United Nations system and other relevant
international organizations to support developing countries and, in particular, the
least developed countries in capacity-building for developing resource-efficient and
inclusive economies, including by:
(a)

Sharing sustainable practices in various economic sectors;

(b) Enhancing knowledge and capacity to integrate disaster risk reduction
and resilience into development plans;
(c) Supporting North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation for the
transition to a resource-efficient economy;
(d)
D.

Promoting public-private partnerships.

Trade

281. We reaffirm that international trade is an engine for development and sustained
economic growth, and also reaffirm the critical role that a universal, rules-based,
open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system, as well as
meaningful trade liberalization, can play in stimulating economic growth and
development worldwide, thereby benefiting all countries at all stages of
development as they advance towards sustainable development. In this context, we
remain focused on achieving progress in addressing a set of important issues, such
as, inter alia, trade-distorting subsidies and trade in environmental goods and
services.
282. We urge the members of the World Trade Organization to redouble their efforts
to achieve an ambitious, balanced and development-oriented conclusion to the Doha
Development Agenda, while respecting the principles of transparency, inclusiveness
and consensual decision-making, with a view to strengthening the multilateral
trading system. In order to effectively participate in the work programme of the
World Trade Organization and fully realize trade opportunities, developing countries
need the assistance and enhanced cooperation of all relevant stakeholders.
E.

Registry of commitments

283. We welcome the commitments voluntarily entered into at the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development and throughout 2012 by all stakeholders
and their networks to implement concrete policies, plans, programmes, projects and
actions to promote sustainable development and poverty eradication. We invite the
Secretary-General to compile these commitments and facilitate access to other
registries that have compiled commitments, in an Internet-based registry. The
registry should make information about the commitments fully transparent and
accessible to the public, and it should be periodically updated.

53
