S/2020/174

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 March 2020
Original: English

Children and armed conflict in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions, is the fifth report of the Secretary -General on
children and armed conflict in Somalia and covers the period from 1 August 2016 to
30 September 2019. The report focuses on trends and patterns with respect to the six
grave violations committed against children and provides information on the
perpetrators, as well as action taken to prevent and respond to the violations. The
progress made by parties to the conflict in terms of dialogue, action plans and other
child protection commitments is also outlined. The Secretary-General provides a series
of recommendations aimed at ending and preventing grav e violations against children
and strengthening child protection in Somalia.

20-03462 (E)

310320

*2003462*

S/2020/174

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, is the fifth report
of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in Somalia and covers the
period from 1 August 2016 to 30 September 2019. It describes the trends with respect
to grave violations committed against children since the previous report
(S/2016/1098) and outlines the progress and challenges since the adoption by t he
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in July 2017 of its conclusions on
children and armed conflict in Somalia (S/AC.51/2017/2). The violations presented
in the report have been verified by the United Nations country task force on
monitoring and reporting in Somalia, co-chaired by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and, where
possible, perpetrators are identified.
2.
The report shows the devastating situation of children affected by the armed
conflict in Somalia, with number of children affected by recruitment, use, abduction
of children and rape and other forms of sexual violence exceeding the numbers
verified in other conflict situations. Most of the grave violations against children were
committed by armed groups, with Al-Shabaab as the main perpetrator, and by
government security forces, including increasingly by the Somali police and the
regional forces of federal member states. The report also documents continued
violence involving clan militias, which led to grave violations against children.

II. Overview of political and security situation and parties
to conflict
A.

Political and security context
3.
The presidential and legislative electoral process held between October 2016
and February 2017 was a major milestone on the country’s path to federalism.
Reconciliation processes within the federal member states and between the Federal
Government and the federal member states continued and state presidential and
parliamentary electoral processes were held in Southwest State in 2018 and in
Puntland and Jubbaland in 2019.
4.
The agreement on the national security architecture between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, in April 2017, represented an important
step towards a unified Somali security sector, as it defined the relationship between
federal and state-level security institutions and the overall size, distribution and
composition, command and control, resourcing and financing of the security forces.
In addition, the agreement foresaw the integration of regional forces into the Somali
National Army and the establishment of federal and state police forces.
5.
The political stalemate between the Federal Government and the federal
member states since September 2018, however, has negatively affected the
implementation of the agreement. While efforts to restore relations between the
Federal Government and some federal member states have been undertaken since
September 2018, constructive political dialogue between all parties is yet to be
resumed. The political stalemate has also hampered progress regarding the protection
of children in armed conflict, in particular with regard to the implement ation at the
federal member state-level of the action plans on preventing and combating the
recruitment and use and the killing and maiming of children, signed in 2012 between
the United Nations and the Government of Somalia.

2/17

20-03462

S/2020/174

6.
Al-Shabaab remained the main threat to security and stability in Somalia. After
international military efforts had helped to reduce attacks in previous years, a new
upsurge of Al-Shabaab activity was observed from 2017. The group continued to exert
effective control over large parts of rural areas in southern and central Somalia but
did not hold any of the country’s major urban centres. Al-Shabaab resorted to largely
asymmetrical means of warfare, such as suicide and complex attacks and the use of
improvised explosive devices. The group targeted the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army, military installations or heavily
protected government buildings, but also civilian installations such as hotels,
restaurants and tea shops, leading to many civilian casualties, including children.
7.
The number of internally displaced persons in Somalia increased from
1.1 million people in August 2016 to 2.6 million people by December 2019, almost
two thirds of whom were children. The main drivers of internal displacem ent were
conflict and insecurity, fear of violence, droughts and floods. Many internally
displaced persons moved from rural to urban areas, where they often resided in
informal settlements. Mogadishu and Baidoa, the capital of Southwest State, where
large swathes of territory are held by Al-Shabaab, hosted the largest numbers of
internally displaced persons in Somalia. Among other factors driving displacement,
children and their families became internally displaced as they sought to avoid forced
child recruitment by Al-Shabaab. Children were exposed and vulnerable to violations
while in situations of displacement, especially to sexual violence and recruitment and
use by parties to conflict, including by those tasked with guarding them.
8.
Large-scale operations by AMISOM and the Somali National Army focused on
targeting Al-Shabaab continued. A plan for guiding the transition process of
AMISOM, involving a gradual handover of security functions to Somali security
forces, was developed in 2018, with the objective that Somali security forces would
assume full responsibility for Somalia’s security by 2021. Bilateral and multilateral
cooperation with the Federal Government continued to strengthen the Somali security
sector through training, capacity-building or material support.
9.
From late 2017 onwards, an increase in air strikes by international forces was
recorded, in response to increased Al-Shabaab activity. Air strikes were principally
directed at Al-Shabaab bases and specific individuals in southern and central Somalia
and caused child casualties.

B.

Parties to the conflict
Federal Government of Somalia security forces
10. The Provisional Federal Constitution defines the Federal Government of
Somalia security forces as its national army, intelligence services, police and prison
forces. These entities include the Somali National Army, the Somali national police
and the National Intelligence and Security Agency. According to the agreement on the
national security architecture, the Somali police shall be composed of 32,000
members divided among federal and state police, while the Army shall be composed
of at least 18,000 members, excluding the Special Forces, Navy and Air Force.
Various entities operated in different modalities in support of t he national army,
including clan militias and security forces of federal member states. In annex I to my
most recent annual report on children and armed conflict ( S/2019/509), the Somali
National Army was listed for the recruitment and use and the killing and maiming of
children.

20-03462

3/17

S/2020/174

Regional forces
11. Various regional forces, mostly composed of clan militias, are aligned with the
federal member states. These include Jubbaland, Galmudug, Puntland and Southwest
forces. Since the adoption of the national security architecture, progress in integrating
the regional forces into the Somali security forces has been slow, hampered by
political tensions between the Federal Government and the federal member states. In
2018, 2,400 members of the Puntland forces were integrated into the Somali National
Army.
Armed groups
12. Al-Shabaab remained the main threat to peace and security in Somalia and
operated under a well-organized structure, capable of effectively generating revenue
through the taxation of businesses and local communities and through the collection
of tolls at checkpoints along main supply routes, as well as other revenue streams.
The group continued to successfully recruit new combatants into its ranks, including
children and foreign fighters. In my most recent annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2019/509), Al-Shabaab was listed for the recruitment and use, the killing
and maiming and abductions of children, for sexual violence against children and for
attacks on schools and hospitals.
13. In December 2017, Galmudug authorities and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a reached
a power-sharing agreement that foresaw the integration of the latter into the
Galmudug forces. However, this process was hampered by political disagreements
between the Galmudug authorities, Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a and the Federal
Government. On 5 July 2019, the Federal Government launched an exercise to
integrate Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a forces into the Somali security forces. It is
expected that Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a forces will integrate into the Somali National
Army, the Army Special Forces (Danab), federal member state police forces and the
Somali police. In my most recent annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2019/509), Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a was listed for the recruitment and use of
children.
14. Pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) elements in Somalia pledged
allegiance to ISIL. These elements are significantly smaller and less operationally
active than Al-Shabaab. Targeted assassinations and the forcible collection of funds
have been their most common activities. They mainly operate in Puntland, where they
briefly managed to seize control over part of Puntland’s coastline in 2016.
15. The term “clan militia” is used to refer to a plethora of different militia groups
aligned with clans in different parts of Somalia. One of them is the “Westland militia”.
Violations attributed to this group were reported under the term “clan militia” until
January 2019.
Other parties present in Somalia
16. The African Union Mission in Somalia was deployed to Somalia in March 2007
under a mandate by the Security Council of the United Nations and the African Union
Peace and Security Council to assist the Somali National Army i n the fight against
Al-Shabaab and other armed groups. Its military components comprise troops from
Burundi, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda. AMISOM has started a transition to
Somali security ownership, guided by the transition plan. In addition to t heir troops
operating under AMISOM command, Ethiopia and Kenya both continued to maintain
troops in Somalia. The United States of America also targeted Al -Shabaab and
pro-ISIL elements in Somalia, mainly through air and drone strikes.

4/17

20-03462

S/2020/174

III. Grave violations committed against children
17. The highly volatile security situation, ongoing military operations, population
displacements and logistical constraints limited physical access and presented
challenges for the monitoring and reporting of grave violations. With much of
southern and central Somalia inaccessible, the information contained in the present
report is only indicative of the full extent of grave violations committed against
children and does not reflect the full impact of armed conflict on children in Somalia.
18. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 14,856 violations
against 12,551 children (2,103 girls, 10,448 boys). The main perpetrators were
Al-Shabaab (10,672), followed by the Somali National Army (834), regio nal forces
(707), clan militias (494), the Somali police (248), Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (125),
the Westland militia (7), National Intelligence and Security Agency (1), and pro-ISIL
elements in Somalia (1). AMISOM (64), the Ethiopian Liyu Police (18), the K enya
Defence Forces (8) and the Ethiopian National Defence Forces (5) were also
responsible for grave violations against children. Responsibility for the remaining
1,672 violations could not be attributed.

A.

Recruitment and use of children
19. The country task force verified the recruitment and use of 6,143 children (149
girls, 5,994 boys) by armed forces and groups. The main perpetrator was Al -Shabaab,
with 80 per cent of verified cases (4,910), followed by the Somali National Army
(391), the Somali police (172), clan militias (169), Galmudug forces (168), Jubbaland
forces (129), Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (113), Puntland forces (61), Southwest forces
(22) Westland militia (2) and AMISOM (2). Responsibility for four cases was
unattributed.
20. Between August and December 2016, 646 children were recruited and used by
parties to conflict in Somalia, and 2,127 children in 2017. Child recruitment and use
peaked in 2018, with 2,300 children affected. Between January and September 2019,
1,070 children were verified as having been recruited and used.
Al-Shabaab
21. Al-Shabaab was responsible for 4,910 cases of recruitment and use of children.
Al-Shabaab significantly scaled up its recruitment and use of children in 2017 (1,770)
and 2018 (1,865) to bolster their ranks in response to large-scale operations by the
Somali National Army, AMISOM and international forces targeting the group. In
previous years, forced recruitments had mostly been observed in southern and central
Somalia (S/2016/1098). In 2017, the group significantly expanded their child
recruitment activities in Galmudug State, benefiting from the withdrawal of troops of
the Ethiopian National Defence Forces from several locations, which allo wed
Al-Shabaab to expand its presence.
22. Al-Shabaab compelled children to attend madrasas (Qur'anic schools) run by
the group, whose curricula included military training and indoctrination. The group
often ordered clan elders to hand over a specific numb er of children per clan, or to
bring them one child per family to be recruited as child soldiers. For instance, on
10 August 2018, 60 boys between the ages of 12 and 17 were brought by clan elders
to a primary school in a village in Xarardheere district, G almudug, that had been
transformed by Al-Shabaab into an Islamic studies and training centre for new child
recruits. In order to coerce communities into handing over their children, the group
often resorted to abducting elders, teachers and community leade rs. They also
pressured families and communities to hand over girls to be married to Al -Shabaab

20-03462

5/17

S/2020/174

fighters. The group used mass abductions to recruit children. Further details on these
practices are provided later in the present report.
23. Al-Shabaab targeted vulnerable groups, including unemployed youth, for
recruitment, using social and economic incentives to entice recruits, third -party
recruitment through friends and relatives, and peer pressure. Other widely -used
methods were persuasion through religious leaders and preaching in madrasas. In
2017 and 2018, the numbers of children recruited by Al-Shabaab peaked during the
month of Ramadan.
24. A slight decrease in child recruitment by Al-Shabaab was observed in 2019
(875), as many families fled areas held by Al-Shabaab or sent children to governmentcontrolled areas so as to protect them from forced recruitment and in the hope of
better education. Many moved from rural localities to urban areas like Mogadishu or
Baidoa. Some parents even handed their children over to police and government
authorities for protection. Parents who sent their children away often faced reprisals,
abductions or fines imposed by Al-Shabaab. For example, in May 2017, 70 families
fled from areas controlled by Al-Shabaab to areas under the control of Galmudug
authorities or of Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a. Between January and May 2018, around
70 children were either handed over by parents to authorities or sought shelter at
police stations in Dhuusamarreeb, Galmudug State. The children wer e later
transferred to temporary community-based care arrangements.
25. Among the children recruited or used in 2019, around 40 per cent were used as
fighters. For instance, on 5 August 2019, the cases of two boys, 14 and 15 years of
age, recruited by Al-Shabaab were verified after they had been wounded in clashes
between Jubbaland forces and Al-Shabaab in a village in Juba Hoose region. The
remaining children were used by Al-Shabaab in support roles such as porters, cooks
or spies, or forced to marry an Al-Shabaab member.
Federal government security forces and regional forces
26. Cases of the recruitment and use of children by the federal government security
forces increased steadily between August 2016 and December 2018, with 65 cases
verified in 2016, 130 in 2017 and 248 in 2018. Between January and September 2019,
the number of verified cases decreased slightly, to 120.
27. Children were used as escorts for senior military officers, while others manned
military checkpoints or guarded army bases. For instance, a 17-year-old boy was
recruited by the Somali National Army in March 2017 and worked as a guard at the
main entrance of the army base in Dhuusamarreeb, Galguduud Region. In August
2018, two boys aged between 15 and 17, in national army unifor m, were verified
guarding a police station in the same region. Many children were recruited to take the
place of their deceased fathers or uncles, while others were used to perform chores in
the barracks.
28. Of particular concern was a continuous increase in the recruitment and use of
children attributed to the Somali police. A total of 172 cases of the recruitment and
use of children by the Somali police were verified, 11 of which occurred in 2017, 93
in 2018 and 68 between January and September 2019. The majority of those children
were used in support roles, for example as cooks or cleaners, or as escorts, guards or
at checkpoints. For instance, on 13 October 2018, a girl estimated to be 16 years old
was used as a cook and cleaner by the Somali police at a police station in Banaadir
Region. She was paid $30 per month and lived with her parents at a nearby camp for
internally displaced persons. On 8 April 2019, one boy aged between 14 and 16 years
old was verified controlling traffic and directing vehicles alongside several other
police officers in Mogadishu, armed and dressed in Somali police uniform.

6/17

20-03462

S/2020/174

29. Incidents of the recruitment and use of children were also attributed to regional
forces, responsible for the recruitment and use of 380 children. Of that total, 46
children were recruited and used in the second half of 2016, 102 in 2017, 144 in 2018
and 88 between January and September of 2019. The main perpetrators were the
Galmudug forces (168), followed by Jubbaland forces (129), Puntland forces (61) an d
Southwest forces (22). For instance, on 23 September 2018, the cases of eight boys
aged between 13 and17 were verified, when they were at a police station, as enlisted
into the Galmudug forces in Balanbal district, Galguduud Region. Most children had
reportedly been brought in to enlist by their parents after they had discontinued
school. On 28 July 2018, six boys aged between 14 and 16 were recruited by the
Jubbaland forces in Dhooble town, Juba Hoose Region. The boys were promised a
salary by Jubbaland security forces and dropped out of school after being recruited.
One of the boys had previously travelled to Badhaadhe town to escape recruitment by
Al-Shabaab.
Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a
30. Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a was responsible for the recruitment and use of 113
children, with the majority of violations verified in 2017 (66) and in 2018 (14). From
January to September 2019, no cases were attributed to Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a. In
December 2017, Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a signed an agreement with the Galmudug
authorities to merge their forces, and since January 2019, incidents of recruitment and
use by Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a have been included in the total of incidents attributed
to the Galmudug forces. To date, there has not been a comprehensive screening to
identify, release and rehabilitate children from Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a before their
integration into the government security forces.
Deprivation of liberty for alleged association with armed groups
31. A total of 910 children (17 girls, 893 boys) were verified as having been detained
for alleged association with Al-Shabaab or pro-ISIL elements in Somalia. The Somali
National Army accounted for most of the detention cases (492), followed by the
Somali police (303), Jubbaland forces (59), National Intelligence and Security
Agency (18), Galmudug forces (10), Southwest forces (7) and “Somaliland”
forces (2). Clan militia (4) and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (2) also held children in
custody for their association with Al-Shabaab. Furthermore, 13 children were
detained by AMISOM (10) and Kenya Defence Forces (3). Children were captured
during operations targeting Al-Shabaab or pro-ISIL elements in Somalia or arrested
during security sweeps, after explosions of improvised explosive devices or
assassinations.
32. While security forces handed over captured children to the United Nations for
rehabilitation and reintegration support, the detention of children often exceeded the
time limit of 72 hours stipulated by the standard operating procedures on the reception
and handover of children separated from armed groups, endorsed by Somalia in 2014.
For instance, between 19 and 25 January 2018, the Army Special Forces (Danab)
handed over 36 children to the United Nations as part of the implementation of the
standard operating procedures. The children had been captured during a military
operation on an Al-Shabaab training centre in Shabelle Dhexe Region. Between
October and December 2018, the National Intelligence and Security Agency handed
over 59 children for community reintegration in Baidoa, Bay Region. The children
had been detained for periods ranging from a few days to several months for alleged
association with Al-Shabaab.
33. The National Intelligence and Security Agency continued to conduct risk
assessment screenings of children formerly associated with armed groups in their
custody. Concerns about this practice were raised in the previous report on children
20-03462

7/17

S/2020/174

and armed conflict (S/2016/1098), as the practice contradicts the principle that
children recruited and used by armed groups should be treated first and foremost as
victims and should not be punished for their association with armed groups.
Furthermore, there were continuing difficulties in ascertaining the fate and
whereabouts of children classified as “high-risk”. A checklist for screeners,
specifically tailored to the needs of children and that prioritizes their rehabilitation ,
is currently being elaborated by the Agency.
34. A total of 40 children, captured by Puntland forces in March 2016, who had
received sentences ranging from the death penalty (12 children) to heavy prison
sentences of up to 20 years (28 children) for their association with Al-Shabaab, as
reported in the previous report (S/2016/1098), were transferred to an interim care
centre supported by UNICEF, on 2 April 2017. The death sentences against 12
children were revoked in November 2016. After sustained advocacy by the United
Nations and my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, the
President of Puntland pardoned the 34 children remaining in that centre on 20 August
2018. The children were reunited with their families.
35. Ten children were also detained by AMISOM for their alleged association with
Al-Shabaab. For instance, on 28 February 2017, a 17-year-old boy in AMISOM
custody on suspicion of his association with Al-Shabaab was shot and injured as he
tried to escape, in Buulobarde town, Hiraan Region. The victim was treated in the
AMISOM clinic and returned to custody.
36. In addition, 30 children were verified as having been arrested and deprived of
their liberty by Al-Shabaab. Children were often held for “lack of discipline”,
including fighting in public, playing football at prayer time and possessing banned
items such as smart phones and artificial pistols. For instance, on 24 August 2016,
two boys aged 15 and 17 were arrested by Al-Shabaab in their homes and detained
for three days in Jilib town, Juba Dhexe Region for getting into a fight in public.
While in detention, the boys were also interrogated as to why they had not joined
Al-Shabaab. They were later released.

B.

Killing and maiming
37. During the period under review, the Country Task Force verified the killing and
maiming of 2,916 children, including 754 girls and 2,162 boys. Responsibility for
almost half of the child casualties (1,233) could not be attributed. Where identified,
the main perpetrators were Al-Shabaab (953), the Somali National Army (297), clan
militias (158), AMISOM (60), Jubbaland forces (59), the Somali police (50),
Southwest forces (42), Galmudug forces (33) and Puntland forces (21). Cases were
also attributed to the Kenya Defence Forces (7), Ethiopian Liyu police (2) and the
Ethiopian National Defence Forces (1). Child casualties were the result of crossfire,
failure to take adequate precautions to protect children during military operations,
indiscriminate attacks through the use of improvised explosive devices, explosive
remnants of war, targeted killings and air strikes. Of the 2,916 verified cases of killing
and maiming, 436 took place in the second half of 2016, 931 in 2017, 1,041 in 2018
and 508 between January and September of 2019.
38. The figures of killing and maiming by Al-Shabaab show a marked increase in
late 2017 and 2018, due to the intensification of conflict, armed confrontations with
government security forces and increased numbers of attacks with the use of
improvised explosive devices, leading to large number of civilian casualties. For
instance, on 14 October 2017, the Zoobe junction truck bomb killed approximately
600 people, including 25 children, and injured many more, including 15 children.
Al-Shabaab also executed or maimed children as punishment or for disciplinary

8/17

20-03462

S/2020/174

reasons. For instance, on 11 October 2016, Al-Shabaab publicly executed seven boys
aged between 14 and 17, who were accused of spying in Galguduud Region. On
January 2017, three boys aged between 14 and 16 who were associated with
Al-Shabaab had their right hands cut off by Al-Shabaab at a public gathering in Ceel
Buur district, Galguduud Region because they could not account for the bullets they
had been provided with after a military training. Children were also killed or maimed
while they were undergoing training by Al-Shabaab or being used by the group. For
instance, on 15 March 2019, 10 boys were killed and 18 wounded when an explosion
occurred during a bomb-making training at an Al-Shabaab training camp in Ceel Buur
town, Galguduud Region.
39. Somali security forces, including federal and regional security forces, were
responsible for 502 cases of the killing and maiming of children. The Somali National
Army was the main perpetrator, with 297 cases, followed by Jubbaland forces (59),
the Somali police (50), Southwest forces (42), Galmudug forces (33) and Puntland
forces (21). Of particular concern are the substantive increases in the number of cases
attributed to the Somali police and regional forces tha t were verified in 2017 and
2018. Crossfire and military operations targeting armed groups were the main causes
of child casualties. For instance, two boys aged approximately 15 years old were
killed at a farm by the national army during a security operation targeting Al-Shabaab
on 25 August 2017 in Shabelle Hoose Region. In-fighting between government
security forces or altercations between regional forces also led to child casualties. On
1 June 2018, three girls aged between 11 and 17 and a 14-year-old boy were killed,
and a 13-year-old girl and a 16-year-old boy were maimed in crossfire between
Mogadishu stabilization force and national army forces in Banaadir Region. The
incident happened after clashes erupted between national army soldiers and the
stabilization forces stationed in the area.
40. The African Union Mission in Somalia was responsible for the killing and
maiming of 60 children. Incidents often occurred while AMISOM was responding to
explosions of improvised explosive devices or attacks by Al-Shabaab. For instance,
on 31 October 2017, six children, including an eight month -old girl, were killed and
three children were maimed in Galmudug when an AMISOM contingent opened fire
on the outskirts of Ceel Buur town.
41. Air strikes by international forces remained a serious concern in Somalia, as
they continued to result in the killing and maiming of children. The lack of access to
air strike-affected areas, mainly controlled by Al-Shabaab, made it difficult to
adequately monitor and report on their impact on children. Notwithstanding such
challenges, the country task force verified the killing of 23 children and the maiming
of 21 children in air strikes by unidentified forces in Al-Shabaab strongholds. For
instance, on 16 October 2017, three children (two boys and one girl) between the ages
of 5 and 16 were maimed during an air strike carried out by unidentified forces in
Shabelle Hoose Region. The bombing, reportedly targeting an Al-Shabaab convoy,
struck a house, injuring eight civilians, including th e three children.
42. Explosive remnants of war continued to produce casualties among children. For
instance, on 21 March 2018, two children between the ages of 8 and 10 died while 11
others (8 girls and 3 boys aged between 7 and 15) were injured when a ha nd grenade
detonated near an area in which they were playing.

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
43. The country task force verified that 958 children (954 girls, 4 boys) had been
victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence. Somali secu rity forces and
regional forces committed one third (306) of the total cases of sexual violence,

20-03462

9/17

S/2020/174

including the Somali National Army (133), Jubbaland forces (75), Southwest forces
(42), Galmudug forces (25), the Somali police (24) and Puntland forces (7).
Al-Shabaab was responsible for 157 cases of sexual violence and clan militias for
103, Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a for 3 and the Westland militia for 1. A total of 22
violations were attributed to Ethiopian Liyu Police (16), Ethiopian National Defence
Forces (4) and Kenya Defence Forces and AMISOM (1 each). Responsibility for more
than one third of the cases could not be attributed (366). The number of cases for 2017
and 2018 was the same (331) while 135 cases were verified in the last two quarters
of 2016. The number decreased from 331 in 2018 to 161 between January and
September of 2019. Sexual violence affecting girls and boys is believed to be
underreported owing to fear of stigmatization, reprisals, the lack of accountability
and the absence of adequate support services for survivors.
44. Sexual violence against girls and boys included rape, attempted rape and forced
marriage. Rape and attempted rape often occurred in camps for internally displaced
persons or when children collected firewood or water or looke d after animals. For
instance, on 13 October 2017, a boy aged 14 was sexually assaulted by two Somali
National Army soldiers in Beledweyne town, Hiraan Region. On 11 November 2018,
a 16-year-old girl was repeatedly raped by five Al-Shabaab elements east of Xagar
town in Juba Hoose Region.
45. Forced marriage often occurred in the context of abductions of girls by
Al-Shabaab. For instance, on 26 May 2017, two Al-Shabaab fighters abducted and
forcefully married two girls aged 15 and 16 in Ceel Buur district o f Galguduud
Region. The abduction occurred after both girls and their parents rejected the
marriage proposals made by the group.
46. Accountability for sexual violence remained low and impunity persisted. Most
perpetrators remained at large or were released after the payment of compensation to
the victims or their families, or received minor sentences. For instance, on 4 October
2017, a 17-year-old girl collecting firewood was beaten up and gang-raped by three
Southwest forces elements on the outskirts of Bardaale town, Bay Region. She
received treatment at a medical facility. Although her parents reported the incident to
the Southwest police, no action was taken against the perpetrators. In another
incident, on 13 November 2018, a 14-year-old girl was raped by two Galmudug
soldiers near Cadaado in Galguduud Region. The perpetrators were arrested by
Galmudug police and, on 15 November, sentenced to six months’ imprisonment and
a fine of $1,000 to compensate the victim.

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
47. The country task force verified 242 incidents of attacks on schools (203) and
hospitals (39), 80 per cent of which (194) were attributed to Al-Shabaab, followed by
unknown armed elements (17), the Somali National Army (8), Galmudug forces and
clan militias (7 each), Southwest forces (3), the Somali police and Ahl al -Sunna
wal-Jama‘a (2 each) and pro-ISIL elements in Somalia (1). One incident was
attributed to AMISOM. Attacks on schools and hospitals increased, from 21 incidents
in the second half of 2016, to 74 incidents in 2017 and to 91 incidents in 2018.
Between January and September 2019, 56 incidents of attacks on schools and
hospitals were verified. The increase between 2017 and 2018 is linked to the
continued targeting of schools and education personnel by Al-Shabaab as a tactic for
recruitment, including through abductions of children and teachers from schools and
madrasas during these years.
48. In April 2017, Al-Shabaab introduced a curriculum for primary and secondary
schools in areas under their control. The subsequent closure of schools and illegal

10/17

20-03462

S/2020/174

detention of teachers, parents and elders who did not comply with Al -Shabaab orders
to adopt its curriculum triggered population displacement from the regions of
Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe, as well as from Galguduud, to Mogadishu,
Baidoa and other government-controlled areas. For instance, on 13 October 2018, a
madrasa teacher was abducted by Al-Shabaab in Jawhar district in Shabelle Dhexe
Region when he refused to hand over children to Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab assigned a
new teacher to the school, with instructions to implement their curriculum. Parents
who kept their children at home after the incident were ordered by Al-Shabaab to
bring children to the madrasa or face severe sanctions. Furthermore, on 24 February
2017, Al-Shabaab shut down a madrasa in El Garas town, Ceel Buur district,
Galguduud Region after the teacher, who was later arrested, refused to refer his
students for Al-Shabaab training. In another incident, in June 2017, Al-Shabaab
abducted 162 elders, imams and madrasa teachers in Xarardheere district, Galmudug
State for failing to hand over 50 children as young as 7 years old and for refusing to
send the children to madrasas established by Al-Shabaab.
49. Al-Shabaab also attacked health facilities and protected personnel, including
through the abductions of medical personnel and the looting of medical supplies. For
instance, on 11 August 2018, Al-Shabaab raided a village in Afgooye district,
Shabelle Hoose and abducted four teachers at the village primary school, as well as
three staff working at a mother and child health centre run by a local
non-governmental organization. Al-Shabaab also looted medical supplies and
equipment at the health centre. On 1 October 2018, Al-Shabaab looted a hospital for
office equipment and medical supplies during an attack on a village in Baidoa district,
Bay Region, and torched the police station before withdrawing from the village.
50. A total of 20 attacks on schools and hospitals were attributed to federal
government security forces (10) and regional forces (10). For instance, on 12 January
2019, three soldiers from Galmudug forces attacked and fired at a mother and child
health centre in Cadaado district, Galguduud and coerced the centre’s personne l to
hire members of their sub-clan. As a result, the centre was temporarily closed to repair
the damage. In another instance, on 6 April 2019, soldiers from the Somali National
Army forcibly closed a hospital in Baardheere district, Gedo Region, claiming they
were not satisfied with the quality of services offered and coercing the hospital to hire
a manager from their sub-clan.
51. In addition, the country task force verified the military use of three schools and
two hospitals by clan militias (2), the Somali police and the Somali National Army
(one each). One school was also used by Al-Shabaab for military purposes. For
instance, on 6 February 2019, clan militia seized a hospital in Caabudwaaq district,
Galguduud Region for military purposes. The hospital was not vacated, despite
appeals and interventions by local leaders, and was therefore permanently relocated
to another building. On 25 July 2017, national army soldiers seized a primary school
in Ceel Barde district, Bakool Region. The soldiers used the s chool to treat their sick
soldiers for a period of almost two months. During that period, the school remained
closed to students.

E.

Abduction
52. Between August 2016 and September 2019, the country task force verified the
abduction of 4,462 children (356 girls, 4,106 boys). It was verified that 98 per cent
of all abductions were committed by Al-Shabaab (4,376), followed by unknown
armed elements (43), clan militias (32), Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (5), Westland
militia (4), AMISOM, Galmudug forces and Southwest forces (1 each).

20-03462

11/17

S/2020/174

53. The number of abductions peaked in 2017 (1,634) and 2018 (1,609), when
Al-Shabaab significantly enhanced its forced recruitment campaigns, as outlined
above. Between August and December 2016, 373 cases of abductions of children were
verified. The reduction in the number of abduction cases noted between January and
September of 2019 (846 children) as compared with 1,278 children over the same
period in 2018 can notably be attributed to the fact that, following a marked increase
in forced recruitment by Al-Shabaab in 2018, families moved their children away
from areas controlled by Al-Shabaab to government-controlled areas in order to
protect their children from recruitment.
54. Mass abductions of children were one of the main recr uitment tactics used by
Al-Shabaab, mostly through attacks on villages or by forcing clan elders to hand over
children, as described above. For example, in July and August 2017, Al -Shabaab
abducted 550 children from several villages in Ceel Buur district, Galmudug State
and took them to the Ali Jim’ale training centre, run by Al-Shabaab in Ceel Buur
town, Galguduud Region. In a similar incident, 150 boys between the ages of 9 and
16 were abducted by Al-Shabaab from villages in Galguduud Region and taken to a
madrasa run by Al-Shabaab in Galguduud Region. They were subsequently
transported to a training camp in the same region, on 16 November 2017.
55. Al-Shabaab abducted girls to forcibly marry them to their fighters. For instance,
on 14 May 2017, 15 children between the ages of 10 and 17, including seven girls,
were abducted by Al-Shabaab in villages in Xarardheere district, Mudug Region. The
girls were forcibly married to the fighters, while the boys were recruited as
combatants.

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
56. The country task force verified 148 incidents of denial of humanitarian access,
affecting the delivery of aid to children. Most of the incidents were attributed to
Al-Shabaab (82) followed by clan militias (25), Galmudug forces (9), the Soma li
National Army (5) Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (2), Puntland forces and Jubbaland
forces and the National Intelligence and Security Agency (1 each). Responsibility for
nine of the incidents could not be attributed. The number of incidents of denial of
humanitarian access verified in 2018 increased by 100 per cent (74), compared with
37 incidents in 2017. Nine incidents were verified in the second half of 2016 and 28
between January and September of 2019.
57. Serious challenges remained around humanitarian access in Somalia throughout
the reporting period, as the activities of humanitarian actors were frequently
hampered by military operations, the volatile security situation and security incidents
affecting humanitarian workers. Incidents included threats and violence against
humanitarian personnel and assets, abductions of humanitarian workers, the detention
of personnel and beneficiaries, entry restrictions, disruptions to humanitarian
activities and the looting of goods. The use of improvised explosive devic es as part
of attacks on humanitarian and commercial convoys has steadily increased.
58. The majority of incidents of denial of humanitarian access were attributed to
Al-Shabaab (98) and consisted of violence against humanitarian personnel, including
attacks and abductions and the looting of humanitarian goods. In an incident on
21 September 2016, two local workers of a non-governmental organization in
Caabudwaaq district, Galguduud Region, were killed, while two others were injured,
when clan militia attacked the organization. The attack was carried out as part of a
revenge killing against a rival clan militia group. In another incident, on 15 July 2017,
seven humanitarian workers were abducted and their vehicle was seized by
Al-Shabaab, while the workers were on their way to provide aid to people affected by

12/17

20-03462

S/2020/174

drought in Baidoa, Bay Region. Although the workers were released on 24 July,
following the payment of a ransom by their family members, the vehicle remained
with Al-Shabaab.
59. Federal government security forces (19) and regional forces (11) were
responsible for 30 incidents of denial of humanitarian access. On 21 February 2017,
two Somali National Army elements attacked staff of a humanitarian organization
who were distributing humanitarian goods to drought-affected communities in
Xuddur District, Bakool Region. The soldiers threatened the humanitarian workers,
demanding that they also be given humanitarian goods. When the huma nitarian actors
refused, the soldiers opened fire, and the distribution was stopped. There were no
casualties. For instance, on 5 October 2018, food aid to be distributed to internally
displaced persons by a local non-governmental organization was looted by Galmudug
police in Cadaado, Galguduud Region. Although the incident was reported to the
police commander, no action was taken.

IV. Progress and challenges in addressing grave violations
against children
A.

Progress in the legislative framework
60. The Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development submitted the initial
report of Somalia to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in September 2019,
with support from UNICEF (CRC/C/SOM/1). Discussions have commenced on the
ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict. In July 2018, the Federal Government
held a consultative meeting of child protection stakeholders, facilitated by the African
Union, to discuss the ratification of the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child.
61. Two critical pieces of legislation to better protect children from the six grave
violations were elaborated by the Federal Government. In May 2018, the Council of
Ministers unanimously adopted the sexual offences bill, which, once enacted, will
criminalize a wide range of sexual offences. The bill sets out clear duties for the
police, investigators and prosecutors and imposes penalties on those who fail to
adequately investigate or prosecute crimes of sexual violence or interfere with
investigations and prosecutions. It is survivor-centred and prioritizes the rights and
needs of the survivors during proceedings so as to protect their identity and welfare.
The bill envisages the establishment of specialized units to investigate sexual
violence, comprising specialized police, investigators, prosecutors and judges to
investigate, prosecute and hear all sexual offence case s. Once adopted, the bill has
the potential to significantly enhance accountability for crimes of sexual violence in
Somalia. However, its adoption by Parliament has been pending since 2018.
62. In November 2017, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Deve lopment
launched the drafting process of a child rights bill, aimed at incorporating the
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child into national law and
criminalizing the six grave violations. With UNICEF support, the drafting of the child
rights bill was at an advanced stage at the time of writing.
63. At the federal member state-level, the Sexual Offences Law was enacted in
November 2016 in Puntland. The law provides stronger protection for women and
girls against sexual violence. It criminalizes all sexual crimes, including gang rape
and sexual exploitation and abuse, and broadens the definition of consent, which is
now designed to redress the balance in favour of survivors, without prejudicing the

20-03462

13/17

S/2020/174

accused’s right to a fair trial. The law has led to greater accountability for victims of
sexual violence, with examples of prosecutions.
64. Notwithstanding the progress made, Somalia’s international obligations under
the Convention on the Rights of the Child have not yet been fully incorporated i nto
the national legal system. The ongoing constitutional review process presents a good
opportunity to address these issues. Legal ambiguities persist regarding the definition
of a child between the Provisional Federal Constitution, which stipulates a chi ld as
anyone under 18 years of age, and the regional constitutions of Puntland and of
Southwest State, both of which define a child as anyone below the age of 15.

B.

Follow-up on dialogue and implementation of action plans
65. The Federal Government of Somalia continued to make progress on the
implementation of its 2012 action plans on preventing and combating the recruitment
and use and the killing and maiming of children.
66. On 21 August 2017, the Commander of the Somali National Army issued a
general command order to prevent child recruitment and use within the Somali armed
forces, as well as all grave violations against children during military operations. The
command order has been translated from English into Somali for wider dissemination
within the national army.
67. In April 2018, the Federal Government started the process of drafting a national
strategy aiming at preventing child recruitment and facilitating the release and
reintegration of children associated with armed groups. The strategy w ill ensure a
harmonized provision of services for children affected by armed conflict in Somalia
as well as a more coherent approach to preventing child recruitment. Furthermore, the
Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development, in close cooperation with the
Ministry of Internal Security, initiated a national strategy on assistance to victims,
aiming at supporting survivors of armed conflict, including children affected by
conflict.
68. In 2019, the Federal Government began the verification and biometric
registration of all Somali National Army personnel. The exercise is primarily aimed
at improving the collection of human resources data and at reviewing the eligibility
of personnel, and is expected to contribute to the prevention of child recruitment.
69. In order to accelerate the implementation of the action plans, the Federal
Government, with the support of the United Nations, elaborated and committed to a
road map, which was signed by the Minister of Defence and by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict during her visit to Somalia in
October 2019. It includes renewed commitments to strengthening the legislative
framework, to capacity-building and awareness-raising for security forces on grave
violations against children, and to the screening of troops and the release and
reintegration of child soldiers. The road map also foresees the implementation of the
action plans at federal member state-level through the creation of regional working
groups on children and armed conflict. In addition, it contains provisions on the
prevention and response to sexual violence against children.
70. The country task force cooperated with the Ministry of Defence in the screening
of a total of 5,929 troops, including the Somali National Army (2,493), Punt land
forces to be integrated into the national army (2,060), Jubbaland forces (1,069),
Southwest forces (235), Hirshabelle police (60) and the National Intelligence and
Security Agency (12). A total of 23 boys associated with Puntland forces (17), the
national army (4) and Southwest forces (2) were identified, 19 of whom were
separated and provided with reintegration assistance.

14/17

20-03462

S/2020/174

71. In collaboration with the European Union military mission to contribute to the
training of Somali security forces and AMISOM, the country task force conducted
joint child protection training for government security forces, including the Child
Protection Unit of the Ministry of Defence. The country task force and AMISOM also
organized joint capacity-building and outreach events, including for the
commemoration of the International Day against the Use of Child Soldiers, the Day
of the African Child and Universal Children’s Day.
72. During the reporting period, 3,554 children, including 709 girls, benefited from
United Nations-supported community-based reintegration services, including
psychosocial assistance, back-to-school support programmes and vocational training.
Among these children, 80 per cent were formerly associated with armed forces or
armed groups, while 20 per cent were vulnerable children from conflict-affected
communities. Owing to continued insecurity in most areas of origin, children often
remained in reintegration centres for longer periods, resulting in increased unplanned
financial expenditure and contributing to making the children’s reintegration into
their communities more difficult and unpredictable. In October 2019, some funds
were made available to support the reintegration of children by the Peacebuilding
Fund.
73. The standard operating procedures on the reception and handover of children
separated from armed groups, endorsed by the Government of Somalia in 2014 as part
of the implementation of its action plan, were often applied inconsistently. While the
majority of the children enrolled in UNICEF-supported reintegration centres had been
handed over by government security forces, the time children spent in detention often
exceeded the 72-hour time limit stipulated in the standard operating procedures.
74. Notwithstanding the progress achieved, significant gaps remain, and efforts
need to be sustained to fully implement the two action plans, including the adoption
and enactment of the child rights bill, the full application of command orders and
standard operating procedures on the reception and handover of children separated
from armed groups, and the continued screening of troops, including those forces and
groups that will integrate the Somali National Army. Significant challenges also
persist in holding perpetrators of grave violations against childre n accountable.

C.

Advocacy and engagement on child protection
75. Throughout the reporting period, the country task force exchanged written
communications and held meetings with AMISOM to raise the issue of violations
against children committed by AMISOM. Violations attributed to the Kenya Defence
Forces, Ethiopian National Defence Forces and Ethiopian Liyu Police were also
systematically shared with the Governments of Kenya and Ethiopia, respectively, who
reported having conducted investigations.
76. On 16 June 2019, the global campaign by the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, “Act to Protect Children Affected by Armed Conflict”,
was launched in Somalia by the Minister of Justice and Judiciary Affairs during an
event held to commemorate the Day of the African Child. The Minister reaffirmed his
Government’s commitment to strengthening child protection legislation in Somalia.
77. From 27 to 30 October 2019, the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict visited Somalia and held discussions with national and international partners
on mechanisms to strengthen child protection and address grave violations against
children. She held meetings with representatives of the Federal Government and the
Southwest State authorities to advocate immediate action to end and prevent
violations against children by government security forces. During her visit, the
Federal Government committed to a road map to expedite the implementation of the

20-03462

15/17

S/2020/174

two existing action plans to end and prevent the recruitment and use and killing and
maiming of children. The Special Representative also launched a project for the
prevention of child recruitment and for community-based integration, funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund. During her visit, a Group of Friends on Children and Armed
Conflict, chaired by Denmark, was established.

VI. Observations and recommendations
78. I am concerned by the continuing high number of grave violations
committed against children by all parties to the conflict in Somalia. I stro ngly
condemn these violations, in particular the staggering numbers of abductions
and of the recruitment and use of children by Al-Shabaab. I call upon all parties
to immediately cease all violations and abide by their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
79. I am concerned by the number of violations attributed to government
security forces, in particular the sharp increase in cases of the recruitment and
use and the killing and maiming of children and of sexual violence against
children attributed to the Somali police and regional forces. I call upon the
Federal Government to fully implement the commitments made under the action
plans to end and prevent the recruitment and use and the killing and maiming
of children, signed in 2012. In this regard, I welcome the signature of the road
map for the expedited implementation of the two action plans by the Federal
Government of Somalia in October 2019 and call for its swift implementation,
including at federal member state-level.
80. I welcome the national strategy aimed at preventing child recruitment and
facilitating the release and reintegration of children, which the Federal
Government is finalizing, and look forward to its adoption and implementation.
81. I encourage the Federal Government to ensure that armed groups or militia
integrating its security forces are screened and that any children who are
associated are identified, released and reintegrated.
82. I welcome the revocation of the death penalty against 12 children, as well
as the presidential pardon by the President of Puntland for 34 children who had
been sentenced to prison terms for their alleged association with Al-Shabaab.
83. I am, however, concerned about the continued detention of children for
their actual or alleged association with armed groups and the fate of children
classified as “high-risk” by the National Intelligence and Security Agency. I urge
the Federal Government to treat children associated with armed groups
primarily as victims, with the best interests of the child and international
protection standards as guiding principles, and in line with the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (the
Paris Principles) that Somalia has endorsed.
84. In this regard, I further call upon the Federal Government to fully apply
the standard operating procedures for the handover of children separated from
armed groups that it signed in 2014 and to allow full access for child protection
actors to children at every stage of the release and reintegration process.
85. I encourage the Federal Government to further strengthen its legal
framework for the protection of children, including by ratifying such relevant
international legal instruments as the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child.

16/17

20-03462

S/2020/174

86. I encourage the Federal Government to take into account child rights issues
in the framework of the constitutional review process. I welcome the efforts made
by the Federal Government towards enacting the sexual offences bill into law, as
it will provide justice for victims of sexual violence, including children. I reiterate
my call for the timely enactment of the bill, as stated in my reports on children
and armed conflict (S/2019/509) and conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2019/280). I also commend the progress made in drafting the child rights bill
aimed at domesticating the Convention of the Rights of the Child and look
forward to its enactment. I further call on Puntland authorities and Southwest
authorities to harmonize their legislation on the age of majority with federal laws
and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
87. I pay tribute to AMISOM for its efforts and sacrifices and note the decrease
in the number of grave violations against children attributed to AMISOM. I
welcome the close cooperation between the country task force and AMISOM on
the protection of children in Somalia and call upon AMISOM and the African
Union to investigate reports and allegations of grave violations against children,
to ensure accountability for perpetrators and to further reinforce measures to
end and prevent grave violations against children.
88. I call upon the international community to continue to support efforts for
the prevention of child recruitment and for the rehabilitation and reintegration
of children formerly associated with armed groups in Somalia, including through
the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers.

20-03462

17/17
