S/2020/964

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 October 2020
Original: English

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK, and
developments related thereto, from 16 March to 15 September 2020.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities in
Kosovo, and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security a nd
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force continue to perform their roles
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). The European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo continues its presence in Kosovo, in line with the statement by the
President of the Security Council of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my
report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
Several overlapping and intersecting challenges confronted the people and
institutions of Kosovo. Foremost among those was the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) crisis, which, beyond its impact on public health, carried serious
economic, social and political repercussions. The spread of the virus accelerated
during the latter half of the reporting period, causing loss of lives and livelihoods
throughout Kosovo and putting a major strain on the capacity of public institutions to
respond to the crisis. The COVID-19 pandemic was accompanied by a political crisis,
as the government led by the Prime Minister, Albin Kurti, of the Movement for SelfDetermination (Vetёvendosje), was voted out through a non-confidence motion
initiated by its coalition partner, the Democratic League of Kosovo, just two months
into its term of office. The announcement in June by the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
that war crimes and crimes against humanity indictments had been filed in The Hague
against the President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, and the leader of his former party,
the Democratic Party of Kosovo, Kadri Veseli, brought further complexities to the
political scene in Pristina. These developments and challenges have rendered the

20-12455 (E)

121020

*2012455*

S/2020/964

political and security circumstances in Kosovo more fragile, at a time when the world
is striving to combat and manage the pandemic.
4.
On 18 March, as Kosovo was reporting some of its earliest confirmed
COVID-19 cases, the Democratic League of Kosovo withdrew from the coalition with
Vetёvendosje, which had garnered the majority of votes in the October 2019 elections,
and initiated an ultimately successful motion of non-confidence in the Vetёvendosjeled government of Albin Kurti. Inter-party tensions had been building and public
differences aired, including on calls for the unconditional removal of the 100 per cent
import tax on good from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina that had been put in
place in 2018 by the former government led by the then Prime Minister, Ramush
Haradinaj. After the dismissal by Mr. Kurti of the Minister of Interior and the
Democratic League of Kosovo’s first Vice-President, whom he had accused of openly
contradicting the government response to the COVID-19 outbreak, the Democratic
League of Kosovo left the coalition, calling it an unacceptable violation of its
coalition agreement with Vetёvendosje.
5.
On 25 March, 82 of the 120 members of the Assembly voted in favour of the
motion of non-confidence against the government of Albin Kurti. In response,
Mr. Kurti and his party called for the immediate scheduling of new elections.
However, President Thaçi, following consultations with most political parties,
concluded that a majority of parties favoured the formation of a new government. On
30 April, following the lack of response of Vetёvendosje to the repeated requests made
by President Thaçi to identify an alternate candidate for Prime Minister, he invited
the Democratic League of Kosovo, given that the party had won the second -highest
number of votes in the previous election, to form a new government. Vet ёvendosje
challenged that action in the Constitutional Court of Kosovo, which, on 28 May,
upheld the decision of President Thaçi. Amid continuing protests from Vet ёvendosje
and widespread public dissatisfaction with the political upheavals during a public
health emergency, on 3 June, the Assembly narrowly approved the new government
to be led by the Vice-President of the Democratic League of Kosovo, Avdullah Hoti.
6.
The new government depends on a one-vote majority in the Assembly and is
comprised of a mixture of smaller Kosovo Albanian -led parties, including the
Alliance for the Future of Kosovo and the Socialist Democratic Initiative for Kosovo,
along with the Kosovo Serb party Serbian List and parties representing other
non-majority communities. The Cabinet of Prime Minister Hoti is slightly larger than
that of the previous government, with four Deputy Prime Ministers and 16 ministries
(formerly 15), including 3 women ministers, compared with 5 in the preceding
government.
7.
Upon taking office, the new government prioritized addressing the pandemic,
facilitating economic recovery, combating crime and corruption, advancing the
dialogue with Belgrade and progressing on European integration. It also lifted the
non-tariff restrictions, including reciprocity measures, on Serbian goods that had been
imposed by the previous Vetёvendosje-led government, but indicated that they could
be reinstated if necessary progress was not achieved in the dialogue with Belgrade.
Continued political infighting, however, delayed the passage of legislation on
managing the pandemic and mitigating its economic impact. A new law on
“preventing and combating the COVID-19 pandemic” was eventually passed on
14 August, some three months after the Constitutional Court had recommended
urgent legislative changes to support the measures introduced by the government to
contain the virus. In July, following repeated unsuccessful attempts due to a lack of
quorum, the Assembly also ratified five international financial agreements with the
World Bank, the European Union and the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development in support of, among other things, modernizing the tax and customs
administration of Kosovo and a supplementary budget law. In August, the Assembly
2/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

ratified two other financial agreements of great importance for economic recovery,
namely, an agreement with the World Bank and a loan agreement with the European
Union for macro-financial assistance. In response to the pandemic, the government
proposed a 1.2 billion euro economic recovery plan, which remains pending with the
Assembly.
8.
On 24 June, the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office announced the 24 April filing at
the Kosovo Specialist Chambers of a 10-count indictment against President Thaçi,
Mr. Veseli and other individuals. They were charged with war crimes and crimes
against humanity, including murder, enforced disappearance of persons, persecution
and torture. The indictment is pending a review and confirmation by a pre -trial judge
of the Specialist Chambers, which is before the end of October, in accordance with
the applicable rules of procedure and evidence. The Office stated that the charges
were being disclosed in advance owing to “repeated efforts by both Hashim Thaçi and
Kadri Veseli to obstruct and undermine the work of the KSC [Kosovo Specialist
Chambers]”. Prime Minister Hoti, reacting to the announcement, called for respect
for the procedures of the Specialist Chambers. Mr. Veseli said in a statement that the
“true motives” of the Prosecutor were “entirely political”. President Thaçi described
the allegations as “false”, while promising to resign if the indictment was officially
confirmed by the Specialist Chambers.
9.
In a televised address on 18 July, President Thaçi characterized the process as
“another one among 21 years of accusations, allegations and fabrications about the
Kosovo Liberation Army and the struggle of the people of Kosovo for freedom and
sovereignty”. Meanwhile, the Assembly adopted a non-binding resolution on political
and civic unity in the protection of the values of the people of Kosovo calling, among
others, “to protect the liberation war of the KLA” (Kosovo Liberation Army),
addressing the issue of missing persons and ensuring justice for “all victims of
Serbia’s crimes” and the impartiality of the Specialist Chambers. Some 20 million
euros were approved within the 2020 Kosovo budget to support the potential indictees
and their families. In addition, a debate was renewed on a previously submitted draft
law on “the protection of Kosovo Liberation Army war values, which failed to be
adopted on its first reading, on 13 August, owing to a lack of quorum. International
actors and local human rights organizations have strongly criticized elements of this
draft text, noting that they may violate freedom of expression and other fundamental
rights guaranteed under the Constitution and international norms. On 14 August, the
Kosovo Liberation Army Veterans Association petitioned the Assembly to amend the
Law on the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Office to extend their jurisdiction to
crimes committed by Serbian forces. On 24 August, President Thaçi submitted a
request to the Assembly to amend the Constitution to provide clarification on the end
of the mandate of the Specialist Chambers and the Office.
10. Those developments took place against the backdrop of continuing public
debate and speculation on the viability of the Democratic League of Kosovo -led
coalition government. On 6 August, Vetёvendosje announced that it was in the process
of collecting signatures in the Assembly to initiate a motion of non-confidence against
the Hoti government. In addition, political actors have launched public discussions
on the election of a new President in the event that President Thaçi resigns before the
end of his mandate, in April 2021.
11. The resumption of work by the municipality of Deçan/Dečani on a transit road
to Montenegro through the special protective zone of the Visoki Dečani monastery,
in contravention of applicable laws, sparked renewed political and security tensions
during the reporting period. Following the resumption of the road upgrades within the
special protective zone in mid-July, the Eparchy of Raška-Prizren appealed to the
Kosovo government and the international community to prevent further encroachment
into the special protective zone. Belgrade also decried the new const ruction works,
20-12455

3/23

S/2020/964

with the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, requesting that the issue of the special
protective zones be included in the agenda of the next session of the European Unionfacilitated Belgrade-Pristina talks. On 16 August, following a visit to the municipality
by Prime Minister Hoti, construction was halted. On 27 August, upon a fact -finding
visit to the area, the Pristina-based representatives of France, Germany, Italy, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Unite d States of
America, who were accompanied by officials from the European Union, OSCE and
the Kosovo Force, called upon the Kosovo government to uphold the Law on Special
Protective Zones and to ensure the implementation of the 19 May 2016 decision of
the Constitutional Court upholding land ownership rights of the Serbian Orthodox
Church. To date, however, the municipality has not committed itself to a permanent
cessation of the unlawful road works.
12. From mid-March until the end of May, when pandemic restriction measures
were in force, the Kosovo Serb communities in Vushtrri/Vučitrn, Novak/Novakë,
Prizren, Istog/Istok, Gjilan/Gnjilane and Obiliq/Obilić recorded an increase of
criminal incidents directed against their property and livelihoods. On 1 May, my
Special Representative, alongside other high-level international representatives in
Kosovo, expressed concern over the increase in such incidents and urged Pristina
authorities to prioritize law enforcement for those communities, to swiftly identify
the perpetrators and publicly discourage such acts.

III. Coronavirus disease impact and response
13. Notwithstanding an early response and strict measures against the pandemic,
which had initially led to a relative containment of the virus, the situation began to
worsen early in June, coinciding with the easing of the restrictions to permit the restart
of regular economic activity. Faced with a dramatic increase in the number of cases,
the government reimposed certain restrictions in July. Those included night-time
curfews, bans of public gatherings and the mandated wearing of face masks in public
indoor spaces. Compliance with the measures was inconsistent, and their effect on
slowing the rate of infection has been limited. By the end of the reporting period, at
least 15,000 cases of COVID-19 and more than 600 deaths were reported. Among
other measures, an effort is under way to increase testing capacity in Kosovo, with
the support of the international community. The Kosovo public health system has, in
many cases, been stretched beyond its existing capacities, including available beds
for COVID-19 patients, testing, essential medical equipment, and numbers of
qualified caregivers and other medical staff. As at 9 September 2020, approximately
11 per cent of all recorded COVID-19 cases were health-care workers.
14. The response to the pandemic in Kosovo was also affected by the existing
parallel operations of the Government of Serbia-supported public health structures in
the Kosovo Serb-majority areas. Although, in many cases, ad hoc working-level
cooperation functioned well between the Belgrade- and Pristina-run systems, such
cooperation was not systematic. The two systems have, in large part, been able to
implement practical arrangements for the free movement of test samples, essential
medical supplies, personnel and patients. In the early phases of the pandemic,
divergences were common between the restrictions imposed by Pristina - and
Belgrade-sponsored institutions, which became gradually more synchronized.
15. UNMIK and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have remained
operational during the pandemic, while implementing risk-reduction measures,
including telecommuting. UNMIK and the United Nations Kosovo team continue to
closely coordinate efforts to ensure staff welfare and continuity of operations, as well
as to support local authorities and institutions. My Special Representative set an early

4/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

priority of upgrading in-house medical capacity to serve all United Nations staff on
the ground. Accordingly, UNMIK was equipped with reliable equipment, facilities
and specialized personnel to treat United Nations staff and their dependents, except
the most critical cases, which required medical evacuation. My Special
Representative was personally engaged with authorities in Belgrade and Skopje to
secure agreements for the medical evacuation of United Nations staff and their
dependents. UNMIK and the United Nations Kosovo team also cooperated with the
National Health Institute for testing of staff with symptoms. However, the testing
capacity of the Institute has been constrained owing to high demand, and the Mission
has entered into agreements with other local laboratories to conduct reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction tests. As of the end of the reporting period,
there had been 23 confirmed cases of COVID-19 infection among United Nations
staff and their dependents in Kosovo, which included 17 cases among UNMIK staff
and dependents (with 14 recovered and 3 still active cases) and 6 among th e United
Nations Kosovo team staff and dependents (with all recovered).
16. UNMIK, in close coordination with the United Nations Kosovo team, has
directed available resources towards supporting public health institutions and the
population of Kosovo, directing such support, in particular, to help to meet the urgent
needs among the most vulnerable populations. The Mission adapted much of its
programmatic activities towards responding to the COVID-19 emergency. It
distributed food and hygiene packages, personal protective equipment and equipment
for distance learning to all municipalities in Kosovo. Responding to requests from
health authorities, UNMIK also provided medical supplies and personal protective
equipment to the Ministry of Health, police and firefighters, the Kosovo Judicial
Council and Kosovo Correctional Services, among other institutions. UNMIK
initiated a range of projects for young people and on gender tailored to contribute to
the response to COVID-19, including support for domestic violence shelters
throughout Kosovo and the production and distribution of face shields to health
workers.
17. The United Nations Kosovo team has been providing key support to the
government in responding to COVID-19, under the overall guidance of the United
Nations Resident Coordinator, by coordinating the emergency assistance to cope with
the outbreak. The World Health Organization (WHO), in close coordination with other
United Nations Kosovo team agencies, has played a central role in advising and
supporting Kosovo public health institutions in combating the pandemic. As the
infection rates accelerated during the summer, WHO has deployed additional
technical missions and standing expertise to Kosovo and facilitated the procurement
of essential equipment such as oxygen concentrators and intensive care unit
ventilators. Experts have been deployed to assist in scaling up capacity in terms of
surveillance, risk communication and infection prevention, as well as case
management and testing. United Nations Kosovo team members have implemented
more than $27 million in bilateral and multilateral assistance since March. In June,
the United Nations Kosovo team completed a socioeconomic impact assessment and
an inter-agency response plan focused on health, social protection, economic
recovery, macroeconomic response, and social cohesion and community resilience, in
order to strengthen the government’s response to COVID-19.

IV. Northern Kosovo
18. On 16 June, the mayor of North Mitrovica and President of the Serbian List,
Goran Rakić, resigned in order to take up the position of Kosovo Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Local Government and Administration. Following a
consultative meeting with representatives of political parties and the Central Election
20-12455

5/23

S/2020/964

Commission on 22 June, President Thaçi announced that, owing to COVID-19-related
circumstances, a special local election in North Mitrovica would not be scheduled
until October 2020. On 21 June, voting in Kosovo took place for the Serbian
parliamentary elections. As in past such elections, OSCE facilitated the collection of
votes, albeit with multiple additional health precautions in place, which proceeded
without security incidents or major irregularities at 20 locations and 140 polling
stations in Kosovo.
19. On 2 April, the mayors of North and South Mitrovica, accompanied by the
Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Kosovo Force, held a joint
press conference on the main bridge across the Ibër/Ibar River, in which they appealed
to residents of both municipalities to adhere to the COVID-19-related public health
measures. That was the first time since October 2018 that the mayors had issued a
public statement together.
20. On 29 July, the Minister of Internal Affairs of Kosovo and the Kosovo Police
General Director visited the Kosovo Serb-majority municipality of Zubin Potok to
discuss security challenges facing the municipality amid the pandemic, including
ensuring more coordinated law enforcement efforts to combat organized crime across
municipal and community lines.

V. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
21. Efforts continued in order to resume the European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, which had been suspended since November 2018. On
3 April, the European Union appointed Miroslav Lajčák as Special Representative for
the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue and other Western Balkans regional issues. The
appointment was welcomed during the European Union-Western Balkans Summit on
6 May by European Union and Western Balkans leaders, who also reconfirmed the
region’s European perspective and a commitment to intensifying their engagement in
support of the political, economic and social transformation of the region. Mr. Lajčák
undertook preparatory visits to Pristina and Belgrade in June to discuss the modalities
of future meetings in the context of the dialogue.
22. On 10 July, France and Germany hosted a virtual meeting with Serbian President
Vučić and Kosovo Prime Minister Hoti, which was followed by a virtual meeting on
12 July chaired by the European Union with the two leaders to mark the official
resumption of the European Union-facilitated dialogue. In-person meetings of the
leaders followed on 16 July and 7 September under the auspices of the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice President of the European Commission, Josep Borrell, and Special Representative
Lajčák and at the expert level, focusing on issues related to missing and displaced
persons and economic cooperation. Prior to the meeting of 7 September, President
Vučić and Prime Minister Hoti issued a joint statement in which they stressed that
they attached the “highest priority” to European Union integration and to continuing
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. They also committed themselves to
redoubling their efforts to ensure further European Union alignment in accordance
with their relevant obligations. At the same time, the parties continued to present
diverging narratives on the expected outcomes of the dialogue, with Pristina insisting
on mutual recognition and Belgrade emphasizing the importance of implementing
existing agreements.
23. On 4 September, under the auspices of the United States, President Vučić and
Prime Minister Hoti met in Washington, D.C., and signed separate commitments in
which they agreed to move forward with “economic normalization”. According to the
documents, Belgrade and Pristina pledged, among others, to implement the agreed
6/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

re-establishment of a railway connection and the construction of a highway and to
work with the Government of the United States on a feasibility study for the purposes
of sharing Gazivode/Ujmani Lake as a reliable water and energy supply. Both parties
further agreed on having Kosovo join the so-called “mini-Schengen” zone of which
Albania, North Macedonia and Serbia were already members. The document also
includes agreements by Pristina and Belgrade to suspend, for a period of one year,
their recognition and derecognition campaigns.
24. In April, members of the Regional Group of Continental Europe of the European
Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity approved a connection
agreement with the Kosovo Electricity Transmission System and Market Operator,
which allows the latter to join the regional network of operators in Europe. The
agreement was signed on 30 June, authorizing the Kosovo Electricity Transmission
System and Market Operator to leave the Serbian regulatory area within a larger
regional “control block”, covering also Montenegro and North Macedonia, and
operate as an independent regulatory zone with Albania. The decision is also in line
with the 2013 European Union-facilitated energy agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina which, among other things, provided for the Operator to become the official
transmission system operator in Kosovo.

VI. Returns, reconciliation, cultural heritage and
community relations
25. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 189 voluntary returns by members
of non-majority communities who had been displaced within and outside Kosovo.
The returnees included 102 women and 87 men (116 Kosovo Serbs, 22 Kosovo Roma,
36 Kosovo Egyptians, 12 Kosovo Albanians and 3 Kosovo Bosniaks). This brings the
total number of displaced members of non-majority communities who have found
durable solutions in Kosovo since 2000 to 28,547, including 14,021 women and
14,526 men (12,207 Kosovo Serbs, 7,670 Kosovo Egyptians and Kosovo Ashkali,
3,990 Kosovo Roma, 1,878 Kosovo Bosniaks, 1,464 Kosovo Gorani, 1,294 Kosovo
Albanians, 21 Kosovo Montenegrins, 19 Kosovo Turks and 4 Kosovo Croats). There
remain 16,052 displaced persons within Kosovo (7,404 women and 8,648 men), as
well as 69,627 persons with displacement-related needs across the Western Balkans.
Most of the approximately 200,000 displaced persons from Kosovo residing in the
region are in Serbia.
26. On 29 May, a technical working group composed of senior representatives from
Belgrade, Podgorica, Pristina and Skopje held a virtual meeting under the auspices of
the “Skopje process”, the regional initiative facilitated jointly by UNHCR and OSCE,
to promote durable solutions for displaced persons from Kosovo. The participants
assessed the implementation of previously agreed action points and committed
themselves to developing action plans under five main areas: (a) property rights;
(b) security; dialogue and reintegration; (c) personal documentation; (d) data
management; and (e) solution planning.
27. On 28 March, the Kosovo Office of the Language Commissioner published its
annual report on compliance of Kosovo municipalities with the Law on the Use of
Languages. In the report, it was found that non-majority communities in Kosovo
continued to face obstacles in gaining access to judicial remedy, property registration
and health care owing to inadequate provision of materials and services in all official
languages. On 15 April and 9 June, Kosovo Serb civil society representatives lodged
formal complaints with the Office of the Language Commissioner concerning the

20-12455

7/23

S/2020/964

non-compliance of Kosovo institutions with the Law on the Use of Languages in
disseminating COVID-19 information.
28. On 3 August, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) launc hed a
needs assessment and monitoring project with its local partners in the
Gjakovë/Đakovica municipality to improve the access of Kosovo Roma, Kosovo
Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptian communities to information on COVID-19 preventive
measures and social services, and to safeguard their livelihoods. This is the first of a
series of projects to be implemented in 12 Kosovo municipalities by November 2020.
UNHCR, UNMIK and other international actors continued to support the Kosovo
Ashkali, Kosovo Egyptian and Kosovo Roma communities in obtaining personal
documentation and resolving civil status issues to enable their access to public
services. In responding to the COVID-19 crisis, the United Nations Kosovo team has
reinforced its support for the Kosovo Roma, Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptian
communities, in particular in the areas of nutrition and hygiene, health, education,
civil documentation and social inclusion, while continuously assessing the impact of
the pandemic on these communities to ensure targeted assistance, with a focus on
women and children. During the period under review, no contributions were made to
the United Nations trust fund in support of the Kosovo Ashkali, Kosovo Egyptian and
Kosovo Roma communities affected by lead poisoning in Kosovo, leavi ng the fund
without the ability to support their urgent needs.

VII. Rule of law and human rights
29. During the reporting period, Kosovo prosecutors and courts issued indictments
and judgments in several high-profile organized crime and corruption cases. In April,
19 individuals, including a member of the Assembly of Kosovo and three former
ministers, were indicted for alleged abuse of official position or authority in relation
to the privatization process of the Kosovo Energy Corporation in 2013. An indictment
was also filed on 23 April against five Kosovo police officers on charges of organized
crime, abuse of official position or authority, and smuggling of goods. In May, the
Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed an indictment on charges of organized
crime against seven individuals accused of unauthorized transport and sale of
weapons and unauthorized purchase and sale of narcotic substances. The Office
indicted a further 33 persons for abuse of official position or authority, accepting
bribes, smuggling of goods and unauthorized ownership and possession of weapons.
30. At the same time, local civil society organizations continued to report slow
progress in addressing corruption and organized crime, expressing concern over the
often-lenient sentences imposed. On 23 June, the Kosovo Law Institute published a
report that revealed, on the basis of findings resulting from a systematic monitoring
of 334 corruption cases and 1,180 court hearings throughout 2019, that most cases of
high-level corruption and involvement in organized crime had either been dismissed
or terminated by the prosecution. On 31 August, the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council
also published a report that assessed the performance of the prosecutorial system in
handling cases in the past six years. The report served to confirm the findings of the
Kosovo Law Institute that the majority of corruption and organized crime-related
reports and investigations had been either dismissed or terminated.
31. Kosovo courts also issued judgments in several war crimes and related cases. In
April, the Supreme Court returned for retrial the case against a prom inent former
Kosovo Liberation Army member accused of crimes allegedly committed in
Suharekë/Suva Reka in June 1999. In the same month, the Basic Court of Pristina
issued a guilty verdict against the former mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica in relation to his
escape from detention on two occasions, in August and September 2015, while on

8/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

trial for war crimes against the civilian population. He was sentenced to a fine of
12,000 euros. On 22 June, the Basic Court of Prizren found a former member of the
Yugoslav reserve police guilty of war crimes against the civilian population
committed in the village of Krushë e Vogël/Mala Kruša in March 1999, namely,
plunder and destruction of property, as well as desecration of corpses of an unknown
number of unidentified persons, and sentenced him to 22 years of imprisonment.
32. At the end of June, the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of Serbia announced
the filing of an indictment against a Kosovo Albanian who had been arrested and
detained in January 2020 in Belgrade in relation to crimes allegedly committed in the
village of Rudicë/Rudice, municipality of Klinë/Klina in June and July 1999. The
Higher Court in Belgrade subsequently returned the indictment and requested the War
Crimes Prosecutor to conduct further investigations.
33. UNMIK continued to support efforts to determine the fate of 1,643 persons still
missing since the Kosovo conflict. On 30 June, UNMIK provided equipment and
technical support to the Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on persons who are
unaccounted for in connection with events in Kosovo, in order to strengthen the
Group’s capacity to coordinate, exchange, and process information on missing
persons. On 30 August, on the International Day of the Victims of Enforced
Disappearances, my Special Representative reaffirmed UNMIK support for work to
establish the fate of missing persons in Kosovo. Access to this information is a
fundamental human right and a crucial element of trust-building and reconciliation
between communities.
34. UNMIK continued to closely monitor the evolving human rights implications of
COVID-19 and measures to contain it, especially with regard to the disproportionate
impact on non-majority communities and persons in vulnerable situations, such as
women and girls, older persons, persons deprived of liberty and persons on the move.
On 4 April, reacting to reports of media outlets disclosing the personal information
of individuals in quarantine, the Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo issued a
statement in which it urged the media to adhere to the Constitution and legislation
concerning the protection of personal data. My Special Representative called upon all
institutions and stakeholders to remain vigilant to possible stigmatization and
discrimination related to combating COVID-19 and for an inclusive response to
ensure no one was left behind and to respect patients’ right to privacy.
35. During the period under review, the preparatory team for the establishment of
the Kosovo truth and reconciliation commission continued to hold public
consultations with members of civil society, academia and local communities
throughout Kosovo to discuss the functional modalities and jurisdiction of such a
commission. On 8 June, UNMIK participated in a virtual meeting, during which the
preparatory team briefed relevant stakeholders on the process of creating a draft
normative act and on its substantive provisions.
36. Kosovo continued to prosecute individuals suspected of participation in foreign
wars and terrorism. In June and July, the Special Department of the Basic Court of
Pristina issued guilty verdicts in the cases against seven women, part of a group of
individuals repatriated from the Syrian Arab Republic to Kosovo in April 2019 (see
S/2019/461). The Court sentenced each woman to a two-year suspended sentence of
imprisonment and mandatory psychological counselling. In addition, the Court of
Appeals published judgments in the cases against three men from the same group,
increasing the sentences imposed by the court of first instance for two of the
individuals, while confirming the sentence imposed on the third.
37. Against the backdrop of reports that COVID-19 containment measures had
increased instances of violence against children, the Law on Child Protection entered
into force on 17 July. The new law provides protections for children from physical
20-12455

9/23

S/2020/964

and mental violence, abuse, exploitation, neglect and other forms of violence that
endanger their life, safety, health, education or development. The law, which places
the best interests of the child first, is in line with international standards and principles
of the Constitution.

VIII. Women and peace and security
38. During the reporting period, the Kosovo government commission responsible
for the verification and recognition of the status of survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence received 63 applications, bringing the total number of applications received
since its establishment, in February 2018, to 1,303. To date, 846 applicants (819
women and 27 men) have been granted survivor status, while 262 (224 women and
38 men) were rejected.
39. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic marked the beginning of a steady increase
in cases of domestic and gender-based violence. From January to June 2020, Kosovo
police reported 1,012 cases of domestic violence, compared with 785 during the same
period in 2019, a 29 per cent increase. During the reporting period, the
multi-stakeholder Security and Gender Group, which is chaired by the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and includes
UNMIK as a member, focused on assisting women and girls in overcoming the
adverse impact of isolation measures, in particular risks of domestic and gender-based
violence. In partnership with UN-Women, UNMIK supported domestic violence
shelters throughout Kosovo with donations of bed linen and clothes, as well as
equipment to support online schooling for children living in shelters. Moreover, an
awareness-raising campaign consisting of televised spots empowering survivors to
report domestic violence was launched, and informative visual materials on reporting
cases of domestic violence were distributed. During the first months of the COVID-19
lockdown, the OSCE mission in Kosovo also launched a campaign against domestic
violence in all official languages to inform the public of the services and support
available to victims. The campaign was supported by the Kosovo Force, which aired
radio messages in the Albanian and Serbian languages.
40. On 29 June, the mayor of Zubin Potok and the chief executive officer of the
municipality of North Mitrovica inaugurated the first regional shelter for survivors of
domestic and gender-based violence in northern Kosovo. The construction of the
shelter was funded by UNMIK. On 2 July, the mayor of Gjakovë/Đakovica signed an
agreement with the local women’s shelter for victims of domestic violence to
contribute 4,000 euros annually to the shelter for a period of three years.
41. As part of the COVID-19 response initiatives, the UNMIK-produced
documentary “Not Your Property” was screened on a local television channel on
2 July, followed by a high-level discussion on the impact of COVID-19 on women,
which reached more than 171,000 views on social media. In addition, 54 women and
6 men improved their livelihoods through an UNMIK-funded income-generating
project involving the production of some 24,000 face masks distributed to vulnerable
populations in five municipalities of Kosovo in July.
42. While the majority of school-aged children were able to complete the academic
year through distance learning implemented by the Kosovo Ministry of Education,
the lack of access to information technology equipment and Internet connectivity
exacerbated pre-existing inequalities and affected the rights of some to education.
Vulnerabilities of girls and boys from the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities,
notably, have been further exacerbated by the pandemic. Most children from these
communities, in particular girls and young women, do not have access to information
technology equipment or the Internet. Coupled with increased domestic care duties at
10/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

home, young women and girls are at risk of losing their academic year and of,
ultimately, dropping out of school.

IX. Trust-building, partnerships and cooperation
42. During the reporting period, the Mission’s confidence-building projects were
adapted to support the people of Kosovo in combating the pandemic and meeting
emergency needs, while ensuring that they contributed to their overall
inter-community trust-building objectives. The Kosovo Trust-building Platform,
which was launched online on 17 March, provides public health information in local
languages, while continuing to track and share information on efforts by grassroots
and civil society actors, international organizations and Kosovo central and local
institutions to further the recommendations of the United Nations Kosovo Trust Building Forum held in Ljubljana in May 2018. In June, UNMIK, in cooperation with
IOM, completed the second phase of a trust-building initiative aimed at promoting
the learning of both official languages, expanding the contents of the online AlbanianSerbian and Serbian-Albanian dictionaries, and supporting Kosovo institutions in
disseminating information on COVID-19 in both official languages, as well as
producing online COVID-19-related content. The UNMIK-sponsored townhall
debate series on trust-building was also adapted to address issues and concerns related
to COVID-19 through online means. The debates, interviews with medical experts
and articles published during the reporting period had a combined 1,971,000 views
across Kosovo social media platforms.
43. As a result of COVID-19 containment measures imposed in mid-March, the
Mission modified its support for the pilot drop-in centre for street children and their
families in Kosovo in order to enable the conduct of online classrooms and the
provision of psychosocial support and counselling. In addition, food and hygienic
packages were distributed to 25 homeless families, including 52 adults and 131
children. In consultation with the United Nations Kosovo team, those activities
complemented United Nations Children’s Fund initiatives focused on continued
access to essential health and nutrition services for women, children and vulnerable
communities, as well as continuous education, social protection and child protection
support.
44. UNMIK continued to provide support for the integration of the judiciary and the
administration of justice, in line with the recommendations of the United Nations
Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, with a focus on the needs resulting from the
COVID-19 pandemic. UNMIK, in partnership with the local non-governmental
organization (NGO), Advocacy Centre for Democratic Culture, continued to support
the Basic Court of Mitrovica in the translation of case files to reduce the backlog of
cases. It also supported the integration of young Kosovo Serb lawyers into the Kosovo
legal system through targeted training on the Kosovo bar exam and on the judiciary
and legal practice. With programmatic funds provided by UNMIK, the United Nations
Development Programme assisted the Basic Courts of Pristina, Feriza j/Uroševac,
Gjilan/Gnjilane and the Supreme Court in the translation of case files and provided a
five-week training to 30 court interpreters in legal translation skills. On 25 June, the
President of the Basic Court of Mitrovica inaugurated its new courtroom, which was
fully furnished and equipped by UNMIK.
45. The UNMIK-supported Legal Aid Centre of the Kosovo Law Institute provided
free legal aid to 611 individuals (207 women and 404 men) on issues related to
property rights, labour and pensioner rights, and domestic violence. During May, as
part of an UNMIK-funded project, the local NGO, Initiative for Justice and Equality,
organized a series of online training on domestic violence, protection orders, joint

20-12455

11/23

S/2020/964

property division and financial maintenance for police and justice system personnel.
It also published a series of articles on legal literacy and video materials on victims’
rights and legal counselling to survivors of domestic violence.
46. On 31 March, with support from UNMIK, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Training completed
a joint regional project to support capacity-building on financial investigations in
South-Eastern Europe that had begun in 2017. During the final stage of the pro ject,
the more than 100 representatives from Kosovo law enforcement and the judiciary
who had participated in the training developed a curriculum on financial
investigations tailored to the Kosovo legal framework. The project increased
Kosovo’s capacity to combat money laundering and terrorism financing and promoted
strengthened cooperation among law enforcement agencies in the region.
47. UNMIK continued to bolster its engagement with human rights-focused civil
society organizations to help to facilitate cross-community dialogue and encourage
grassroots monitoring of human rights violations and other human rights-related
concerns. UNMIK supported several local human rights civil society organizations in
drafting their first joint report on the human rights situation in Kosovo, which was
published on 30 June. The report, which fills an existing gap in human rights
monitoring and reporting in Kosovo, was produced at the end of a participatory
process that brought together representatives of civil society organizations from
different ethnic backgrounds, in line with the Mission’s trust-building efforts.
48. UNMIK continued its work in support of the youth, peace and security agenda,
including in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. From March to June, UNMIK
organized 10 online discussions with youth and local representatives from 10
ethnically mixed municipalities, which resulted in several joint activities, including
the distribution of personal protective equipment and the inclusion of youth councils
into municipal emergency task forces in the municipalities of Vushtri/Vučitrn,
Lipjan/Lipljan, Rahovec/Orahovac and Istog/Istok. As a follow-up to those municipal
meetings, in July and August, UNMIK supported youth cyclist volunteers in
delivering more than 1,300 reusable masks to more than 500 vulnerable families,
including from non-majority communities, and 2,100 posters with COVID-19
awareness-raising information, in the municipalities of Lipjan/Lipljan, Prizren,
Kaçanik/Kačanik and Fushё Kosovё/Kosovo Polje. Similar actions are planned in
other municipalities of Kosovo. UNMIK also supported the Mitrovica Innovation
Centre, the Gračanica/Graçanicë Innovation Centre and the Klokot/Kllokot
Multi-Ethnic Youth Centre by procuring desktop 3-D printers and filaments to
produce protective face shields. Between May and June, more than 900 face
protective shields were produced and delivered to local medical staff and frontline
health-care professionals. Furthermore, the UNMIK-supported Youth Centre for
Cultural Diversity and Minority Development in Klokot/Kllokot conducted weekly
online workshops on mental health, digital media literacy and countering
disinformation and online hate speech. Those workshops complemented the UNMIKsupported online awareness-raising campaign by the United Youth Task Force,
reaching more than 12,000 young people.
49. On 7 August, UNMIK presented its work on inter-ethnic youth cooperation at
an event organized by the United Nations Kosovo team and the Young Men’s
Christian Association Kosovo within the framework of the UN75 campaign. In the
wake of the adoption of Security Council resolution 2535 (2020) on youth, peace and
security, on 27 August, UNMIK, the United Nations Verification Missio n in Colombia
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq organized the first joint online
youth platform to share experiences and ideas of Kosovo, Iraqi and Colombian youth
in building peace and combating the COVID-19 pandemic. Kosovo youth were joined
by young peacebuilders from Afghanistan, Colombia, Iraq and Mexico and discussed
12/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

youth participation in peace processes and decision-making, challenges related to
engaging young women in trust-building initiatives, the relevance of youth work for
reconciliation and building collective memory, and the importance of cultural and
other activities to help to bridge community divides. On 9 September, UNMIK,
together with youth representatives from Kosovo, also presented its youth trust building achievements at an Arria formula meeting on implementation of the youth,
peace and security agenda by United Nations peace operations.
50. During the reporting period, UNMIK facilitated the issuance of 26 Red Notices
and 7 extradition requests to Kosovo from members of the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL). It opened 608 cases for investigation within the
INTERPOL database. UNMIK also processed 4,806 items of INTERPOL official
correspondence. In addition, in July, the Kosovo government signed a “working
arrangement” document with the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation on cooperation in combating organized crime, corruption and other
forms of serious crime.

X. Observations
51. I express my deep solidarity with the people of Kosovo during these difficult
times caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic. I am pleased that both UNMIK and
the United Nations Kosovo team are in a position to support the efforts of Kosovo
institutions to contain the spread of COVID-19 and mitigate the socioeconomic
effects of the health crisis, in particular on the most vulnerable members of the
population. I welcome the commitments of the Kosovo leadership to combating the
pandemic and advancing the dialogue with Belgrade and on European integration. I
also call upon the new government of Kosovo to continue to strengthen the rule of
law, support accountability processes for serious violations of human rights, take
resolute steps to combat corruption and impunity, and implement human rights
frameworks, including by ensuring a human-rights based approach to the COVID-19
response and recovery.
52. I am concerned by the political polarization that persists in Pristina and that has
had an impact on the management of the pandemic. I call upon all political entities in
Kosovo to unite around the priorities of safeguarding public health and supporting
public institutions in ensuring a coherent and effective response to curb the pandemic
and associated public health and socioeconomic challenges.
53. The increase in reported cases of domestic violence since the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic is disturbing. I encourage Kosovo institutions to strengthen
their efforts to enforce legal and other protections and address the inequalities
experienced by women. The government should continue efforts to assist survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence, including by ensuring victim-centred and
inclusive support.
54. I welcome that UNMIK and its partners adapted their trust-building
programmatic activities to support the management of the pandemic and to meet the
emergency needs of Kosovo. The creative use of strategic communications tools, such
as the online multilingual Kosovo Trust-building Platform and the town hall debates,
contributed to ensuring the dissemination of critical public health information to
communities throughout Kosovo. UNMIK and the United Nations Kosovo team will
continue to adapt their operations to the changed environment and prioritize support
for Kosovo, especially the most vulnerable.
55. I welcome the resumption, after a prolonged suspension, of the European Unionfacilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. The renewed commitment

20-12455

13/23

S/2020/964

towards the normalization of relations is evident, and I hope that it will remain so
until a comprehensive solution is found. I am encouraged by the constructive
participation of both parties in the initial phase of negotiations facilitated by the
European Union Special Representative, and the continued personal engagement of
the European Union High Representative. The parties should build on the progress
achieved to date in the discussions, including in follow-up to the agreements signed
by the parties under the auspices of the United States related to “economic
normalization”. I hope the continuing discussions will help to clarify the fate of the
remaining missing persons and that progress can be achieved on the return of
displaced persons and economic cooperation and implementing other outstanding
agreements.
56. I call upon the leadership in Belgrade and Pristina to demonstrate flexibility and
creativity to overcome differences. I urge political leaders to ensure an inclusive
approach through greater participation of key stakeholders, in particular women and
young people, in the consultation and decision-making processes and the inclusion of
gender and youth perspectives in the implementation of agreements that affect the
lives of the population.
57. I am concerned about renewed tensions over construction activities in the
special protective zone around the Visoki Dečani monastery, a United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization World Heritage site. While the
works have been suspended, a clear commitment by the Kosovo authorities to respect
legislation, including the ruling of the Constitutional Court upholding the property
rights of the Serbian Orthodox Church, will be important for preserving
inter-community trust.
58. I reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to supporting the Ashkali,
Egyptian and Roma communities affected by lead poisoning in Kosovo. Regrettably,
there have been no further contributions to the United Nations trust fund established
to support targeted projects for the benefit of these communities. I renew my appeal
for voluntary contributions from Member States and other actors and organizations to
enable an effective response to meet the needs of those vulnerable communities.
59. During the reporting period, the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office made progress in
furthering its investigations. I call upon all relevant parties, Kosovo institutions and
international actors to extend their full support and cooperation for these efforts,
which are essential for the peaceful future of Kosovo.
60. I thank my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, for his leadership dur ing this
difficult period and all Mission staff for their dedicated support for Kosovo, including
to meet the challenges of the pandemic. I reiterate my gratitude to the United Nations
Development Coordinator and United Nations agencies, funds and programm es for
their valuable collaboration with UNMIK, and to longstanding partners of the United
Nations in Kosovo, including the Kosovo Force, the European Union and OSCE.

14/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General on the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
from 16 March to 15 September 2020
1.

Summary
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic overshadowed the reporting
period. Notwithstanding the extraordinary situation, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo continued to carry out its mandate, albeit with a reduced physical
presence. The President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, and the High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Josep Borrell, agreed through an exchange of
letters to a one-year technical extension of the Mission’s 2018–2020 mandate owing
to the pandemic. The Mission, meanwhile, resumed all its mandated tasks.
Following the decision of the Kosovo Judicial Council to lift its pandemicrelated restrictions and to allow court sessions to recommence, the Mission resumed
its case monitoring activities. Those restrictions permitted only a few urgent hearings
to be held. The Mission’s Case Monitoring Unit conducted a review of the trials being
held that might have to recommence because no hearings were held for three
consecutive months.
The Case Monitoring Unit also participated in several working groups of the
functional review of the rule of law sector led by the Ministry of Justice, a process
aimed at reforms in the justice system (including vetting), and in a working group on
finalizing the revised Criminal Procedure Code.
Furthermore, the Mission contributed to drafting the new Kosovo Correctional
Service Law by taking part, at the expert level, in relevant working groups.
In support of the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, the Mission continued to facilitate the implementation of the IBM Technical
Protocol and the dialogue agreements related to freedom of movement and the
judiciary. In this regard, the Mission participated in the working group that is drafting
the new national IBM strategy.
The fate of the missing persons continued to draw attention during the reportin g
period, and the positive role of the Mission in identifying remains of missing persons
was highlighted in a number of domestic and international media reports.
In May, the Mission launched the “Speak Up on Time” media campaign,
highlighting the importance of preserving biological evidence in cases of sexual
violence. This is part of an ongoing awareness-raising campaign, which the Mission
and the Institute of Forensic Medicine launched in 2019.
The Mission continued to support the Kosovo police in the field of international
police cooperation at different levels. The Mission also maintained its rapid
intervention capacities as second security responder and continued its support for the
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. Through the Institute of
Forensic Medicine, the Mission supported its local counterparts in locating and
identifying missing persons.

20-12455

15/23

S/2020/964

2.
2.1.

Activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
Monitoring
Following the decision of the Kosovo Judicial Council to lift its restrictions
related to the pandemic and to allow court sessions to recommence, the Mission
resumed its case-monitoring activities. The Case Monitoring Unit attended the trial
sessions of all the cases that it was monitoring as relevant, while continuing to follow
and analyse the procedural developments of existing and newly monitored cases. The
Council has banned both the public and the media from attending court sessions but
has specifically allowed the Mission to monitor all sessions in line with the Mission’s
robust monitoring mandate.
As a consequence of the imposed COVID-19 measures throughout the reporting
period, only some urgent hearings were held. The Mission conducted a review of the
trials being held that may have to recommence because hearings were not held for
three consecutive months. This measure is stipulated in the Kosovo Criminal
Procedure Code and has affected a considerable number of trials, including high profile cases. To date, the parties agreed in most cases being monitored by the Mission
to consider previous testimonies as read, thus avoiding the re-administration of
evidence in 10 cases. While such agreements enable the continuation of adjudication,
they may risk being legally challenged because it is clearly required under the Code
that, in such cases, all evidence should be examined again. The Mission advocated a
legal opinion on the matter by the Supreme Court. Of 40 cases being monitored by
the Mission, to date, in 10, testimonies were considered as read, while, for all others,
it remained to be seen whether that would happen so as to avoid the re -administration
of evidence, which would further delay justice. Furthermore, in one case, the judge
scheduled the hearing just within the deadline and, in another case, the defence
lawyers objected to considering all testimonies as read. The Mission will closely
monitor the outcome of all these cases, 21 of which are considered high-profile ones.
In 10 cases, hearings were adjourned because the courts could not guarantee the
observance of pandemic-related measures in the court rooms.
In addition, the Mission looked into cases that were likely to reach the period of
statutory limitations as a result of hearings having been halted. Meanwhile, the
Mission cooperated closely with the European Union Office in Kosovo/European
Union Special Representative in Kosovo to urge the Kosovo Judicial Council to act
on the cases that would possibly need to recommence.
The Mission repeatedly expressed concern at the high rate of cases being sent
back for retrial by the Court of Appeals, a practice that should be relied on only in
limited and well-grounded circumstances.
Following the Mission’s advocacy, the Kosovo Judicial Council appointed two
Kosovo Serb judges to the Court of Appeals Division in Mitrovica. With those
appointments, effective as from 1 July, the Division now has four Kosovo Serb and
three Kosovo Albanian judges, as prescribed under the justice agreement signed
between the parties within the framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue.
Justice monitors with the Mission participated in the online conference
organized by the Mitrovica-based non-governmental organization Aktiv on the draft
proposal for amendments to the Law on the Use of Languages, providing comments
and advice.
The Mission participated in several working groups dealing with rule of law
reforms. A Mission expert took part in the introductory online meeting of the
functional review of the rule of law sector sub-working group on the judiciary chaired
by the Ministry of Justice. The group will focus on improving accountability,

16/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

professionalism, competence and integrity in the judicial and prosecutorial systems
(including vetting) as part of a comprehensive process leading to the finalization of
an overall strategy on the rule of law sector. The Mission also partic ipated in the
sub-working group on criminal justice, which focuses on the efforts to combat
organized crime and high-level corruption. Moreover, a Mission expert took part in
the online meeting of the sub-working group on anti-corruption focusing on the policy
measures for reforming the anti-corruption institutional framework and increasing
police-prosecution synergies, such as the establishment of the National Bureau for
Combating High-Level Corruption and Anti-Corruption Courts.
In addition, the Ministry of Justice invited the Mission to take part in two
additional working groups. One working group is aimed at addressing accountability,
while the goal of the other working group is to finalize the revised Criminal Procedure
Code. The new Minister of Justice’s proposal on the vetting process caused several
experts from civil society to resign from the working group, which had been
established by the previous government. The new government also suspended
previous decisions aimed at curtailing nepotism or irregularities in the appointment
of diplomats in foreign institutions.
The Mission has continued to advocate the need for relevant legislation, or a
regulation, that allows courts to hold online trial sessions to prevent legal deadlines
from elapsing. According to European Union best practices, judicial authorities in
many European Union member States have passed or amended laws that allow
hearings to take place online.
In February 2020, all Basic Courts in Kosovo began to use an automatic case
assignment system. However, the Basic Court Presidents manually reassigned cases
that had already been automatically assigned to judges under the system. Mission
experts took part in discussions to address the issue, and, together with several other
stakeholders, including the European Union Office in Kosovo, disagreed with the
proposed practice of manual reassignment of cases, given that it provided room for
interference in the allocation of cases.
The Kosovo Law Institute issued a report titled “Justice in the Eyes of Citizens”.
The report is the phase 1 outcome of the Mission-funded project, “Building trust in
the judicial system and enhancing realisation of human rights through lay trial
monitoring”. The project was implemented by the Institute from October 2019 to
March 2020. Eighteen non-expert (lay) monitors, selected from a diverse range of
ages, genders, ethnicities and regions, monitored 360 criminal trial sessions
throughout Kosovo. They evaluated criminal hearings on human rights and procedural
fairness issues, including equality before the law, transparency and impartiality of the
courts, and fair trial rights. The institute analysed the feedback from the lay monitors
and drafted the assessment report.
Mission experts actively participated in a videoconference with the European
Commission for Democracy through Law, also attended by staff of the Office of the
European Union Special Representative in Kosovo and representatives of the
embassies of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America. The Commission issued an opinion on certain provisions
of the Draft Criminal Procedure Code, namely, on trial in absentia and suspension of
officials from office, which reflected the comments and proposals suggested by the
Mission.
Through regular monitoring, the Mission concluded that all Kosovo correctional
facilities were applying adequate protective anti-COVID-19 measures for both staff
and inmates.

20-12455

17/23

S/2020/964

The Mission donated information technology equipment to the Kosovo
Correctional Service to allow inmates to communicate with family members and
facilitate contacts among staff.
The Mission participated in a working group preparing the draft legislation on
the Kosovo Correctional Service. The Mission presented several recommendations on
the revised draft, including on the need to enhance transparency in the work of the
Service.
The Mission continued to monitor the situation at the common crossing points
between Serbia and Kosovo following the lifting of the tariffs on imports from Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and produced an analytical overview of imports of
goods, commercial freight traffic and drivers exiting Kosovo to Serbia.
The Mission facilitated requests for information between Kosovo and Serbian
customs in line with the IBM Technical Protocol mechanism on the exchange of
information, which is part of the agreements reached within the European Union facilitated dialogue. The Mission will continue to monitor and assist to ensure that
the exchange of information mechanism is back on track.
The Mission participated in the working group for the drafting of the new
national IBM strategy. The Mission had repeatedly advocated that the strategy be a
standalone document with a single dedicated budget, which the government finally
accepted.
Mission experts participated in the working group on the introduction of
measures and procedures involving advance passenger information and passenger
name records at Pristina International Airport. The resulting administrative
instruction has now been approved by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This is an
important development, bringing Kosovo in line with European Union guidelines for
combating irregular immigration and improving border control.
The Mission continued regular face-to-face meetings or phone calls with the
Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Civil Registration Agency. The Mission’s
Dialogue Support Unit’s experts on the IBM, Freedom of Movement and Justice
Agreements participated in a two-day seminar chaired by European Union Special
Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue and other Western Balkans regional
issues, Miroslav Lajčák. The Unit provided short briefings on each of the relevant
European Union-facilitated dialogue agreements, focusing on achievements in terms
of implementation and on challenges ahead.
The Mission continued to support the Mitrovica Basic Court and the Court of
Appeals Division in Mitrovica in the implementation of the European Union facilitated justice agreement.
2.2.

Operations
On 27 July, Kosovo and the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation signed a working arrangement increasing cooperation between Kosovo
law enforcement agencies and the Agency. Meanwhile, the Mission has continued to
facilitate accurate and timely information exchange between the Agency and the
Kosovo police on serious crime investigations through its Swedish liaison desk.
The Mission’s formed police unit, as the second security responder in Kosovo,
served as a support to the regional police directorates in Mitrovica South and
Mitrovica North during the protests held by Vetëvendosje. The Mission also assisted
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) operations during the
collection of votes in Kosovo for the Serbian elections held on 21 June through the
presence of a Mission liaison officer at the OSCE operations centre. That was also an

18/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

excellent opportunity to review and rehearse joint procedures and activities with the
Kosovo police and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Kosovo Force.
The Mission supported the Kosovo Institute of Forensic Medicine in exhuming
body remains from graves in the municipalities of Pejë/Peć and Mitrovica, in which
complete remains of potential conflict-related victims were recovered.
The project “Evidence preservation on sexual violence”, in particular the
campaign “Speak up on time”, was supported by the Mission and implemented by the
Institute of Forensic Medicine, in cooperation with the Kosovo police. Some 800
students attended the lectures given by a team composed of two local experts from
the Institute and one member of the Kosovo police.

20-12455

19/23

S/2020/964

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
On 12 March 2020, the Government of the Netherlands declared the
implementation of national measures to enhance public safety in response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Overnight, the Specialist Chambers and
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office activated a business continuity plan, in which the
majority of staff made the transition to telecommuting. The remote work
arrangements have remained in place since then, with only a very limited team at the
premises.
Notwithstanding the special measures in place due to the pandemic, the work of
the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office has continued
uninterrupted and even intensified.
The Specialist Chambers detention facility is fully operational. On 16 March, it
became fully staffed, and all necessary training of staff and technical preparations
were concluded by 1 April.
On 17 March, the call for nominations of judges for appointment to the roster
of international judges closed. The independent selection panel that was appointed
has concluded the selection process and submitted its report to the appointing
authority.
On 23 April, the Specialist Prosecutor notified the President of the Specialist
Chambers of his intent to initiate proceedings before the Specialist Chambers. In
accordance with the Law on the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office, the President assigned a pre-trial judge to review the indictment filed by the
Specialist Prosecutor. The pre-trial judge has up to six months to decide whether to
confirm the indictment.
On 29 and 30 April, the Specialist Chambers judges conducted their annual
plenary by videoconference. During the plenary, the judges elected a new Vice President and adopted 30 amendments to the Specialist Chambers rules of procedure
and evidence (rules).
On 26 May, the Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court issued its
judgment, finding that all 30 adopted rule amendments complied with chapter II of
the Constitution. The adopted amendments therefore entered into force.
The outreach activities carried out by the Specialist Chambers have continued
and quickly moved online in view of the pandemic. Nine outreach events were held
during the reporting period. Six of those events were with students in Kosovo and
three with Albanian- and Serbian-speaking journalists. The Specialist Chambers is
also engaging with its Court Information Network and, on 26 March, hosted an online
meeting to receive feedback on newly produced video clips and outreach activities
planned for the coming months. In the same month, the Specialist Chambers Registrar
signed a grant agreement with the Government of Switzerland concerning outreach
activities planned by the Specialist Chambers for 2020 and 2021. The visitors’
programme of the Specialist Chambers also moved online and continues to welcome
groups to learn about the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
The number of media queries received by the Specialist Chambers increased
with the filings by the Specialist Prosecutor in February and in April, as well as with
queries about the impact that the pandemic may have on Specialist Chambers and
Specialist Prosecutor’s Office operations. During the reporting period, accurate media
reporting increased. This is particularly important in order to reassure victims,
witnesses and others affected that the operations continue without interruption.
20/23

20-12455

S/2020/964

The Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office moved from the
third budgetary period into the fourth when the budget for the pe riod from 15 June
2020 to 14 June 2021 received final approval by the European Council on 11 June
2020.
On 24 June, an updated list of Specialist Counsel eligible to practise before the
Specialist Chambers was published. The current list contains 179 Specialist Counsel,
of whom 89 are qualified to represent victims. The application process remains open.
The President, Registrar and Specialist Prosecutor continued their engagement
with the host State, European Union member States, contributing States and others.
On 9 July, the Principals hosted an online briefing for the ambassadors of the
European Union member States and contributing third States in The Hague. Twentyseven States participated in the briefing, during which they were updated by the
Principals on the most recent developments and participants posed questions.
On 3 September, the legal aid regulations were adopted by the Specialist
Chambers Registrar, following consultations with the President of the Specialist
Chambers, and were published online. The regulations exemplify best practices in
legal aid standards, guaranteeing compliance with the f air trial principles enshrined
in the Constitution and the Law on the Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office, while ensuring the sound financial management of the legal aid
scheme’s resources. The regulations set out the process for suspects or accused before
the Specialist Chambers to receive legal aid, in full or in part, if they have
demonstrated that they cannot afford to pay for their defence or do not receive legal
aid through other means.
The COVID-19 pandemic notwithstanding, the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
continued to implement its mandate. On 24 June, it issued a statement announcing
that it had filed a 10-count indictment in April with the Specialist Chambers for the
court’s consideration, charging Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli and others with a range
of crimes against humanity and war crimes, including murder, enforced disappearance
of persons, persecution and torture. The Specialist Prosecutor deemed it necessary to
issue the public notice of charges because of repeated efforts by Mr. Thaçi and
Mr. Veseli to obstruct and undermine the work of the Specialist Chambers. During
the reporting period, the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office continued to interview
suspects, victims and witnesses, as well as collect and review other evidence . In order
to fulfil its mandate, it continues to require the engagement and support of the
international community, international organizations and individual States.

20-12455

21/23

S/2020/964

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 September 2020)
Country

Women

Men

Total

Germany

–

1

1

Hungary

–

1

1

Russian Federation

1

1

2

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

–

1

1

Total

1

5

6

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 September 2020)

22/23

Country

Women

Men

Total

Czechia

–

2

2

Poland

–

1

1

Republic of Moldova

–

1

1

Romania

–

1

1

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

1

1

2

Total

1

7

8

20-12455

S/2020/964

20-12455

23/23
