10

31/1.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Admission of the Republic of Seychelles
to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 16 August 1976 that the Republic of Seychelles should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations, 2
Having considered the application for membership
of the Republic of Seychelles, 3
Decides to admit the Republic of Seychelles to membership in the United Nations.
1 st plenary meeting
21 September 1976
31/3.

Observer status for the Commonwealth
Secretariat at the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the States members of the Commonwealth for co-operation between the United Nations
and the Commonwealth Secretariat,
1. Decides to invite the Commonwealth Secretariat
to participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution.
33rd plenary meeting
18 October 1976

(a) Any other form of referendum or consultation
which may hereafter be organized on Comorian territory
in Mayotte by France;
( b) Any foreign legislation purporting to legalize
any French colonial presence on Comorian territory in
Mayotte;
2. Strongly condemns the presence of France in
Mayotte, which constitutes a violation of the national
unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of the independent Republic of the Comoros;
3. Calls upon the Government of France to withdraw immediately from the Comorian island of Mayotte,
an integral part of the independent Republic of the
Comoros, and to respect its sovereignty;
4. Invites all Member States to render effective
assistance, individually and collectively, to the Comorian
State and to co-operate with it in all fields with a view
to enabling it to defend and safeguard its independence,
the integrity of its territory and its national sovereignty;
5. Appeals to all Member States to intervene, individually and collectively, with the Government of
France to persuade it to abandon once and for all its
plan to detach the Comorian island of Mayotte from
the Republic of the Comoros;
6. Calls upon the Government of France to enter
into negotiations immediately with the Government of
the Comoros concerning the implementation of the
present resolution.
39th plenary meeting
21 October 1976

31/6.
31/ 4. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the people of the Republic of the
Comoros as a whole, in the referendum of 22 December 1974, expressed by an overwhelming majority its
will to accede to independence in conditions of political
unity and territorial integrity,
Considering that the referendums imposed on the inhabitants of the Comorian island of Mayotte constitute
a violation of the sovereignty of the Comorian State
and of its territorial integrity,
Considering that the occupation by France of the
Comorian island of Mayotte constitutes a flagrant encroachment on the national unity of the Comorian
State, a Member of the United Nations,
Considering that such an attitude on the part of
France constitutes a violation of the principles of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, in particular
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 concerning the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples, which guarantees the
national unity and territorial integrity of such countries,
1. Condemns and considers null and void the referendums of 8 February and 11 April 1976 organized
in the Comorian island of Mayotte by the Government
of France, and rejects:
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/31/176.
3 A/31/173-S/12164. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council. Thirty-first Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1976.

Policies of apartheid of the Government
of South Africa4
A

THE SO-CALLED INDEPENDENT TRANSKEI AND OTHER
BANTUSTANS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3411 D (XXX) of 28 November 197 5 condemning the establishment of bantustans by the racist regime of South Africa,
Taking note that the racist regime of South Africa
declared the sham "independence" of the Transkei on
26 October 1976,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid5 and its special reports, 6
1. Strongly condemns the establishment of bantustans as designed to consolidate the inhuman policies
of apartheid, to destroy the territorial integrity of the
country, to perpetuate white minority domination and
to dispossess the African people of South Africa of
their inalienable rights;
2. Rejects the declaration of "independence" of the
Transkei and declares it invalid;
3. Calls upon all Governments to deny any form of
recognition to the so-called independent Transkei and
to refrain from having any dealings with the so-called
independent Transkei or other bantustans;
4 Sec

also sect. I above, foot-note 9.
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/3 l /22).
ii Ibid., Supplement No. 22A (A/31/22/ Add.1-3).

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Requests all States to take effective measures
to prohibit all individuals, corporations and other institutions under their jurisdiction from having any dealings
with the so-oalled independent Transkei or other bantustans.
42nd plenary meeting
26 October 1976

B
UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Trust
Fund for South Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the Trust Fund, 7 to which is annexed the report
of the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations
Trust Fund for South Africa,
Reaffirming that humanitarian assistance by the international community to all those persecuted under
repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa,
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia is appropriate and
essential,
Deeply concerned over the massive repression of
opponents of apartheid and racial discrimination in
South Africa, including the killing of numerous peaceful demonstrators,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
2. Endorses the urgent appeal of the Committee
of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa for more generous contributions to the Trust
Fund;
3. Commends all voluntary agencies which are engaged in rendering humanitarian assistance to the victims of apartheid and racial discrimination.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976
C
SOLIDARITY WITH SOUTH AFRICAN POLITICAL
PRISONERS

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the
South African people for the total eradication of apartheid and the exercise of the right of self-determination
by all the inhabitants of South Africa,
Noting that the racist regime of South Africa has
constantly defied the United Nations resolutions calling
upon it to end repression of the leaders of the oppressed
people and other opponents of apartheid and to release
all ,persons imprisoned or restricted for struggling against
the system of apartheid,
Gravely concerned about the brutal massacres in
Soweto and other areas of South Africa and the incarceration of schoolchildren and other persons demonstrating against apartheid and about the continuation
of these atrocities in defiance of Security Council resolution 392 (1976) of 19 June 1976,
7 A/31/277.

11

Commending the heroism and sacrifices of the South
African people in their struggle for liberation,
l. Condemns the racist regime of South Africa
for its ruthless repression of the oppressed people of
South Africa and other opponents of apartheid;
2. Reaffirms its solidarity with all South Africans
struggling against apartheid for the establishment of
majority rule and the exercise of their right to selfdetermination and for the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations;
3. Demands the immediate and unconditional release of all persons imprisoned or restricted for their
involvement in the struggle for liberation in South
Africa;
4. Proclaims 11 October the Day of Solidarity with
South African Political Prisoners;
5. Requests the Centre against Apartheid, in consultation with the Special Committee against Apartheid,
to intensify publicity for the cause of all those persecuted for their opposition to apartheid in South
Africa.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976

D
ARMS EMBARGO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions concerning the arms embargo
against South Africa,
Deeply concerned over the explosive situation in
South Africa resulting from the wanton killings by the
racist regime of hundreds of peaceful demonstrators
against apartheid and racial discrimination including
many schoolchildren,
'
Condemning the racist regime of South Africa for
its colonial war against the Namibian people and its
repeated acts of aggression against the People's Republic
of Angola and the Republic of Zambia,
Noting that the racist regime of South Africa has
i:sed weapons received from its traditional allies, particularly France, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Israel, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, as well
as other foreign countries, for repression in South Africa
and aggression against other States,
Noting further that the racist regime of South Africa
has supplied military equipment to the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia in flagrant violation of the resolutions of the Security Council,
Noting with concern the continued rapid increase in
the military budget of South Africa and the continued
violations of the arms embargo against South Africa
by its traditional allies, particularly France, the Federal
Republ~c of Germany, Israel, the United Kingdom and
the Umted States, as well as other foreign countries,
Mi~ful of the primary responsibility of the Security
Coun_cil for the maintenance of international peace and
security,
Strongly convinced that mandatory measures, under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to
secure the full implementation of the arms emb;rgo
against South Africa are essential to prevent a further
aggravation of the situation,

12

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

--------------------

Expressing serious regret that three permanent members of the Security Council-France, the United Kingdom and the United States-have so far prevented such
measures and thereby facilitated the militarization of
South Africa,
1. Requests once again the Security Council to take
urgent action, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, to ensure the complete cessation by
all States of the supply of arms, ammunition, m~l~tary
vehicles and spare parts thereof, and any other m1ht~ry
equipment to South Africa, as well as any co-operat10n
to enable the building-up of military and police forces
in South Africa;
2. Further requests the Security Council to call
upon all Governments, in particular:
(a) To implement fully the arms embargo against
South Africa, without any exception as to the type of
weapons, and to prohibit any violations of the arms
embargo by companies and individuals within their
jurisdiction;
( b) To refrain from importing any military supplies manufactured by, or in collaboration with, South
Africa;
(c) To terminate any existing military arrangements with the racist regime of South Africa and to
refrain from entering into or planning any such arrangements;
(d) To prohibit any institutions, agencies or companies, within their national jurisdiction, from delivering to South Africa or placing at its disposal any equipment or fissionable material or technology that will
enable the racist regime of South Africa to acquire
nuclear-weapon capability;
3. Calls upon the Governments of France, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America to adopt a positive
policy to enable the Security Council to take effective
action under Chapter VII of the Charter;
4. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid to continue to promote the full implementation of the arms embargo against South Africa
and, to this end, to launch a special campaign to secure
the widest public support for the arms embargo.

Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid concerning relations between
Israel and South Africa, 8
1. Strongly condemns the continuing and increasing
collaboration by Israel with the racist regime of South
Africa as a flagrant violation of the resolutions of the
United Nations and as an encouragement to the racist
regime of South Africa to persist in its criminal policies;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate
widely the report of the Special Committee against
Apartheid, in various languages, in order to mobilize
public opinion against the collaboration by Israel with
the racist regime of South Africa.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976
1

F

1

58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976
E
RELATIONS BETWEEN ISRAEL AND SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its repeated condemnations of the strengthening of relations and collaboration between the racist
regime of South Africa and Israel in the political, military, economic and other fields, as contained in General
Assembly resolutions 3151 G (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3324 E (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 and
3411 G (XXX) of 10 December 1975,
Deeply concerned about the fact that Israel has sent
paramilitary personnel to train South African troops
and about the sale of warships and other war materiel
by Israel to South Africa in flagrant violation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council,

Apartheid IN SPORTS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2775 D (XXVI) of 29 November 1971 and 3411 E (XXX) of 28 November
1975 on apartheid in sports,
Reaffirming its unqualified support of the Olympic
principle that there should be no discrimination on the
grounds of race, religion or political affiliation,
Recognizing the importance in the international campaign against apartheid of the boycott of South African
sports teams selected on the basis of apartheid,
Regretting that some national and internationa'l sports
bodies and individual sportsmen have continued contacts with racist South African sports bodies in violation
of the Olympic principle and resolutions of the United
Nations,
Convinced that effective measures must be taken, as
a matter of priority during the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to abo!i~h
apartheid in all fields,
Taking note of the Declaration9 and the Programme
of Action 10 adopted by the International Seminar on
the Eradication of Apartheid and in Support of the
Struggle for Liberation in South Africa, held at Havana
from 24 to 28 May 1976,
Noting also the resolution of the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976,
endorsing the proposal for an international convention
against apartheid in sports and requesting the United
Nations to give urgent consideration to the formulation
of such a convention, 11
Noting further that in its report the Special Committee
against Apartheid, inter alia, recommended that the
General Assembly should consider the proposal for an
int~rnational convention against apartheid in sports and
"0/]icial Rffords of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplmzcnt No. 22A (A.131/22/ Add.1-3), document A/
3 I /22/ Add.2.
n A/31/104-S/12092, annex I. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1976.
10 A/31/104-S/12092. annex IT. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1976.
11 A/31/197. annex lV. sect. A. resolution 6.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Co_m_m_i_tt_e_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
l3

that meanwhile the Assembly should adopt a declaration
on apartheid in sports, 12
1. Welcomes the proposal for an international convention against apartheid in sports t? pr:on_iote_ adherence
to the Olympic principle of non-discn~mat10n and to
discourage and deny support to sporting events organized in violation of that principle;
2. Decides to establish an Ad Hoe Committee_ on
the Drafting of an International Con~e~tion agamst
Apartheid in Sports, compose~ of the exist~ng members
of the Special Committee agamst Apartheid and seven
other Member States to be appointed by the President
of the General Assembly on the basis of equitable geographical distribution;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to pr~pare. a
draft declaration on apartheid in sports, as an mtenm
measure and to submit it to the General Assembly at
its thirty-second session;
4. Further requests the Ad Hoe Committee to undertake preparatory _steps t?wards the . dr:afting of an
international convention agamst apartheid m sports and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session;
5. Urges all States to implement the. recomme~dations contained in the report of the Specrnl Committee
against Apartheid concerning apartheid in sports, 13
namely:
(a) To convey the Unit~d Nations resol_ution~ on
apartheid in sports to all national sports bodies with a
request that necessary action be taken to implement
those resolutions;
( b) To refuse any official sponsorship, assistance or
encouragement to sports contacts with South Africa,
including official receptions to teams and pay1!1ents of
grants to sports bodies or teams or sportsmen mvolved
in sporting competitions with South African teams or
sportsmen;
(c) To refuse visas to South African sports bodies
or teams or sportsmen, except for non-racial sports
bodies endorsed by the 1Special Committee and the
liberation movements;
(d) To deny facilities to sports bodies or teams or
sportsmen for visits to South Africa;
(e) To encourage national sports bodies concerned
to support the exclusion of South Africa from international sports bodies and tournaments;
6. Calls upon Member States and international
sporting organizations. to s~pport ~ctive)y projects undertaken in collaborat10n with the hberat10n movements
towards the formation of non-racial teams truly representative of South Africa.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976

G
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE
AGAINST Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid 14 and its special reports, 15
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/31/22), vol. I, sect. II, paras. 285
and 286.
13 Ibid., para. 284.
14 Ibid., Supplement No. 22 (A/3 I /22).
1:; Ibid., Suppleme11t No. 22A (A/31/22/ Add.1-3).

Commending the Special Committee for its activities
in the discharge of the mandate given to it by the General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the work of the Centre
against Apartheid in assisting the Special Committee,
Considering the need for further expansion of the
activities of the Special Committee-in close co-operation with the specialized agencies, the movement of nonaligned countries, the Organization of African Un!ty,
the Leacrue of Arab States, the -South African liberation
movemtnts recognized by the Organization of African
Unity, and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations-at this crucial stage of the
struggle for the total erad\cation of aparthei~ a!ld the
exercise by the South Afncan people of their nght to
self-determination,
I. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid to continue and to intensify its activities to promote
concerted international action against apartheid in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
2. Requests all organs of the United Nations concerned with problems of decolonization to co-operate
and consult with the Special Committee with a view to
ensuring the co-ordination of efforts;
3.

Authorizes the Special Committee:

(a) To send missions composed of members of
the Special Committee and representatives of the African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania to Governments of Member States, to the headquarters of specialized agencies
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, as well as trade union confederations, as
required, for consultations to promote the international
campaign against apartheid;

( b) To take appropriate steps to promote closer
co-operation with the movement of non-aligned countries, the Organization of African Unity and other
appropriate intergovernmental organizations;
( c) To participate in conferences concerned with
apartheid;

(d) To invite representatives of the South African
national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity and those of other organizations, as well as experts on apartheid, for consultations
on various aspects of apartheid and on action against
apartheid;

4. Authorizes the Special Committee to organize
World Conference for Action against Apartheid in
1977, in accordance with the recommendations contained in paragraphs 296 to 302 of its report; 14

a

5. Further authorizes the Special Committee to
convene an International Conference of Trade Unions
against Apartheid, in accordance with paragraphs 269
to 274 of its report; 14
6. Approves the recommendations contained in the
report of the Special Committee concerning information activity against apartheid by the United Nations
and the specialized agencies 1 G and requests it to take
appropriate action towards the implementation of those
recommendations;
tt: !hid.,

Supplement No. 22A (A/31/22/ Add.1-3), document

A 1 3 I 1 22/ Add.3, sect. III.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

14

7. Authorizes the Special Committee to establish
an award to be presented to persons who have, in cooperation with the United Nations and in solidarity
with the South African liberation movements, contributed significantly to the international campaign against
apartheid;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to enable the Centre against Apartheid to
continue to provide effective assistance to the Special
Committee;
9. Invites all specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the discharge
of its task.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976

8. Requests the International Monetary Fund to
refrain forthwith from extending credits to South Africa;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights to give special
attention to the scope and consequences of the activities of the transnational corporations in South Africa;
l 0. Commends all those Governments which have
ceased all economic collaboration with the racist regime
of South Africa in compliance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions;
l 1. Commends all anti-apartheid movements,
churches, trade unions and other organizations which
arc engaged in shareholder actions or other activities
to discourage collaboration by transnational corporations with South Africa.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976

H
I
ECONOMIC COLLABORATION WITH SOUTH AFRICA
SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid17 and its special reports, 18
Recalling its resolutions on the policies of apartheid
of the racist regime of South Africa,
Noting with grave concern that some Governments,
in pursuing strategic and economic and other interests,
continue to collaborate with the racist regime of South
Africa and thereby encourage it to persist in its criminal
policies,
1. Proclaims that any collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa constitutes a hostile act against
the oppressed people of South Africa and a contemptuous defiance of the United Nations and the international community;
2. Strongly condemns the action of those States
and foreign economic and other interests which continue
to collaborate with the racist regime of South Africa;
3. Calls upon Member States still engaged in economic collaboration and trade with the racist regime
of South Africa to implement the relevant General Assembly resolutions and to cease forthwith any such
collaboration with that regime;
4. Calls upon a:11 Governments to take effective
action to prohibit all loans to or investments in South
Africa by banks and corporations within their national
jurisdiction;
5. Condemns the intensified activities of transnational corporations, which continue to exploit the racially oppressed people of South Africa and plunder
its natural resources and thereby are accomplices to the
crimes of the apartheid regime;
6. Requests all agencies within the United Nations
system to refrain from any dealings with corporations
which provide any loans to, or make any investment
in, South Africa;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Transnational Corporations
to study and publicize the involvement of transnational
corporations in the apartheid economy of South Africa;
17 Ibid., Supplement No. 22

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid17 and its special reports, 18
Taking note of the national uprising of the oppressed
people of South Africa against the apartheid regime,
Outraged by the continuing massacres and other
atrocities by the racist regime of South Africa against
schoolchildren and other peaceful demonstrators against
apartheid and racial discrimination,
Gravely concerned about the military and other activities of the racist regime of South Africa and, in particular, about the nuclear collaboration aimed at the
establishment of nuclear installations and the transfer
of nuclear technology to South Africa,
Conscious that mercenaries and their organizations
are active in the territory of South Africa and participate
in the acts of aggression of that country against the
African peoples and States members of the Organization of African Unity,
Convinced that the situation in South Africa constitutes a grave threat to international peace and security,
Reaffirming that the policy and practice of apartheid
constitutes a crime against humanity,
Welcoming the coming into force of the International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid,19
Mindful of the special responsibility of the United
Nations and the international community towards the
oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation
movements and towards those imprisoned, restricted or
exiled for their struggle against apartheid,
1. Proclaims that the racist regime of South Africa
is illegitimate and has no right to represent the people
of South Africa;
2. Reaffirms that the national liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity-the
African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania-are the authentic representatives of the overwhelming majority of the South
African people;

(A/31/22).

1s Ibid., Supplement No. 22A (A/31/22/ Add.1-3).

Ul Resolution

3068 (XXVIll), annex.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Strongly condemns the racist regime of South
Africa for its criminal policies and practices of apartheid, its massacres of black people, including schoolchildren, and its ruthless repression of all those struggling against apartheid;
4. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation
movements, by all possible means, for the seizure of
power by the people and the exercise of their inalienable
right to self-determination;
5. Recognizes, in particular, that the consistent
defiance by the racist regime of South Africa of United
Nations resolutions on apartheid and the continued
brutal repression, including indiscriminate mass killings,
by that regime leave no alternative to the oppressed
people of South Africa but to resort to armed struggle
to achieve their legitimate rights;
6. Declares that the situation in South Africa, resulting from the policies and actions of the racist regime,
constitutes a grave threat to the peace, requiring action
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Demands the cessation of any form of military
and nuclear co-operation with the racist regime of
South Africa;
8. Condemns the racist regime of South Africa for
encouragement of the activities of the mercenaries and
their organizations in its territory and for their use
against the African peoples and States members of the
Organization of African Unity;
9. Urgently appeals to all States to enact laws
declaring the recruitment, financing, training, transit
and assembly of mercenaries for the racist regime of
South Africa in their territories a punishable crime and
prohibiting their citizens from enlisting as mercenaries;
10. Calls upon the Governments of France, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, in particular:
(a) To desist from misusing their veto power in
the Security Council to protect the racist regime of
South Africa;

( b) To enable the Security Council to determine
the existence in South Africa of a threat to the peace
and to exercise its responsibilities under the Charter;
( c) Not to obstruct but to facilitate the adoption
of a mandatory arms embargo and other indispensable
measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter, to deal
with the grave situation in South Africa;

11. Appeals to all States and organizations to provide all assistance required by the oppressed people
of South Africa and their national liberation movements
during their legitimate struggle, in the light of the recommendations of the Special Committee against Apartheid;
12. Further calls upon Member States and the
specialized agencies, through emergency joint projects
and financial assistance, to help Lesotho and other
countries bordering South Africa to ensure the provision
of educational facilities to the rapidly growing number
of refugee students from South Africa;
13. Appeals to all Governments which have not
yet done so to become parties to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid;

15

14. Authorizes the Special Committee against
Apartheid to take all appropriate steps to promote such
assistance, including the establishment of a joint United
Nations/Organization of African Unity fund financed
by voluntary contributions, as recommended in paragraph 264 of its report, 17 and to assist the African
National Congress of South Africa and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania to maintain offices at United
Nations Headquarters in New York;
15. Commends the anti-apartheid and solidarity
movements and other non-governmental organizations
which have taken action against apartheid and in support of the South African national liberation movements;
16. Condemns the racist regime of South Africa for
its acts of aggression against neighbouring independent
African States which have assisted the South African
national liberation movements, and invites all Governments to provide those States, at their request, with all
necessary assistance for defence against aggression;
17. Proclaims 16 June the International Day of
Solidarity with the Struggling People of South Africa
and calls upon Member States to commemorate this
day in the most fitting way.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976

J
PROGRAMME OF ACTION AGAINST Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid2° and its special reports, 21
Welcoming the Declaration22 and the Programme of
Action 23 adopted by the International Seminar on the
Eradication of Apartheid and in Support of the Struggle
for Liberation in South Africa, held at Havana from
24 to 28 May 1976,
Taking note of the resolutions adopted by the Council
of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at
its twenty-seventh ordinary session, held at Port Louis
from 24 June to 3 July 1976,24
Taking note also of the declarations and resolutions
of the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from
16 to 19 August 1976, 211
Considering the need for a programme of action to
be implemented by Governments, intergovernmental organizations, trade unions, churches, anti-apartheid and
solidarity movements and other non-governmental organizations in order to assist the people of South Africa
in their struggle for the total eradication of apartheid
and the exercise of the right of self-determination by
all the people of South Africa irrespective of race,
colour and creed,
20 Q_(Jicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/3 l /22).
~ 1 /hid., Supplement No. 22A (A/31/22/ Add.1-3).
22 A/31/ 104-S/ 12092, annex I. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for April, Mav and June 1976.
23 A /31/104-S/ 12092, annex II. For the printed text, see
0/Ticiol Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1976.
24A/3l/196 and Corr.I, annex.
2 r. See A/31/197, annexes I to IV.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

16

l. Commends to all Governments, organizations
and individuals the Programme of Action against Apartheid annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests all United Nations organs and specialized agencies concerned to participate in the implementation of the Programme of Action, in close
co-operation with the Special Committee against Apartheid;
3. Requests the Specia'l Committee, in co-operation
with the Organization of African Unity, to promote the
implementation of the Programme of Action and report,
from time to time, on the progress achieved;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure maximum publicity to the Programme of Action and provide
all necessary assistance to the Special Committee in
promoting its implementation.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976

ANNEX
Programme of Action against Apartheid
CONTENTS

Page

Section

I.
II.
III.

IV.

Introduction

16

Action by Governments
Action by the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations
Action by trade unions, churches, anti-apartheid
and solidarity movements and other non-governmental organizations
Action by the Special Committee against Apartheid

17
18

18
19

INTRODUCTION

1. The abolition of racist domination and exploitation in
South Africa and assistance to the South African people to
establish a non-racial society have become one of the primary
concerns of the United Nations and the international community.
2. Apartheid, like slavery, must be eradicated because it
is a crime against humanity.
3. Apartheid must be eradicated because it is an affront
to human dignity and a grave threat to international peace
and security.
4. Apartheid must be eradicated so that the continent of
Africa may be finally emancipated, after all the miseries and
tragedies to which it has been subjected for centuries, and
enabled to play its rightful role in international affairs.

5. Apartheid must be eradicated because that is indispensable for the elimination of racism and for laying the
basis for genuine international co-operation.
6. For thirty years the United Nations has been seized
with the problem of racism in South Africa. It bas made
patient efforts to persuade the racist minority regimes to
abandon the bitter legacy of the past and to work for a peaceful solution in accordance with the principles of human
equality and international co-operation.

9. The black people, who constitute the overwhelming
majority of the population of the country, have been constantly
humiliated and brutally exploited. Millions of people have
been forcibly moved from their homes to barren reserves or
urban ghettos in an attempt to enforce racial segregation.
Millions of Africans have been imprisoned under pass laws
and other racist legislation. Thousands of patriots have been
sentenced to long years in prison or tortured or banished.
Hundreds of people have been massacred for peaceful demonstrations against racism.
10. The African workers have been denied elementary
trade-union rights; they have been imprisoned or killed for
nothing more than the "offence" of participating in strikes.
11. The struggle of the South African people against this
racist monster has constituted a notable contribution to the
struggle of humanity for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
12. The General Assembly recalls that, in resolution 3411 C
(XXX) of 28 November 1975, it proclaimed that the
United Nations and the international community have a
special responsibility towards the oppressed people of South
Africa and their liberation movements, and towards those
imprisoned, restricted or exiled for their struggle against
apartheid, and reiterated its determination to devote increasing
attention and all necessary resources to concert international
efforts for the speedy eradication of apartheid in South Africa
and the liberation of the South African people.

13. The General Assembly commends the courageous
struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa, under the
leadership of their national liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity, to abolish racism. It
reaffirms that their struggle for the total eradication of apartheid and the exercise of the right to self-determination by
all the inhabitants of South Africa is fully legitimate. It
reiterates its solidarity with all South Africans struggling
against apartheid and for the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.
14. The General Assembly condemns the racist regime of
South Africa for its repeated and flagrant defiance of United
Nations resolutions. It denounces the manoeuvres of that
regime to perpetuate and obtain acquiescence in its abhorrent
apartheid policies. It denounces, in particular, the creation of
bantustans as designed to deprive the African people of their
inalienable rights in the country as a whole.
15. The General Assembly declares that the racist regime
of South Africa is illegitimate and has no right to represent the
people of South Africa. It recognizes that the national liberation
movements are the authentic representatives of the great
majority of the people of South Africa.
16. It is convinced that the collaboration by some Governments and vested interests with the racist regime of South
Africa and their total disregard of United Nations resolutions
and the legitimate demands of the South African people have
impeded efforts for the eradication of apartheid and encouraged
the racist regime to persist in its inhuman policies.
17. Those Governments and economic interests have enabled the racist regime of South Africa to build up a military
machine for the suppression of the people and for aggression
against neighbouring States. They have made profits, amounting
to billions of dollars, through the exploitation of African
labour in South Africa. They bear a grave responsibility for
the sufferings of the South African people and for the threat
to international peace resulting from the situation.

7. But these regimes have proved to be immune to
persuasion. They have met the peaceful and just demands of
the oppressed people by ruthless repression and have caused
immense suffering in a desperate effort to preserve and consolidate racist domination.

18. The General Assembly considers apartheid a matter
of universal concern. Governments, organizations and peoples
all over the world must increase their support to the righteous
struggle of the South African people for justice and for their
inalienable right to self-determination, under the leadership of
their national liberation movements.

8. The record of the apartheid regime which seized power
in 1948 has few parallels in history for its inhumanity.

19. The General Assembly mandates the Special Committee against Apartheid to launch-in co-operation with Gov-

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(xiv)

To refrain from any other form of military cooperation with South Africa;

(xv)

To prohibit any violations of the arms embargo by
corporations, institutions or individuals within their
jurisdiction;

(xvi)

To refrain from any collaboration with South
Africa in the nuclear field;

(xvii)

To prohibit any institutions, agencies or companies,
within their national jurisdiction, from delivering to
South Africa or placing at its disposal any equipment or fissionable material or technology that will
enable the racist regime of South Africa to acquire
nuclear-weapon technology;

ernments, specialized agencies and other intergovernmental
organizations, trade unions, chur~hes and ot~er non-g~wernmental organizations-an international campa1?n to assist_ !he
oppressed people of South Africa at this crucial and dec1S1ve
stage of their struggle for liberation:
No arms to South Africa!
No profit from apartheid!
No compromise with racism!
I.

ACTION BY GOVERNMENTS

20 The General Assembly calls upon all Governments,
irrespective of any other differences, to _unite in action against
the crime of apartheid and to take vigorous and concerted
measures in implementation of United Nations resolutions to
isolate the apartheid regime and assist the oppres~ed people <;>f
South Africa and their liberation movements until they attam
freedom.
21. The General Assembly calls upon all Governments, in
particular:
A. Diplomatic, consular and other official relations

C.

Economic collaboration

To terminate all economic collaboration with South
Africa and, in particular:
(c)

(a) To terminate diplomatic, consular a_nd other offici~l
relations with the racist regime of South Afnca, or to refram
from establishing such relations;
B. Military and nuclear collaboration
(b) To implement fully the arms emba:go against_ Sout_h
Africa without any exceptions or reservat10ns and, m this
connexion:
(i) To refrain from the sale and shipment of arms,
ammunition of all types and any vehicles or equipment for use of the armed forces and paramilitary
organizations in South Africa;
(ii) To refrain from the sale and shipment of equipment
and materials for the manufacture and maintenance
of arms, ammunition and military vehicles and equipment in South Africa;
(iii) To refrain from the supply of spare parts for
vehicles and equipment used by the armed forces
and paramilitary organizations in South Africa;

(iv)

17

To revoke any licences or patents granted to the
racist regime of South Africa or to South African
companies for the manufacture of arms, ammunition
and military vehicles and equipment and to refrain
from granting such licences and patents;

(i)

To refrain from supplying petroleum, petroleum products or other strategic materials to South Africa;

( ii)

To refrain from extending loans, investments and
technical assistance to the racist regime of South
Africa and companies registered in South Africa;

(iii)

To prohibit loans by banks or other financial institutions in their countries to the racist regime of South
Africa or South African companies;

(iv)

To prohibit economic and financial interests under
their national jurisdiction from co-operating with the
racist regime of South Africa and companies registered in South Africa;

(v)

To deny tariff and other preferences to South African
exports and any inducements or guarantees for investment in South Africa;

(vi)

To take appropriate action in international agencies
and organizations-such as the European Economic
Community, the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, the International Monetary Fund and the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development-for denial by them of all assistance and commercial or other facilities to the South African regime;

(vii)

To take appropriate action, separately or collectively,
against transnational companies collaborating with
South Africa;
D.

Airlines and shipping lines

(v)

To prohibit investment in, or technical assistance
for, the manufacture of arms and ammunition, aircraft, naval craft and other military vehicles and
equipment in South Africa;

(d) To refuse landing and passage facilities to all aircraft
belonging to the racist regime of South Africa and companies
registered under the laws of South Africa;

(vi)

To terminate any existing military arrangements
with the racist regime of South Africa and to refrain
from entering into any such arrangements;

flag;

(vii)

To refrain from providing training for members of
the South African armed forces;

(viii)

To refrain from any joint military exercises with
South Africa;

(ix)

(x)

To prohibit warships or military aircraft from visiting South African ports and airports, and South
African warships or military aircraft from visiting
their territories;
To prohibit visits of military personnel to South
Africa and visits by South African military personnel to their countries;

(xi)

To refrain from exchanges of military, naval or
air attaches with South Africa;

(xii)

To refrain from purchasing any military supplies
manufactured by, or in collaboration with, South
Africa;

(xiii)

To refrain from any communications or contacts
with the South African military establishment or
installations;

( e)

To close ports to all vessels flying the South African

(f) To prohibit airlines and shipping lines registered in
their countries from providing services to and from South
Africa;

E.

Emigration

To prohibit or discourage the flow of immigrants,
particularly skilled and technical personnel, to South Africa;
(g)

F.

Cultural, educational, sporting and other collaboration
with South Africa

( h) To suspend cultural, educational, sporting and other
exchanges with the racist regime and with organizations or
institutions in South Africa which practise apartheid;
(i) To implement United Nations resolutions on apartheid
in sports and, in particular:

(i)

To refrain from all contact with sports bodies established on the basis of apartheid or with racially selected
sports teams from South Africa;

(ii)

To withhold any support from sporting events which
are organized in violation of the Olympic principle
with the participation of racially selected teams from
South Africa:

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

18
(iii)

G.

To encourage sports organizations to refrain from any
exchanges with racially selected teams from South
Africa;
Assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa

(j) To provide financial and material assistance, directly
or through the Organization of African Unity, to the South
African liberation mowments recognized by that organization;
(k) To encourage public collections in the country for assistance to the South African liberation movements;

(/) To contribute generously and regularly to the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
the United Nations Trust Fund for Publicity against Apartheid
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental funds for
assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and their
liberation movements;
(m) To encourage judicial organizations, other appropriate
bodies and the public in general to provide assistance to those
persecuted by the racist regime of South Africa for their struggle against apartheid;
(n) To grant asylum and extend travel facilities and
educational and employment opportunities to refugees from
South Africa;
(o) To encourage the activities of anti-apartheid and
solidarity movements and other organizations engaged in
providing political and material assistance to the victims of
apartheid and to the South African liberation movements;

H.

Dissemination of information on apartheid

(p) To ensure, in co-operation with the United Nations
and the South African liberation movements, the widest possible dissemination of information on apartheid and on the
struggle for liberation in South Africa;

To encourage the establishment of national organizations for the purpose of enlightening public opinion on the
evils of apartheid;
(q)

(r) To encourage the information media to contribute
effectively to the international campaign against apartheid;

(s) To provide broadcasting facilities to South African
liberation movements;
To take all necessary measures against the operations
of propaganda organizations of the racist regime of South
Africa and of private organizations which advocate apartheid;
(t)

I.

Other measures

(u) To accede to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid; 26
( v) To observe annually the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, on 21 March, and the
Day of Solidarity with South African Political Prisoners,
on 11 October;
To promote action by intergovernmental organizations
in support of the struggle for liberation in South Africa;
(w)

To provide, at their request, all necessary assistance
to independent African States subjected to acts of aggression
by the racist regime of South Africa in order to enable them
to defend their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
(x)

II.

ACTION BY THE SPECIALIZED AGENCIES AND OTHER
INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS

22. The General Assembly calls upon all specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations to contribute
to the maximum to the international campaign against apartheid. It suggests in particular that they:
(a) Exclude the racist regime of South Africa from any
participation in their organizations;
(b)

Deny any assistance to the racist regime of South

Africa;
26 Resolution

3068 (XXVIII), annex.

( c)
Invite representatives of the South African liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity
to attend, inter alia. their conferences and seminars and make
financial provision for their participation;

(d) Provide appropriate assistance to the oppressed people
of South Africa and to their liberation movements;
( c) Disseminate information against apartheid in cooperation with the U nitcd N ,ttions;
(/) Provide employment within their secretariats and assistance for education and training to the oppressed people of
South Africa.

III.

ACTION BY TRADE UNIONS,
AND SOLIDARITY MOVE"\fENTS

CHURCHES, ANTI-apartheid
AND OTHER NON-GOVERN·

MENTAL ORGANIZATIONS

23. The General Assembly commends the activities of all
public organizations in denouncing the racist regime of South
Africa, in supporting United Nations resolutions against apartheid, in assisting the oppressed people of South Africa and in
mobilizing public opinion against apartheid.
24. The General Assembly encourages them to concert and
redouble their efforts, in co-operation with the Special Committee against Apartheid and with the Centre against Apartheid, and, in particular:
(a) To exert their influence to persuade Governments
which continue to collaborate with the racist regime of South
Africa to desist from such collaboration;

(b) To press all Governments to implement United Nations
resolutions against apartheid;
(c)

To expand campaigns for the boycott of South African

goods;
(d) To intensify campaigns against banks and other transnational companies which collaborate with South Africa;
(e) To establish solidarity funds and provide assistance to
the South African liberation movements;

(/)

To assist political refugees from South Africa;

(g) To publicize the struggle for liberation in South
Africa;
(h) To observe annually the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, on 21 March, and the
Day of Solidarity with South African Political Prisoners,
on 11 October.

25. The General Assembly calls upon trade unions, in
particular:
(a) To organize rallies and information campaigns among
the workers to make them fully aware of the problem of
apartheid and to secure their collaboration in industrial action
against South Africa;
(b) To support internationally co-ordinated boycotts of
South African goods:
( c) To organize international trade-union action to ban
the handling of goods going to and from South Africa;
(d) To investigate the operations of companies with subsidiaries inside South Africa;
( e) To undertake, in the countries concerned, industrial
action against transnational companies which refuse to recognize African trade unions in South Africa and fail to comply
with internationally recognized labour standards;
(f) To give moral and financial support to the African
and non-racial trade unions in South Africa, including legal
assistance to imprisoned and restricted trade unionists;

(g) To intensify the campaigns against the emigration of
workers to South Africa;
( h) To request workers not to handle any arms orders to
South Africa and tn give full support to those workers who,
on grounds of comcience, refuse to work on such orders.

26. The General Assembly appeals to churches and religious
organizations, in particular:

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(a) To exert all their influence and efforts to oppose any
form of collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) To expand campaigns against banks and transnational
corporations collaborating with South Africa;

( c) To provide all forms of assistance to the oppressed
people of South Africa and to their liberation movements;
(d) To disseminate information on the inhumanity of
apartheid and on the righteous struggk of the oppressed people
of South Africa.

27. The General Assembly appeals to sports bodies and
sportsmen:
(a) To uphold the Olympic principle that no discrimination
be allowed on the grounds of race, religion or political affiliation;
( b) To refrain from all contact with sports bodies established on the basis of apartheid or with racially selected sports
teams from South Africa;
( c) To assist sportsmen and sports administrators persecuted in South Africa for their opposition to apartheid in
sports;
(d) To take appropriate action to expel racist South
African sports bodies from all international sports federations
and competitions.

IV. ACTION BY THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST Apartheid
28. The General Assembly requests the Special Committee
against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre against
Apartheid, to take all appropriate measures to encourage
concerted action against apartheid by Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. It invites
the Special Committee, in particular, to promote co-ordinated
international campaigns:
(a) For assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa
and their liberation movements;
(b) For an effective arms embargo against South Africa;
(c) Against all forms of ;cuclear co-operation with South
Africa;
(d) Against all collaboration by Governments, banks and
transnational corporations with South Africa;
( e) Against propaganda by the racist regime of South
Africa and its collaborators;
(f) For the unconditional release of South African political
prisoners;
(g) For the boycott of racially selected South African
sports teams.
29. The General Assembly invites all specialized agencies,
the Organization of African Unity and other intergovernmental
organizations as well as trade unions, churches and other nongovernmental organizations to co-operate with the Special
Committee in the implementation of this Programme of Action.

K
INVESTMENTS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid27 and its special reports, 28
Noting the increase of foreign investments in South
Africa which abets and encourages the apartheid policies of that country,
Welcoming as a positive step the decision of some
Governments to achieve the cessation of further investments in South Africa,
27 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/31/22).
28 Ibid., Supplement No. 22A (A/31/22/ Add.1-3).

19

Considering that a cessation of new foreign investments in South Africa would constitute one important
step in the struggL: against apartheid,
Urges the Security Council, when studying the problem of the continued struggle against the apartheid
policies of South Africa, to consider steps to achieve
the ce~sation of further foreign investments in South
Africa.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976

*

* *
The l'residmt of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/W that he had appointed as members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an lnternanational Convention against Apartheid in Sports six of the
seven States to be appointed by him in accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution F above, namely: BARBADOS, CANADA,
CONGO,
JA~fAICA,
l)NITED
REPUBLIC
OF
TANZANIA
and
YUGOSLAVIA.

As a result. the Ad Hoe Committee is composed of the
following /1,femher Stutes: ALGERIA, BARBADOS, CANADA, CONGO,
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBI IC, GHANA, GUINEA, HAITI,
HUNGARY, 1NDIA, 1ND01'ESIA, JAMAICA, MALAYSIA, NEPAL, NIGERIA, PERU, PHILIPPINLS, So~1ALIA, SUDAN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, TRINIDAD AND TOIJAGO, UKRAINIAN Sovmr SOCIALIST REPUBT TC, UNITED REPUIJLIC OF TANZANIA and YUGOSLAVIA.

31/11.

Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year 1975,:;o
A ware that the statement of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 9 November l 97frH provides additional information on the main
developments in the Agency's activities,
Considering the nearly unanimous projection of ever
increasing world demand for energy and noting that
in 1977, its twentieth anniversary, the International
Atomic Energy Agency will hold a major conference
on nuclear power and its fuel cycle at Salzburg, Austria,
to assess the over-all role to be played by nuclear energy
as an alternative energy source presently available,
Appreciating the efforts of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in helping developing countries, through
its expanded training programmes, to meet their manpower requirements for the management, safety and
engineering aspects of their nuclear power projects,
Noting with satisfaction that the report of the Ad
Hoe Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes, set up by the International Atomic Energy
Agency, will deal with the economic, technical, safety
and legal aspects of nuclear explosions for peaceful
purposes as well as the factors involved in the establishment and operation of an international service on
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes,
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
29See A/31/474 and Add.I.
Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report for
1975 (Vienna, July 1976); transmitted to the members of the
General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A/31/
171).
3! Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Plenary Meetings, 59th meeting, paras. 92-129.
30 International
