General Aaeembly-Twenty-fifth Seesion

H

as possible and, at the latest, within a maximum period
of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories concerned;

1. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
diacharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Auombly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance
with established procedures.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2702 (XXV), Question of Oman

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Oman,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other relevant resolutions,

Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,

ConcerMd about the situation in the Territory of
Oman,
Deploring the refusal of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to implement the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the Territory,

1. Reaffirms its resolutions 2238 (XXI) of 20
December 1966, 2302 (XXII) of 12 December 1967,
2424 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968 and 2559
(XXIV) of 12 December 1969;

2. Reafjirms the inalienable right of the people of
Oman to self-determination and to the natural resources of their Territory, as well as their right to dispose of those resources in their best interests;
3. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to implement

fully General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and
other relevant resolutions;

4. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
m.temational institutions concerned should stud¥, within
the scope of their activities and in co-operation. with
the reponal organization concerned and through it,
the possibilities of extending assistance to meet the
educational, technical and health requirements of the
people of the Territory;

S. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify, in
consultation with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, the wide dissemination of information about conditions in the Territory;
6. Requests the Special Committee to follow closely
developments regardmg the colonial situation in the
Territory and to ~ thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2703 (XXV), Activities of foreign economic and
other interests which are impeding the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodeeia,
Namibia and Territories under PortUfJUeae
domination and in all other Terrltoriea
under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of. Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories
under Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this
question,19
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
in particular the eighth preambular paragraph thereof,
and its resolution 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968,
Recalling further the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,
Convinced that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV)
and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southern Africa and other colonial Territories violates
the political, economic and social rights and interests
of the ~pie in those Territories and is therefore incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling that the administering Powers have the
obligation to ensure the political, economic, social and
educational advancement of the inhabitants of the
Territories under their administration and to protect
the J.><>Pulation and the natural resources of those Territones against abuses, in accordance with Chapters
XI and xn of the Charter,
1. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the natural resources of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of those resources in their best interests;
3. Affirms that foreign economic, financial and other
interests operating in colonial Territories constitute a
major obstacle to political independence as well as to
18 /bid.,
Twenty-fifth
(A/8023/Rcv.l/ Add.I).

Session,

Supplement

No.

2.JA.

91

Re1olution1 adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

the enjoyment of the natural resources of those Territories tiy the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Declares that any administering Power, by depriving the colonial peoples of the exercise of their
rlpts or by subordinating them to foreign economic
and financial interests, violates the obligations it has
181Umed under Chapters XI and XII of the Charter
of the United Nations;
5. Condemns the present activities and operating
methods of foreisn economic and other interests in the
Territories under colonial domination;
6. Condemns in particular the construction of the
Cabora Busa project, which is contrary to the vital
intmests of the people of Mozambique and represents
a plot designed to perpetuate the domination, exploitation and oppression of the peoples of this part of Africa
by the Government of Portugal and the minority racist
r6gimes of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia, and
which would lead to international tensions;
1. Requests the colonial Powers and States concerned, whose companies are participants in the construction of the Cabora Bassa pro1ect, to withdraw
their IUPJ?Ort from the scheme and put an end to the
participation of their companies in the project;
8. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
the discriminatory and unjust system of wages applied
to the inhabitants of the Territories under their administration and in all other Territories under colonial
and racist regimes, notably in southern Africa, and to
apply one system of wages to all the inhabitants without
any discrimination;
9. Requests the colonial Powers and States concerned to take legislative, administrative and other
measures in respect of their nationals who own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
bi Namibia, Southern Rhodesia and the Territories
under Portuguese administration, in order to put a
atop to their activities which are detrimental to the
interests of the inhabitants of the Territories;
10. Requests all States to take effective measures to
atop the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military equipment, to colonial regimes that
use such assistance to repress the national liberation
movements;
11. Requests the colonial Powers and States. concerned, whose companies and nationals are CDJaged in
such activities, to comply fully with the provISions of
General Assembly resolutions 2288 (XXII) of 7 December 1967, 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968
and 2554 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, and also to
acloJ?t effective measures to prevent new investments,
particularly in southern Africa, which run counter to
the above-mentioned resolutions;
12. Deplores the attitude of the colonial Powers
and States concerned which have not taken any action
to implement the relevant provisions of the resolutions
of the General Assembly;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
study this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to use all the
facilities at his disposal to render assistance to the Special Committee in the pursuit of this study.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2704 (XXV). Implementation of the DeeJaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the 1pedalued
agencies and the International lmtitutlom
auociated with the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Imp~men~tion of the Declaration on the Granting of IDClepelldence to Colonial Countries and Peoples bf the specialized agencies and the international mstitutiona
associated with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
Recalling its resolutions 2311 (XXII) of 14 December 1967, 2426 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968 and
2555 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, and its other
relevant resolutions,
Taking into account the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on southern Africa, in particular
resolution 277 (1970) of 18 March 1970 on the question of Southern Rhodesia and resolution 283 (1970)
of 29 July 1970 on the question of Namibia,
Taking into account the relevant reports submitted
by the Secretary-General,11 the Economic and Social
Council 18 and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 111 concemin_g the implementation of
the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the United
Nations,
Noting that, while several of the specialized agencies
and the other organizations within the United Nations
system have rendered considerable assistance to
refugees from the colonial Territories in Africa, many
have not extended their full co-operation to the United
Nations in the implementation of other aspects of the
relevant resolutions,
Conscious of the urgent need of the peoples and the
national liberation movements of several colonial Territories, particularly in the liberated areas of some of.
these Territories, for assistance from the specialized
agencies and the other organizations within tlie United
Nations system, especially in the fields of education,
training, health and nutrition,
Recognizing the need for further and more effective
measures to be taken for the speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council by all the
organizations of the United Nations system within their
respective spheres of competence,
Mindful of the need to keep under continuous review
the activities of the organizations within the United
Nations system in the implementation of the various
United Nations resolutions relating to decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Imple-

'

17 Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda items 68 and
12, document A/8143.
18 Jbid., Twenty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8003
and Corr.l), chapter XIII, section D.
19 fbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.l), chapter IV.
