S/2006/644

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 August 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 10 August 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I have the honour to transmit herewith the
report dated 8 August 2006 on the activities of the European Union Police Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the period from 1 January to 30 June 2006 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-46571 (E) 170806

*0646571*

S/2006/644

Annex
Letter dated 8 August 2006 from the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
European Union to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I attach a report on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the period
from 1 January to 30 June 2006.
I propose to provide the Security Council with a written update on the progress
of the Mission.
I should be grateful if you would transmit this report to the President of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

06-46571

S/2006/644

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina covering the period from 1 January to 30 June 2006
Introduction
1.
The European Union Police Mission (EUPM) has been the first operation
undertaken under the European Security and Defence Policy. It was initiated with a
three-year mandate starting on 1 January 2003 and, with Joint Action of
24 November 2005, the Council decided that EUPM shall be continued from
1 January 2006 to 31 December 2007 in a refocused manner. EUPM, under the
guidance and coordination of the European Union Special Representative and as
part of the broader rule-of-law approach in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
region, aims, through mentoring, monitoring and inspecting, to establish in Bosnia
and Herzegovina a sustainable, professional and multi-ethnic police service
operating in accordance with best European and international standards.
2.
The police service should operate in accordance with commitments made as
part of the stabilization and association process with the European Union, in
particular with regard to the fight against organized crime and police reform. EUPM
operates in line with the general objectives of Annex 11 of the Dayton/Paris
Agreement and its objectives will be supported by European Community
instruments. Under the direction of the European Union Special Representative,
EUPM has taken the lead in the coordination of policing aspects of the European
Security and Defence Policy efforts in the fight against organized crime. It assists
local authorities in planning and conducting major and organized crime
investigations. Brigadier General Vincenzo Coppola from Italy was appointed Head
of Mission/Police Commissioner as from January 2006.

New methodology and staffing
3.
The first five months of the year were a transition phase for EUPM,
characterized by the development of the refocused mandate, the reduction of the
Mission strength and the establishment of new structures.
Staffing
4.
At the end of the last reporting period EUPM numbered 571 staff (215
seconded police officers, 48 international civilians and 308 national staff). On
30 June 2006, EUPM numbers 419 staff (175 seconded police officers, 29
international civilians and 215 national staff). All 25 European Union member
States, together with nine non-EU contributing States, have participated in the
Mission in the current reporting period. A challenge for the Mission in its transition
phase was the reduction in staffing and in implementing effective calls for
contributions from States to ensure suitably skilled personnel in the correct posts as
early as possible.
5.
The Mission takes due account of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security in all its activities, as well as the EU operational

06-46571

3

S/2006/644

paper on practical measures for taking work forward on resolution 1325 (2000) in
the context of the European Security and Defence Policy.
Methodology
6.
Police, the general public and the international community were extensively
informed about the refocused Mission, its role in support of the fight against
organized crime, in strengthening internal/external control, inspection and
accountability of the police and the role of the Head of Mission as a member of the
Directorate for the Implementation of Police Restructuring. The Mission
reorganized structures, resources and working methodology, enabling it to become
more effective in achieving its mandate. The co-location methodology was reviewed
and reorganized into a four-region structure, in line with the four State Investigation
and Protection Agency (SIPA) regions, each under the supervision of a Chief
Regional Adviser. The Mission maintains multi-level co-locations with SIPA (the
lead agency in the fight against organized crime) and the State Border Service
(SBS). A great deal of effort was channelled into personnel, logistical and
procedural changes around the new structure, streamlining the Mission to most
effectively further its mandate.

Achievements during the reporting period
1.

Support to the police restructuring process
7.
EUPM has been carrying out its tasks to support the police restructuring
process. The Head of Mission assumed his role in January 2006 as the only
international member of the Steering Board of the Directorate for the
Implementation of Police Restructuring, operating under the guidance of the
European Union Special Representative. The Steering Board met 15 times in the
first six months of 2006 and provides strategic guidance to the Directorate’s
Executive. The Directorate aims to produce a phased plan for the reform of police
structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in line with the three guiding European
Commission requirements.
8.
On 24 May, the Government of Republika Srpska unilaterally downgraded its
participation in the work of the Steering Board to observer status. Despite this
unilateral decision, the Directorate continues to work. The delays caused by the
Republika Srpska almost certainly mean that the Directorate will not be able to
complete the police reform implementation plan by the 30 September deadline. This
in turn might lead to delays in concluding negotiations on a stabilization and
association agreement.

2.

Support to the fight against organized crime
Assisting in the planning and conduct of investigations
9.
The EU Crime Strategy Group and its two subcommittees, and the EUEuropean Security and Defence Policy Targeting Board (chaired by EUPM since
March) and Policy Task Force have been instrumental to the Mission’s taking the
lead role in the coordination of the policing aspects of the European Security and
Defence Policy efforts against organized crime and have begun to assist local
authorities in planning and conducting major and organized crime investigations.

4

06-46571

S/2006/644

EUPM activities in this area are guided by the agreed principles and guidelines
among the European Union Special Representative, EUPM and EUFOR. The end
state of all European Security and Defence Policy efforts is to pass over, with
confidence, full ownership and responsibility for the fight against organized crime
to the local police. This requires appropriate coordination and strategic
understanding, as well as the progressive reduction of dependence on EUFOR
operational support.
10. EUPM assisted the local police in the planning and execution of a number of
operations for illegally stored weapons, a continuing problem affecting safety and
security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The local police are increasingly seeking to
address illegal weapons through intelligence-led initiatives.
11. EUPM introduced a case management system to track all SIPA investigations
in order to monitor progress, identify weaknesses and give appropriate advice.
Following a review, the system was extended to the entire Mission.
Strengthening local ownership and responsibility
12. The Bosnia and Herzegovina strategy for the fight against organized crime and
corruption for the period 2006-2009 (National Action Plan), drafted by a locally
owned working group chaired by the Minister for Security, assisted by the Crime
Strategy Group and envisaging comprehensive improvements in institution-building,
operational capacity and legislation, was adopted on 15 June by the Council of
Ministers.
13. EUPM has actively pursued its role in monitoring investigations in support of
the police’s fight against organized crime. The majority of the investigations are still
ongoing but nevertheless represent the bulk of the achievements of EUPM in terms
of organized crime. It is important to highlight that the nature of such investigations
and operations means that they are protracted and complex, as this case illustrates:
14. EUPM appointed a senior investigator to oversee the reviews of a number of
high-profile, organized-crime-related murders between 1998 and March 2006. Three
of those involved senior police officials. The Mission is advising SIPA and the State
Prosecutor on the cases.
15. Media reports and identified instances of fabrication and/or changes of
evidential statements by local police officers brought about a coordinated, EUPMinstigated investigation.
Criminal justice system monitoring
16. EUPM is acutely aware of the importance of monitoring the wider criminal
justice bodies in ensuring the integrity and effectiveness of the system in dealing
with organized crime. A new unit, the Criminal Justice Interface Unit is tasked to
identify and address deficiencies in the area of police and prosecutorial cooperation.
It focuses on enhancing both general and case-specific cooperation in order to
facilitate effective investigations and prosecutions and to contribute to strengthening
the integrity of the host country’s criminal justice system. In order to ensure a
standardized approach to prosecutors, the Unit acts as the Mission’s point of contact
and coordinating body with prosecutorial authorities at both entity and State levels.
The Unit is in close contact with the prosecutorial advisers within the office of the

06-46571

5

S/2006/644

European Union Special Representative. Already some significant results have been
achieved but this will remain a key area for Mission attention.
17. EUPM is resourced with a high concentration of police and legal expertise, a
great benefit in assisting in the development of the Bosnia and Herzegovina criminal
justice system. Working with partner agencies, including the United States
International Criminal Investigation Training Assistance Programme, EUPM has
advised on improvements in legislation in areas ranging from evidence storage to
firearms offences.
3.

Strengthening operational capacity
18. The provision of technical assistance and equipment has already proved of
benefit to Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies, with some very
notable successes at the State level. There was an identified need to coordinate such
donations effectively, however, in order to better support the continued development
of Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement. EUPM has liaised with international
bodies and diplomatic missions in order to bring about better coordination
arrangements for donations. This in turn is expected to serve in strengthening local
police capacity.
19. There is a requirement for a harmonized legislative framework to regulate
police powers and the employment-related legal status of police officials.
Consequently, in parallel with the efforts of the Directorate for the Implementation
of Police Restructuring, EUPM and the Office of the High Representative have
finalized a model template for a cantonal law on Police Officials, which follows the
basic principles provided for in the equivalent Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Federation cantonal laws. A first version of the template was presented to the
cantonal, Republika Srpska and Brcko district police representatives in April. The
need to have harmonized laws was unanimously recognized and deadlines for their
enactment were established. A major issue was the harmonization of ranks, salaries
and career progression. At the end of May the Head of Mission officially closed the
drafting process. The draft law has now been sent by most cantonal ministries to
their respective governments to establish the text of the law. In addition, EUPM,
along with the Office of the High Representative, has supported the continued
development of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Police Officials.
20. EUPM provided legal and operational support to an EC Community Assistance
for Reconstruction, Development and Stabilization project to develop procedures for
carrying out surveillance and lawful interception of telecommunications by Bosnia
and Herzegovina law enforcement and intelligence agencies. In partnership with
other international agencies, EUPM participated in the development of draft
legislative amendments and a draft Council of Ministers decision on obligations for
telecommunication providers, which were completed late in May. The adoption of
the law and the decision will permit the establishment of an efficient Bosnia and
Herzegovina telecommunication interception system, in line with European good
practice.
Strengthening internal/external control, inspection and accountability of
the police
21. The professional standards and effective self-regulation of local police bodies
needs to be rigorous and reliable. Therefore, the establishment in June of the

6

06-46571

S/2006/644

Professional Standards Unit in the Republika Srpska Ministry of the Interior is seen
as significant progress towards the accountability of local police pillar of the
mandate. The Professional Standards Unit consists of two sub-units, Internal Control
and Audits and Revisions, and was part of EUPM efforts under its previous
mandate, which the Republika Srpska failed to implement by the end of 2005.
EUPM followed this through, with the most cooperation occurring since the
appointment of a new Republika Srpska Minister of the Interior in February 2006.
22. Through its two dedicated inspection teams, EUPM resources in locations and
under an overall coordinator, EUPM has undertaken 17 inspections since 1 January
2006, based on information from various sources. EUPM has reviewed cases
suggested for inspection but deemed in certain instances the appropriate course of
action to be referral to the local police internal control functions, as opposed to
direct Mission involvement, thus encouraging ownership and accountability. Where
EUPM has become involved, its aim has been to push the local police to identify
irregularities and act upon them. EUPM has then continued to oversee the work of
prosecutors as cases are passed to them to ensure that they progress appropriately
through to a final, conclusive result. For this reason the majority of cases remain
outgoing, but one of the key inspections is outlined below:
23. Initial information was obtained from various sources, including police
officers and the media. Intelligence against officers and officials was gathered,
indicating offences ranging from abuse of office and authority to embezzlement,
criminal negligence and fraud. EUPM began working with the Federal Ministry of
the Interior in preparing an operation and a full operational plan was devised under
EUPM guidance. This led to the EUPM-monitored police operation “Granit 2006”,
on 12 January, when Federal Ministry of the Interior officers searched, under
warrant, a number of official, police and business premises, including the cantonal
Ministry of the Interior, seizing large quantities of evidence. EUPM officers were
present throughout, offering expert guidance.
4.

Horizontal tasks
Further support to the development of SIPA and SBS
24. EUPM has invested considerable effort in helping the institutional and
capacity development of Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies,
particularly SIPA and the State Border Service. This continues to be an important
Mission task, since fully resourced, equipped and skilled policing bodies are vital in
the fight against organized crime. Results in anti-organized-crime operations by
SIPA and SBS and the decision on the location of the permanent SIPA headquarters
in east Sarajevo are positive developments.
25. EUPM has been monitoring and providing advisory support to both SIPA and
SBS commissions, formed following the adoption of the book of rules on rank
attribution by the Ministry of Security, and responsible for the attribution of ranks.
The ranking process, which is now drawing to a close, required the commissions to
review the personal files of officers in accordance with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Law on Police Officials and other regulatory provisions and to submit proposals on
the attribution of ranks to their respective directors for final decision, which was
done with EUPM guidance.

06-46571

7

S/2006/644

26. EUPM reviewed amendments to SIPA books of rules governing the internal
organization and systematizing of SIPA positions, and the protection of secret data,
which aim at ensuring the effectiveness and integrity of SIPA vetting procedures and
of ensuring that data relating to criminal investigations and intelligence is
adequately protected. Both books of rules were subsequently adopted by the Council
of Ministers.
27. SIPA has been proactive in this period in planning and conducting operations
for the arrest, detention and transfer of suspected war criminals. A number of
particularly high-profile initiatives, with close monitoring and guidance by EUPM,
have been successful. In April, May and June, EUPM monitored and assisted in the
planning of three arrest operations (two in the Republika Srpska and one in Mostar)
conducted by the SIPA War Crimes Department and Special Support Unit, in which
suspected war criminals were arrested, including one former and one serving police
officer. In June, EUPM monitored the arrest and transfer to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia of Dragan Zelenovic, indicted for war crimes
and deported from the Russian Federation.
28. In June, EUPM monitored the provision, by a SIPA Close Protection Unit, of
round-the-clock security for Tribunal judges and a defence team during their visit to
a number of locations related to a current high-profile war crimes case. This was the
Unit’s first protection operation for the Tribunal. Its performance was very
professional, demonstrating that in future SIPA is capable of taking sole charge of
such protection agencies for the Tribunal. Previous visits were accompanied by
Federal Ministry of the Interior and Republika Srpska police units, according to a
memorandum of commitment that authorized local police protection measures,
while SIPA capacity was being developed.
29. In June, the SBS Director provided an update on the progress of the agency,
highlighting that, although still well below establishment levels and lacking
equipment, SBS has made positive gains. He detailed specific strategic goals of the
agency in developing its capacity, particularly in terms of dealing with trans-border
organized crime. Monitoring and inspection activity by EUPM at SBS locations
across Bosnia and Herzegovina in the first six months support this assessment
regarding capacity. EUPM recognizes that significant progress has been made but
that resources and technical capacity remain an issue to be addressed in order to
allow the agency to reach its full potential.
30. From January to March, EUPM made recommendations on and closely
monitored the Ministry of Security selection process for an assistant director for
SBS, providing advisory support during the assessment and interview of candidates.
Police certification
31. Police certification remains an issue of concern for the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities, who requested to review the process of certain categories
of cases following the opinion of the Economic Commission for Democracy through
Law (Venice Commission) of October 2005. The Office of the High Representative/
European Union Special Representative has explored options with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Contact Group and EU missions in New York
during the last six months.

8

06-46571
