United Nations

A/RES/65/161

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 March 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 20 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2010
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/65/436/Add.6)]

65/161. Convention on Biological Diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/201 of 20 December 2000 and 64/203 of
21 December 2009 and all other previous resolutions relating to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, 1
0F

Recalling also the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992, 2
1F

Recalling further that in its resolution 61/203 of 20 December 2006 it declared
2010 the International Year of Biodiversity,
Reiterating that the Convention is the key international instrument for the
conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and the fair and equitable
sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources, including by
appropriate access to genetic resources and appropriate transfer of relevant
technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to those
technologies, and by appropriate funding,
Recognizing the potential contribution of other multilateral environmental
agreements, including the biodiversity-related conventions, and of international
organizations in support of the three objectives of the Convention,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law, States have the sovereign right to exploit their own
resources pursuant to their own environmental policies and the responsibility to
ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the
environment of other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
Noting that one hundred and ninety-two States and one regional economic
integration organization are parties to the Convention and that one hundred and

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2

10-52220

*1052220*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/161

fifty-nine States and one regional economic integration organization are parties to
the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity, 3
2F

Recognizing that the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention is
crucial for sustainable development, poverty eradication and the improvement of
human well-being and a major factor underpinning the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals,
Recalling the commitments of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from 26 August to 4 September 2002, to pursue
a balanced, efficient and coherent implementation of the three objectives of the
Convention,
Recognizing the continuing need for greater progress in the implementation by
parties of obligations and commitments under the Convention in order to achieve its
objectives, and in this regard emphasizing the need to comprehensively address the
challenges to the full implementation of the Convention at the national, regional and
global levels,
Recalling the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on biodiversity, held
on 22 September 2010 as a contribution to the International Year of Biodiversity,
Recalling also the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals and its outcome document, 4
3F

Expressing deep appreciation to the Government of Japan for hosting the tenth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention and the fifth meeting of
the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena
Protocol, and welcoming the decision by the Conference of the Parties at its tenth
meeting to endorse the offer of the Government of India to host the eleventh
meeting of the Conference of the Parties, to be held from 8 to 19 October 2012, and
the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the
Parties to the Cartagena Protocol, to be held from 1 to 5 October 2012, 5
4F

1.
Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on
Biological Diversity on the work of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention; 6
5F

2.
Recognizes the important outcomes of the tenth meeting of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity1 and the fifth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety,3 held in Nagoya, Japan, from 18 to 29 October
2010 and from 11 to 15 October 2010, which represent a significant contribution to
the comprehensive implementation of the three objectives of the Convention;
0H

1H

Notes the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at
3.
its tenth meeting of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the
Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, 7 and acknowledges the potential role of access
and benefit-sharing in contributing to the conservation and sustainable use of
6F

_______________
3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2226, No. 30619.
See resolution 65/1.
5
See UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/46.
6
A/65/294, sect. III.
7
See UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/1.
4

2

A/RES/65/161

biological diversity, poverty eradication and environmental sustainability and,
thereby, to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
4.
Notes with appreciation the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention at its tenth meeting of the updated and revised Strategic Plan for
Biodiversity 2011–2020 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets; 8
7F

5.
Notes the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at
its tenth meeting of a decision on the strategy for resource mobilization in support
of the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention, 9 and looks forward to
the adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its eleventh meeting, as mandated,
of targets to ensure the effectiveness of the strategy, provided robust baselines have
been identified and endorsed and an effective reporting framework has been
adopted, with a view to fully meeting the commitment to substantially increase
human, financial and technical resources from all sources;
8F

Also notes the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the
6.
Convention at its fifth meeting serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the
Cartagena Protocol of the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on
Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, 10 which provides
international rules and procedures in the field of liability and redress for damage
resulting from transboundary movements of living modified organisms;
9F

Further notes the work of the Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group on
7.
Biodiversity and Climate Change, and encourages parties, Governments, relevant
organizations and the Executive Secretary of the Convention to take the findings of
the Group into consideration, where appropriate, when carrying out work on
biodiversity and climate change;
Notes the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at
8.
its tenth meeting of a decision on mechanisms to promote the effective participation
of indigenous and local communities in the work of the Convention; 11
10F

9.
Encourages the Global Environment Facility to continue supporting the
implementation of the three objectives of the Convention, especially its work on
assisting the early entry into force of the Nagoya Protocol;
10. Welcomes the significant progress made in developing a multi-year plan of
action on biodiversity for development based on the framework for South-South
cooperation, and encourages parties and Governments to further contribute to its
development;
11. Notes the ongoing work of the Joint Liaison Group of the secretariats and
offices of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the Convention on Biological Diversity,
the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 12 and
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 13 (“the Rio
Conventions”) and of the Liaison Group of Biodiversity-related Conventions,
1F

12F

_______________
8

Ibid., decision X/2.
Ibid., decision X/3.
10
See UNEP/CBD/BS/COP-MOP/5/17, annex, decision BS-V/11.
11
See UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/40.
12
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
13
Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.
9

3

A/RES/65/161

acknowledges the importance of improving coherence in the implementation of the
Rio Conventions, recognizes the importance of enhancing synergies among the
biodiversity-related conventions, without prejudice to their specific objectives, and
encourages the conferences of the parties to the biodiversity-related multilateral
environmental agreements to consider strengthening efforts in this regard, taking
into account relevant experiences and bearing in mind the respective independent
legal status and mandates of these instruments;
12. Reaffirms the intrinsic value of biological diversity as well as the
ecological, genetic, social, economic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational
and aesthetic values of biological diversity and its components, taking into account
their importance for sustainable development;
13. Notes the consideration of aspects related to the economic valuation of
ecosystems and biodiversity in the context of the work of the Convention on
Biological Diversity, including The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity
reports, as referred to in relevant decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties
to the Convention at its tenth meeting;
14. Also notes the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention at its tenth meeting of a decision on the administration of the
Convention and budget for the programme of work for the biennium 2011–2012, 14
which included the revised administrative arrangements between the secretariat of
the Convention and the United Nations Environment Programme and through which
the Conference of the Parties looked forward to the rapid completion of the servicelevel agreement provided for in those arrangements, requested the Executive
Secretary of the Convention to report to the Conference of the Parties through its
Bureau on the implementation of those arrangements and invited the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to report on those
arrangements to the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme at its twenty-sixth session;
13F

15. Invites countries that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the
Convention;
16. Invites parties to the Convention that have not yet ratified or acceded to
the Cartagena Protocol to consider doing so;
17. Invites parties to the Convention to sign, ratify or accede to the Nagoya
Protocol at the earliest opportunity;
18. Invites parties to the Cartagena Protocol to sign, ratify or accede to the
Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol at the earliest opportunity;
19. Decides, following the invitation by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention at its tenth meeting, 15 to declare 2011–2020 the United Nations Decade
on Biodiversity, with a view to contributing to the implementation of the Strategic
Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General,
in consultation with Member States, to lead the coordination of the activities of the
Decade on behalf of the United Nations system, with the support of the secretariat
of the Convention on Biological Diversity, the secretariats of other biodiversityrelated conventions and relevant United Nations funds, programmes and agencies,
and invites Member States in a position to do so to contribute, on a voluntary basis,
to the funding of the activities of the Decade;
14F

_______________
14
15

4

See UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/45.
Ibid., decision X/8.

A/RES/65/161

20. Invites the secretariat of the Convention to report, through the SecretaryGeneral, to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session on the work of the
Conference of the Parties;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled
“Convention on Biological Diversity”.
69th plenary meeting
20 December 2010

5
