S/2018/480

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 May 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
Twenty-seventh semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
1.
The present report is the twenty-seventh semi-annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It
provides a review and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since the
issuance of my previous report on the subject, on 16 October 2017 ( S/2017/867), and
covers developments up to 10 May 2018.

I. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) by the Security Council on
2 September 2004, several of its provisions have been implemented, as highlighted in
previous reports. However, a number of provisions, including with respect to the
existence and activities of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, remain pending.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
3.
Through the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council sought to
strengthen the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of
Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the country, in accordance with the Taif Accords of 1989, to which all the
political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. That objective has remained
the priority of my efforts.
4.
As previously indicated in my report of 8 March 2018 on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2018/210), on 4 November 2017 in
Riyadh, the Prime Minister of Lebanon, Saad Hariri, announced his resignation. The
President of Lebanon, Michel Aoun, subsequently issued a statement that he would
await the return of the Prime Minister to Lebanon to determine n ext steps, while
underlining the importance of national unity. On 5 November, I issued a statement to
express my concern about this development, hoping that all sides would focus their
efforts on supporting the continuity of the State institutions of Leban on, in adherence
to the Constitution, and safeguarding the country’s security and stability, and to
reaffirm the commitment of the United Nations to supporting the security, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Lebanon. Following their meeting on 10 No vember with
President Aoun, members of the International Support Group for Lebanon expressed

18-08131 (E)

230518

*1808131*

S/2018/480

their “continuing concern regarding the situation and prevailing uncertainty in
Lebanon” and welcomed “the call of the President for Prime Minister Hariri to retur n
to Lebanon”.
5.
As noted in my report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (ibid.),
on 21 November, Prime Minister Hariri returned to Lebanon. The following day, he
declared his decision to put his resignation on hold at the request of the President, “to
allow further consultations about its political causes”, and expressed his hope that
that would allow for a renewed “commitment to the Taif Accords and the basics of
national consensus and resolve the controversial issues and their impact on Lebanon ’s
relations with its Arab brothers”. On 5 December, the Council of Ministers of
Lebanon issued a statement confirming its commitment to its ministerial statement of
28 December 2016, noting that Lebanon must be kept out of regional conflicts and
the internal affairs of Arab countries, and reiterating its commitment to resolution
1701 (2006), the Taif Accords and the Charter of the League of Arab States.
Subsequently, the Prime Minister withdrew his resignation.
6.
On 8 December 2017, the International Support Group for Lebanon convened a
high-level meeting in Paris. In a joint statement, the Group expressed its satisfaction
at the return to Beirut of the Prime Minister, noting the decision of the Council of
Ministers on disassociation from any regional conflicts and wars and from the internal
affairs of Arab countries, and that it would “pay close attention to the implementation
of the Council’s decision by all Lebanese parties” and calling upon “all Lebanese
parties to implement this tangible policy of disassociation from and non -interference
in external conflicts, as an important priority, as spelled out in previous declarations,
in particular the 2012 Baabda Declaration”. The Group reiterated the need for the full
implementation of and full respect for all Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). Those messages were reinforced by the
Security Council in a press statement of 19 December on the situation in Lebanon.
7.
In his opening speech at the meeting of 8 December, Prime Minister Hariri
emphasized his Government’s commitment to the disassociation policy. He noted the
unique nature of the government agreement on disassociation, stating that “all
political parties agreed on the disassociation policy, and every political party
[represented at] the Cabinet table is responsible about the disassociation. The
guarantee is that this decision was taken unanimously”. After a meeting held on
15 February 2018 with Rex Tillerson, then Secretary of State of the United States of
America, President Aoun reportedly stated that “Lebanon is fully committed to the
policy of self-dissociation and does not interfere in the internal affairs of States, but
is not responsible for the interventions happening from outside ”.
8.
At its December meeting, the International Support Group for Lebanon laid out
an ambitious road map aimed at support for Lebanon, including a ministerial
conference to support the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Internal Security Forces,
to be held in Rome (the “Rome II conference”), and an economic conference aimed
at Lebanese development through reforms, to be held in Pari s.
9.
Marking critical progress towards the reactivation of Lebanese State
institutions, the Government coordinated the holding of parliamentary elections on
the basis of the electoral law adopted in June 2017. On 22 January 2018, President
Aoun and Prime Minister Hariri signed a decree calling for parliamentary elections
on 6 May, with out-of-country voting to be held on 27 and 29 April. Of the
597 candidates, 86 were women, representing 14.4 per cent. The electoral campaign
period was reportedly marked by increased rhetoric along sectarian lines.
10. The voter turnout for the elections on 6 May was 49.2 per cent. At the time of
reporting, preliminary results indicated a decrease in the representation of the Future
Movement, an increase in that of the Lebanese Forces and a consolidation of the
2/11

18-08131

S/2018/480

presence of Hizbullah and the Amal Movement in Parliament. Among the 128 elected
Members of Parliament, 6 are women. According to electoral observers from the
European Union, “voting on election day was generally peaceful and the
administration of polling efficient, with the presence of politically diverse candidate
and list agents. Counting and tabulation were transparent. All European Union
Election Observation Mission observers were able to observe the polling proces s
without hindrance”.
11. In a statement on 8 May, I congratulated Lebanon on the holding of
parliamentary elections, the first to have taken place since 2009. I added that “the
elections represent a vital step in strengthening Lebanon’s State institutions and
consolidating its democratic tradition” and that I was looking forward to the formation
of the new Government. In a statement on 9 May, the Spokesperson of the European
External Action Service stated that, as noted by the European Union observers, “the
elections were well conducted and generally peaceful, which is a clear sign of the
maturity of the Lebanese democratic institutions and the aspirations of the Lebanese
people to overcome the persisting fragilities to achieve a democratic and united
country”, adding that increasing women’s participation in politics would be an
important element looking ahead. In a statement on 10 May, the International Support
Group for Lebanon, meeting in Beirut, congratulated “the Lebanese people and
authorities for the completion of parliamentary elections on 6 May … in a generally
calm and peaceful climate”, encouraged “the swift formation of a new Government”
and looked forward to “working with the new Government as it follows up on its
international commitments, including under resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006)” and to “the resumption of a Lebanese-led dialogue towards a national defence
strategy in the post-elections period”.
12. The number of registered refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic hosted by
Lebanon decreased slightly compared with the previous reporting period, totalling
986,942 as at 1 May 2018. On 1 February, the Ministry of Social Affairs and the
United Nations launched the 2018 update of the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan,
appealing for $2.68 billion to support 2.8 million people with humanitarian
assistance, as well as investment in the country’s public infrastructure, services and
the local economy. At a conference entitled “Supporting the future of Syria and the
region”, held in Brussels on 24 and 25 April and co-chaired by the European Union
and the United Nations, $4.4 billion was pledged for the Syria crisis response,
including in Lebanon.
13. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request made
by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. This remains
critical to enable proper border control and management, including the movement of
people and the potential movement of arms. While progress in that regard remains
elusive, including as a result of the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
there has been some discernible improvement since the previous reporting period in
the extension of the presence of the Lebanese State along the border with the Syrian
Arab Republic, including through the construction of border observ ation posts of the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
14. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain elements
essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity. While border
delineation is a bilateral matter, progress on that issue remains an obligation of
Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with resolution 1680 (2006).
On 14 December 2017, Lebanese and Syrian authorities, for the first time since 2012,
reopened the Qa‘-Jusiyah border crossing in north-eastern Lebanon, the only crossing
of the five border crossings between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic that had
been consistently closed owing to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
18-08131

3/11

S/2018/480

15. Cross-border violations of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity
continued on both the eastern and northern borders. Between October 2017 and March
2018, there were reports of two shooting incidents across the border between Lebanon
and the Syrian Arab Republic, marking a significant decrease compared with previous
reporting periods.
16. In violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006), Israel continued to occupy the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line. By identical letters addressed to me and the
President of the Security Council dated 13 April 2018, the Permanent Repres entative
of Lebanon to the United Nations transmitted a letter from her country ’s Minister of
National Defence in which the Minister noted, inter alia, “the ongoing occupation of
the northern part of Ghajar town … and Lebanese territory along the Blue Line”.
17. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab ‘a Farms area.
Furthermore, neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has responded to the
provisional definition of the area contained in my report of 30 October 2007 on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641). During a tour of Shab‘a town
in southern Lebanon on 13 April, Prime Minister Hariri said that “recovering the
Shab‘a Farms and the hills of Kfar Shuba is the responsibility of the State ”.
18. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make almost daily overflights of Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006). In identical letters addressed to me and the President of the Security
Council dated 30 October 2017, the Permanent Representative of Lebano n to the
United Nations stated that, on 7 September, four Israeli aircraft had violated Lebanese
airspace before targeting Syrian territory, which he described as “a flagrant breach of
Lebanese sovereignty”. In identical letters addressed to me and the President of the
Security Council dated 8 February 2018 (A/72/742-S/2018/109), the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations conveyed her Government ’s
message that Israel had “once again violated Lebanese airspace … in order to carry
out raids in the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic ”. In identical letters addressed
to me and the President of the Security Council dated 6 April 2018 ( A/72/831S/2018/336), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon conveyed her Government ’s
message that “on 31 March 2018, Israel violated Lebanese airspace, using an
unmanned aerial vehicle armed with four missiles. It subsequently sent a second aerial
vehicle to bomb the first aerial vehicle and the site where the latter had crashed ”. In
identical letters addressed to me and the President of the Security Council dated
10 April 2018 (A/72/832-S/2018/342), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
conveyed her Government’s message that “on 9 April 2018, four Israeli warplanes
violated Lebanese airspace … in order to conduct raids in the territory of the Syrian
Arab Republic”, warning that “the repeated violation of its airspace by Israel to
conduct raids in the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic poses a particular threat ”.
In identical letters addressed to me and the President of the Security Council dated
12 April 2018 (S/2018/345), the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations alleged that “Lebanese violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
are daily occurrences”.
19. As specified in my report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2018/210), pursuant to Security Council resolution 1757 (2007), I extended the
mandate of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon from 1 March 2018 for a period of thre e
years, or upon completion of the cases before the Special Tribunal if sooner.

4/11

18-08131

S/2018/480

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
20. The Government of Lebanon continued its efforts to extend the authority of the
State throughout all Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Remaining at the forefront of such efforts were the Lebanese Armed
Forces, including through its further deployment, and the Internal Security Forces.
Yet, the endeavour continued to be challenged.
21. In its statement of 8 December, the International Support Group for Lebanon
commended “the role played by the Lebanese Armed Forces and by all State security
institutions in protecting the country, its borders and its population ”. It recalled that
the Lebanese Armed Forces were “the only legitimate armed forces of Lebanon, as
enshrined in the Lebanese constitution and the Taif agreement ”. It called upon the
international community “to continue, coordinate and step up its support to these
institutions” and, in that context, welcomed “the holding of the Rome II meeting to
be hosted by Italy.”
22. As part of the efforts by the international community to support Lebanese
institutions and contribute to the expansion of State authority, the Rome II conference
was held in Rome on 15 March 2018 under the auspices of the International Support
Group for Lebanon and under the chairmanship of the United Nations and Italy,
gathering together the representatives of 40 countries and organizations. At the
conference, Prime Minister Hariri emphasized the need to build State security
institutions as “the sole defenders of Lebanon’s sovereignty”.
23. Participants in the conference “endorsed the Lebanese Government’s vision of
the Lebanese Armed Forces as the sole defender of the Lebanese State and protector
of its borders, and of the Internal Security Forces as a key instrument in building the
monopoly of the use of force by the Lebanese State”.
24. In addition, conference participants “recalled relevant provisions of the Taif
Accords and of Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701
(2006), including provisions that there be no weapons or authority in Lebanon other
than that of the Lebanese State, no foreign forces in Lebanon without the consent of
its Government, and no sale or supply of arms-related materiel to Lebanon except as
authorized by its Government”. Participants welcomed the updated capability
development plan of the Lebanese Armed Forces and the strategic plan of the Internal
Security Forces. The Security Council reiterated those messages in a press statement
issued on 27 March 2018. Participants in the Rome conference also made pledges of
financial support for the security institutions.
25. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to undertake efforts to mainta in the
country’s stability. On 10 November 2017, five soldiers were injured when a patrol
from the Lebanese Armed Forces came under intense gunfire during an exchange with
armed men in the area of Dar al-Wasi‘ah, in Baalbek. Army units reportedly
conducted raids in the area that resulted in the seizure of several weapons,
ammunition, bombs and drugs. On 4 January 2018, according to a statement from the
Directorate of Orientation of the Lebanese Armed Forces, during an operation to
arrest one of the alleged perpetrators of the attacks against the Lebanese Armed
Forces and the Internal Security Forces in Arsal in 2017, the Lebanese Armed Forces
were attacked by gunmen, which led to the wounding of one soldier and caused
damage to two military vehicles. On 5 February, in an overnight operation to arrest a
wanted suspect in Tripoli, a Lebanese soldier was killed and a number of others
injured. The wanted individual was also killed.

18-08131

5/11

S/2018/480

26. Arrests of individuals on charges of terrorism, including belonging to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, most of which were related to the battle of Arsal
in July 2017, continued during the reporting period.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias
27. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disbanding and
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has yet to be implemented. The provision reflect s and reaffirms a
decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords. It is critical
that the Accords be preserved and implemented by all in order to avoid the spectre of
a renewed confrontation among Lebanese citizens and to strengthe n the institutions
of the State. The Lebanese State should increase its efforts to achieve a monopoly on
the possession of weapons and the use of force throughout its territory.
28. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continued to operate
outside the control of the Government, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). While
several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess weapons outside
government control, Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia in the country. In a
democratic State, it remains a fundamental anomaly that a political party maintains a
militia that has no accountability to the democratic, governmental institutions of the
State but has the power to take that State to war. The maintenance of arms by
Hizbullah and other groups and the alleged increase by Hizbullah of its arsenal pose
a serious challenge to the State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority
over its territory. In addition, several Palestinian armed groups continued to operate
in the country, inside and outside the Palestine refugee camps.
29. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have been taken
to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of a military arsenal outside
of a legal framework and its involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to
be denounced by a number of voices in Lebanon, who consider those issues to be
destabilizing factors in the country and ones that undermine democracy. Many
Lebanese see the continued presence of such arms as an implicit threat that the
weapons could be used within Lebanon for political reasons.
30. As included in my report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(ibid.), in early December 2017, video footage emerged of Qais al -Khazali, of the
Iraqi Shi’te militia Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, visiting South Lebanon in military uniform in
the company of Hizbullah representatives. On 9 December, Prime Minister Hariri
issued a statement asserting that he had contacted military and security officials to
investigate and to take measures to prevent any person from carrying out military
activities and prevent Qais al-Khazali’s re-entry into Lebanon. In identical letters
addressed to me and the President of the Security Council dated 12 December 2017
(S/2017/1043), the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations stated
that that visit constituted a violation of resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004). On
15 January 2018, an arrest warrant was issued in Leb anon for Qais al-Khazali. On
26 December 2017, a photograph appeared on social media in which Haj Hamza (Abu
al-Abbas), the commander of an Aleppo-based pro-Syrian government militia, Imam
al-Baqir Brigade, appeared to be standing near the Blue Line, as specified in my report
on resolution 1701 (2006).

6/11

18-08131

S/2018/480

31. In identical letters addressed to me and the President of the Security Council
dated 5 February 2018 (S/2018/91), the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations stated that a senior Iranian official, Ebrahim Raisi, h ad visited the
area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon close to the Blue
Line on 28 January and had been accompanied by “uniformed and armed members of
Hizbullah”. The Permanent Representative also stated that, prior to his visit to the
Blue Line, “Raisi … called for strengthening the ‘axis of resistance’ — Iran, Lebanon,
and other forces” against Israel. Responding to that letter, the Minister of National
Defence of Lebanon, in the above-mentioned letter dated 13 April 2018, stated that
Mr. Raisi had been accompanied by a Hizbullah member of Parliament and that “his
escort was not visibly carrying weapons”.
32. In identical letters addressed to me and the President of the Security Council
dated 28 November 2017 (S/2017/1000), the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations expressed concern at what he said was a statement by the
Commander of the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Major General
Mohamed Ali Jaafari, which he said expressed “Iran’s intentions and actions taken to
continue arming Hizbullah”. In response, in a letter addressed to me dated 5 December
2017 (S/2017/1019), the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
the United Nations accused Israel of making “false and baseless accusations”.
33. During the reporting period, the Government of Lebanon recommitted to
making progress on the development of a national defence strategy, including through
statements by representatives at the highest levels. On 6 December 2017, in a
statement, President Aoun’s office said that, “through dialogue between the Lebanese
on various issues of concern, especially the defence strategy, we can achieve common
grounds that promote stability and fortify unity”. In its statement of 8 December, the
International Support Group for Lebanon called on all Lebanese parties to resume
discussions towards a consensus on a national defence strategy and welcomed the
statement of the President of Lebanon in that regard. On 8 May 2018, in a televised
address to the nation after the parliamentary elections, President Aoun reportedly
stated that he would be calling for parties to sit down and discuss the implementation
of the Taif Accords and a national defence strategy.
34. Ahead of the Rome II conference, President Aoun, on 12 March 2018,
emphasized the importance of providing the Lebanese Armed Forces with qualitative
weapons “to enable it to play its role through the national defence strategy, which will
be discussed by Lebanese leaders after the parliamentary elections in May that will
result in a new Government”. In his speech at the opening session of the conference,
Prime Minister Hariri referred to President Aoun’s commitment to discuss the
national defence strategy following the May elections. He also joined the President ’s
call to the international community to support the Lebanese Armed Forces, “to enable
them to assume their duty of preserving security and stability in accordance with the
national defence strategy”. Conference participants called on all Lebanese parties to
resume discussions towards a consensus on a national defence strategy and welcomed
the President’s statement of 12 March in that regard. That message was reiterated by
the Security Council in its above-mentioned press statement of 27 March.
35. In a televised speech on 21 March, Hizbullah’s secretary-general, Hassan
Nasrallah, expressed his party’s openness to discussing a national defence strategy,
recalling that Hizbullah had presented its vision during the national dialogue of 2006.
In the same speech, he expressed Hizbullah’s support for the Lebanese Armed Forces
and the Internal Security Forces, emphasizing, however, the importance of giving
them “arms to protect from the Israeli threats and attacks”.

18-08131

7/11

S/2018/480

36. The participation of Hizbullah and other Lebanese in the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic continued to breach the policy of disassociation and the principles of
the Baabda Declaration.
37. The security situation in Palestine refugee camps remained mostly stable, but
relatively tense. On 7 December 2017, in the camps of Beddawi, Nahr el -Bared, Ein
El-Helweh and Mieh Mieh, Palestine refugees, through sit-ins and peaceful strikes,
protested the decision made by the United States on 6 December to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. On 18 March 2018, thousands of Palestine refugees
reportedly took part in a Hamas-sponsored event in Sidon marking 100 days since
that decision. In a speech made on 11 December 2017 at a rally to protest the United
States decision, Hizbullah’s secretary-general Nasrallah called for the “unification of
all resistance … factions in the region” through the setting-up of a unified strategy
for confrontation, pledging that Hizbullah would live up to its responsibilities in that
regard.
38. Separately, in early March 2018, a string of seemingly unrelated incidents
occurred in the refugee camps of Rashidieh and Shatila, apparently as the result of
personal disputes that had turned into factional fighting. On 4 March, a personal
dispute between a Syrian and a Palestine refugee reportedly erupted in the Rashidieh
camp and escalated into a shoot-out involving members of the Islamist group Jund
Ansar Allah, resulting in the killing of two individuals and the setting ablaze of a
number of homes and shops. On 7 March, clashes involving machine guns and rocket propelled grenades reportedly erupted between the Fatah al -Intifada and al-Sa‘iqa
groups at the Shatila refugee camp, killing one person and wounding two others. A
suspect was reportedly arrested by the Lebanese Armed Forces shortly after the
clashes. On 17 March, the killing of a member of Fatah in the Mieh Mieh refugee
camp reportedly resulted in armed clashes between Fatah members and the camp’s
security forces, as well as in high tensions across the camps.
39. The situation in Ein El-Helweh was marked by a relative lull during the
reporting period, including as tensions between Fatah and Islamist factions notably
decreased. On 28 October 2017, the General Director of the General Directorate of
General Security, Major General Abbas Ibrahim, reportedly informed the media of
the departure from Ein El-Helweh to the Syrian Arab Republic of the Islamist militant
Shadi al-Mawlawi, who had been involved in clashes in Tripoli, including against the
Lebanese Armed Forces, in 2014. According to information reportedly released by
Bilal Badr on social media on 2 January 2018, the latter left Ein El-Helweh and settled
in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 9 February, armed clashes in the camp between Fatah
and members of an Islamist armed group reportedly left three injured. On 4 April, two
people were killed and three others wounded in a gunfight between two members of
Islamist factions in Ein El-Helweh. During the reporting period, three individuals
wanted by the Lebanese authorities turned themselves in and one was handed over by
the joint Palestinian security forces. Four individuals, including a 17 -year-old, from
Ein El-Helweh were arrested on terrorism-related charges.
40. The ability of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to deliver its essential health, education, relief
and social services has been challenged, including following the a nnouncement by
the United States on 17 January 2018 of its decision to reduce its funding to the Agency.
On 15 March, Egypt, Jordan and Sweden co-chaired an extraordinary ministerial
conference in Rome entitled “Preserving dignity and sharing responsibility —
mobilizing collective action for UNRWA”, which I attended. As of May 2018, the
overall shortfall in the Agency’s budget had been reduced to less than $246 million.
41. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps also continued.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 in the context of the national dialogue,
8/11

18-08131

S/2018/480

and confirmed at subsequent sessions, to disarm Palestinian militias outside the camps
within a six-month period, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country.
42. On 14 January 2018, the Hamas official Mohammad Hamdan was reportedly
wounded in the suspected explosion of an improvised explosive device that targeted
his car in Sidon. A statement reportedly issued by the Hamas media bureau claimed
that “preliminary investigations seemed to point to Israel’s responsibility for the
attack”. Following an investigation by the Lebanese authorities and the arrest of one
of the alleged perpetrators, the Lebanese Ministry of Interior and Municipalities
announced on 26 January that the suspect had admitted to the attack and claimed to
have been directed by Israeli intelligence agencies. Israel has firmly denied any
involvement in the attack.

II. Observations
43. Lebanon recently witnessed several tumultuous months, during which Lebanese
leaders came to the fore to confront existing challenges in a united fashion. The
international conferences held in support of Lebanon are a testament to the
importance that members of the international community attach to preserving the
stability of Lebanon in a region in turmoil. The conferences also demonstrated the
sustained efforts that international players and Lebanese leaders have made to
reinforce institutions of the State, in particular its legitimate security forces.
44. The emphasis on the disassociation policy has been at the forefront of the
international community’s message in its efforts to maintain the stability of Lebanon.
Respect for the disassociation policy and the Baabda Declaration of 2012 is necessary
to prevent Lebanon from becoming embroiled in conflicts in the region. I note the
renewed commitment to the disassociation policy expressed unanimously by the
Lebanese Cabinet, as well as by President Aoun and Prime Minister Hariri. I echo and
support the Prime Minister’s message that every party is responsible for the
implementation of the disassociation policy. I join my voice with those of other
international actors in their repeated calls for tangible implementation of the
disassociation policy without delay.
45. I have already noted, in my report on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) (S/2018/210), that unauthorized visits by foreign militia members to South
Lebanon undermine the authority of the State and run counter to the spirit of
disassociation.
46. The widespread presence of weapons outside the control of the State, combined
with the existence of heavily armed militias, undermines the security of Lebanese
citizens. The maintenance by Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated military
capabilities outside the control of the Government of Lebanon remains a matter of
grave concern. I reiterate my calls for all concerned to contribute to efforts to
reinforce the institutions of the Lebanese State. I also reiterate my call for Hizbullah
and all other parties concerned not to engage in any military activity inside or outside
Lebanon, consistent with the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559
(2004). I continue to urge the Government and the armed forces of Lebanon to take
all measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and other arme d groups from acquiring
weapons and building paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the State, in
violation of resolution 1559 (2004).
47. Hizbullah’s engagement in the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic is in breach
of the disassociation policy and the principles of the Baabda Declaration of 2012. The

18-08131

9/11

S/2018/480

involvement of Hizbullah in the Syrian Arab Republic for several years demonstrates
the failure of Hizbullah to disarm and its refusal to be accountable to the State
institutions that the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) was intended to
strengthen.
48. I also continue to be concerned by the reported involvement of Hizbullah, as
well as that of other Lebanese elements, in fighting elsewhere in the region, which
carries the risk of entangling Lebanon in the regional conflicts and poses risks to the
stability of Lebanon and of the region. Such activities challenge the prospect of the
full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). I call upon countries in the region that
maintain close ties with Hizbullah to encourage the transformation of that armed
group into a solely civilian political party, and its disarmament, in accordance with
the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004), in the best interests
of Lebanon and of regional peace and security.
49. I congratulate Lebanon on the holding of parliamentary elections on 6 May,
which represents a vital step in strengthening its State institutions and consolidating
its democratic tradition. In particular, the renewal of the country’s Parliament through
elections for the first time in almost 10 years is necessary for Lebanese citizens to
feel adequately represented. I urge all members of Parliament, once they are in office,
to ensure efficient political decision-making on issues affecting the everyday lives of
citizens and to further the normalization of the country’s institutional functioning. As
I have stated, I look forward to the expeditious formation of the new Government and
call on the political leaders of Lebanon to work in a spirit of unity and with a view to
furthering the ambitious agenda set out by the country and its international partners.
50. I welcome the efforts of Lebanon to develop and modernize its security
institutions, including through the development of strategic plans defining its vision
and its resource needs. I echo the endorsement by the International Support Group for
Lebanon of the Government’s vision of the Lebanese Armed Forces as the sole
defender of the Lebanese State and protector of its borders, and that of the Internal
Security Forces as a key instrument in building the monopoly of the use of force by
the State. I welcome the pledges made to financially and technically support the
implementation of these plans, and call on partners to further en hance their support
in order to respond to the needs outlined by the Government of Lebanon. I renew the
call of the participants for Lebanon to fully implement all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1559 (2004).
51. I welcome President Aoun’s commitment on 12 March to develop a national
defence strategy after the parliamentary elections. I am encouraged by the President ’s
confidence that common ground in that regard can be achieved through dialogue, and
I reaffirm the readiness of the United Nations to support that process. I heed the call
of the participants in the International Support Group for Lebanon for all Lebanese
parties to resume discussions on a national defence strategy, and I look forward to
early tangible steps in that regard. Now is the time for Lebanon to resume the national
dialogue as a Lebanese-owned, Lebanese-led process, in line with the country’s
international obligations. It is important that such a strategy ad dress the need to
achieve a State monopoly over the possession and use of weapons and the use of
force. I encourage President Aoun to continue to demonstrate leadership in steering
forward that effort, and I call on all political leaders to support it.
52. I remain concerned that the financial pressure being exerted on UNRWA could
hinder its ability to deliver its essential health, educational, social and relief services
to highly vulnerable Palestine refugees. UNRWA services, in many cases, are
lifesaving for the population it serves. Their discontinuation would have drastic
consequences, both for the people who benefit from such services and for the overall
stability in the Palestine refugee camps and the region. I am grateful to those Member
10/11

18-08131

S/2018/480

States that have advanced their annual commitments and that made pledges at the
Rome extraordinary ministerial conference to enable UNRWA to continue operations
in the near term, and I look forward to significant additional financial support. Such
efforts are without prejudice to the eventual resolution of the Palestine refugee
question in the context of a comprehensive settlement in the region.
53. The continued political and socioeconomic fragility in the Palestine refugee
camps is an environment conducive to the degeneration of personal disputes into
factional fighting, which at times results in casualties. I renew my call for the
Government to implement earlier decisions made in the context of the national
dialogue in 2006 pertaining to the disarmament of Palestinian militias, as called for
in the document entitled “A unified Lebanese vision for the Palestinian refugees
affairs in Lebanon”, the implementation of which I encourage.
54. Lebanon continues to face on its own soil the political, security, humanitarian
and social impacts of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. I welcome the
continuous generosity of Lebanon in responding to the crisis. I urge donors to offer
concrete support to Lebanon in its response to the crisis.
55. I condemn all violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
They also undermine the credibility of the Lebanese security services and generate
anxiety among the civilian population. I renew my calls for Israel to adhere to its
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions and to withdraw its forces
from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue
Line, as well as to immediately cease its overflights of Lebanese airspace.
56. The decrease in the number of incidents of shooting, shelling, air strikes, rocket
attacks and incursions from the Syrian Arab Republic is noteworthy. I note, however,
that no progress has been made by the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon in the
delineation of their common border, which is critical to enable proper border control
and management, including the movement of people and the potential movement of
arms. I call upon all concerned to cease violations of the border and to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
57. Lebanon has received high-level attention from the international community on
the political, economic and security fronts over the past few months. The onus is now
on the country to demonstrate meaningful progress on key policy issues of relevance
to resolution 1559 (2004), including the tangible implementation of the disassociation
policy and the resumption of a dialogue on a national defence strategy. I therefore
count on the continued commitment of the Government of Lebanon to its international
obligations, and I call upon all parties and actors to fully abide by resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). The United Nations will continue its efforts
towards the full implementation of those and all other resolutions pertaining to
Lebanon.

18-08131

11/11
