United Nations

S/PV.6434

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6434th meeting
Monday, 6 December 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Anderson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Mr. Briens
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Sumi
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 1 November 2010 from the President of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/588)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-67368 (E)

*1067368*

S/PV.6434

Letter dated 5 November 2010 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994, addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2010/574)

2

10-67368

S/PV.6434

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994
Letter dated 1 November 2010 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2010/588)
Letter dated 5 November 2010 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994
and 31 December 1994, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2010/574)
The President: I have received letters from the
representatives of Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia,
requesting to participate in this meeting. I propose to
invite those representatives to participate in this
meeting without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

10-67368

The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend invitations under rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure to Judge
Patrick Robinson, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; Judge Dennis
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
It is so decided.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the following documents: S/2010/413, containing
the annual report of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia; S/2010/588, containing a letter
dated 1 November 2010 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/2010/408, containing the annual report of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda; and S/2010/574,
containing a letter dated 5 November 2010 from the
President of the International Tribunal for Rwanda
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson.
Judge Robinson: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council today in my capacity as
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and particularly to do so under the
presidency of the United States. I would also like to
express my sincere appreciation for the support shown
for the work of the Tribunal by the outgoing members
of the Security Council: Austria, Japan, Mexico,
Turkey and Uganda. In particular, the Tribunal is
grateful to Austria, as Chair of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
for the substantial progress that has been in the
development of a residual mechanism.
My remarks today will be brief, as the details of
the measures that the Tribunal has undertaken to
complete its mandate are set out in the written biannual
report, which has been duly submitted to the Security
Council (S/2010/588).
At the close of the reporting period, 13 persons
were in appeal proceedings and 18 persons were on
trial. Two accused, Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić,
remain at-large. To date, we have concluded
proceedings against 125 of the 161 persons indicted by

3

S/PV.6434

the Tribunal. During the reporting period, the Tribunal
conducted proceedings in 10 trials concurrently by
doubling-up judges and staff so that they were working
on more than one case at a time. The second of the
Tribunal’s three multi-accused trials, Prosecutor v.
Popović et al., was brought to a close. Đorđević,
Gotovina et al., Perišić and the Haradinaj partial
retrial will conclude in 2011. Five trials — Prlić et al.,
Šešelj, Stanišić and Simatović, Stanišić and Župljanin,
and Tolimir — are anticipated to conclude in 2012. The
final case — that of Karadžić — should be completed
at the end of 2013.
Two appeal judgements were rendered, and
appeals from three trial judgements are currently
pending before the Appeals Chamber. All appeals are
still scheduled to be completed by the end of 2014,
although the recent, unavoidable delays in the Karadžić
case suggest that this date will have to be reassessed at
an appropriate time. The judges of the Appeals Chamber
also continued to work at maximum capacity on appeals
from the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
The Tribunal continues to take all measures
possible to expedite its trials, without sacrificing due
process. In this regard, I must tell the Council that the
judges have reported feeling extreme pressure to
expedite the work of the Tribunal. I must also say that
this troubles me because judges are entitled to work in
an environment free from all external pressures so that
their independence is not compromised or does not
appear to be compromised.
Despite Herculean efforts to expedite our
proceedings, some estimates from the last reporting
period have had to be amended. Although the trial
schedule is estimated by reference to factors that are
within the Tribunal’s control, there are important
influences upon the schedule that are not within our
control, such as witness intimidation, the failure of
witnesses to appear, the illness of accused, the death of
defence counsel, the complexities associated with selfrepresented accused, the discovery of new evidence,
and perennial staff attrition.
On the issue of our debilitating staff attrition, I
would like to sincerely thank the Security Council for
responding to the pleas of the Tribunal for assistance
by adopting resolution 1931 (2010) in June, which
noted the importance of the Tribunal being adequately
staffed to complete its work expeditiously and called
upon the Secretariat and other relevant United Nations

4

bodies to continue to work with the Registrar to find
practicable solutions to address this issue as the
Tribunal draws to a close. But that resolution must be
translated into action, and unfortunately it has not. The
confusion that started with General Assembly
Resolution 63/256 not being implemented due to
budgetary constraints continues.
Most recently, in June 2010, the StaffManagement Coordination Committee — a body
comprised of the Office of Human Resource
Management (OHRM), staff unions and United Nations
administrators — made two recommendations
regarding the Tribunals, which were approved by the
Deputy Secretary-General on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral. One of those recommendations was that our
staff be given two-year fixed-term appointments,
subject to another extension of two years. Following
consultation at New York Headquarters in October,
OHRM clarified that it was fully within the authority
of the Registrar to issue contracts to staff for a period
of two years, regardless of approved budgetary
funds — a position contrary to its view that General
Assembly resolution 63/256 only authorizes contracts
in conformity with approved budgetary funds.
OHRM also told us that the purpose of the StaffManagement Coordination Committee’s recommendation
was to provide an incentive to staff by way of an
indemnity payment if and when contracts were
terminated prior to expiration. But it was OHRM’s
position that such indemnity had to be covered by the
Tribunal’s existing resources and that no request for
additional funding to cover indemnity payments could
be made. And herein lies the problem. The Tribunal
does not have the resources, nor can it find them, to
implement resolution 63/256. Again, the Tribunal is
offered a measure that on its face seems to provide a
way of stemming the rapid tide of staff attrition, but in
reality is entirely meaningless.
Moreover, the second recommendation of the
Staff-Management Coordination Committee has also
been rendered meaningless. This recommendation was
that Tribunal staff be given priority in consideration of
eligibility for conversion to permanent contracts.
However, OHRM has advised that no such priority will
be given. Indeed, it has referred all recommendations
for permanent contracts by the Tribunal to a central
review board on the basis that it did not agree with any
of them. OHRM has made no secret of the fact that the
recommendations are likely to languish with the review

10-67368

S/PV.6434

board for some time. I have to say that, somewhat
surprisingly, the Secretary-General’s bulletin on the
consideration of permanent contracts provides for no
such review procedure.
Turning to other matters, I would like to bring to
the Council’s attention again the need to compensate
the victims of the armed conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia. In order to build a lasting peace, justice
must not only be retributive; it must also be restorative.
The International Criminal Court and the 114 States
that have ratified the Rome Statute accept the
importance of compensation to victims of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, and the United
Nations must do the same. I therefore call upon the
Council to support the establishment of a victims’ trust
fund in order to complement the Tribunal’s criminal
trials by providing victims with the necessary resources
to rebuild their lives.
In making this proposal, the Tribunal is extremely
sensitive to the financial difficulties being experienced
by Member States, and it has not escaped our notice
that, lately, the importance of the concept of justice has
come under fire. But it is precisely in difficult times
that we must be the most vigilant in safeguarding the
role of justice in our society. We must not lose sight of
the reason why the Security Council created the
Tribunal in the first place. It was the German
philosopher Immanuel Kant who posed the issue in the
starkest of terms, stating that the greatest problem for
the human species is that of attaining a civil society
that can administer universal justice.
Although Kant said those words over 200 years
ago, we are engaged in the same struggle today. Courts
are vulnerable institutions because they are dependent
upon other governmental entities for their very
existence. What ultimately safeguards the ability of
courts to function is the consensus of the community
that justice is a quality worth protecting in its purest
form. In carrying out that function, every staff member
of the Tribunal is committed to playing his or her part
to the very best of his or her ability. It is simply
wonderful to witness the United Nations working as a
family to put into practice the ideal of justice upon
which the United Nations was founded.
I travel to New York twice a year to give the
Council an assessment of the progress of our work, but
it really is a shame that the members of the Security
Council do not have the opportunity to see the Tribunal

10-67368

that I see when I arrive at work in the morning. When I
enter the Tribunal in the early hours of the morning, I
pass a security officer from the United States
reverently raising the United Nations flag. I say hello
to a financial analyst from China who is working on
our next budget submission to the General Assembly. I
walk past a prosecutor from the United Kingdom
nervously practicing her oral argument outside the
courtroom. Inside the courtroom, a defence counsel
from France is consulting with her client before the
hearing begins. As I near the corridor of the judges, I
peek in on a legal officer from Russia working hard to
complete a judgement that is to be rendered soon.
I see faces of the young and the old, men and
women, people from the East and from the West.
Despite their differences, they are all interconnected by
a common thread — they are all ministers of justice.
Theirs are the varied faces of the Tribunal that few ever
get to see. They all came to the Tribunal because they
wanted to be a part of the bold new era ushered in by
the Security Council in May 1993. They came to the
Tribunal to work in a place where they could use their
skills to build a more just world where the guilty are
punished, the innocent go free and the victims have
their day in court. In short, they wanted to help fashion
a world where each person gets what he or she
deserves. That is the very character of justice.
If those staff members are the ministers of
justice, then the members of the Security Council are
the architects of that justice, for it is the Council
members who created the Tribunal in order to stamp
out impunity and bring justice to the former
Yugoslavia. This brings me to the question of why
justice matters. Justice matters because, in a world
without justice, right would be determined by might
and the weak would be at the mercy of the strong.
None of us would want to live in a world where people
did not get what they deserve but what they were able
to take. All of our lives would be much darker without
the light of justice to guide us on our way.
We at the Tribunal are fully aware of its ad hoc
and temporary status. I know I speak for all of us at the
Tribunal when I say that, no matter what we do in our
future professional lives, we will always look back
with nostalgia tinged with gratitude and pride at our
tenure with the Tribunal as a time when we were able
to make a modest difference in the world; as a time
when we were privileged to be a positive force in the
universe. But our work is not finished yet. Those of us

5

S/PV.6434

at the Tribunal who go to work each day and who have
faithfully remained at our posts desperately need our
parent, the Security Council, to stand by us until we
complete the work that the Council started back in
1993. We need the Council to stand by us as we
implement its vision of a world that is ruled not by
might, but by right.
I promise that future generations will not look
back at the work of the Security Council and the
Tribunal and wonder why the completion of a
particular trial was delayed. Rather, our children and
grandchildren will admire the members of the Security
Council, the Tribunal and indeed the United Nations as
a whole for our willingness to be bold, to change the
world, to transform it into a safer and more just place
to live, and to achieve our greatest potential as human
beings. What will be remembered is the justice that
was achieved and the courage of those who were
willing to do what was necessary to make justice a
living and breathing reality.
The President: I thank Judge Robinson for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Dennis Byron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.
Judge Byron: I would like to begin by
congratulating the representative of the United States
on her country’s presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. I wish her all the best for a
successful tour of duty.
I am pleased to present to the members of the
Security Council the fourteenth completion strategy
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (see S/2010/574). I would like to express the
gratitude of the entire Tribunal to the Governments
represented here and to the Secretariat for their
continued trust and support on all levels over the past
six months. I would also like to say a special word of
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Austria for his important work during the past two
years as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals. It would be beneficial if that
work soon led to an agreement on the structure and
location of the residual mechanism to facilitate a
smooth transition process.
Since my last report in June (6342nd meeting) the
Tribunal has rendered five trial and two appeals

6

judgements. The number of remaining judgements to
be delivered at the trial level is now down to 10. We
expect judgements in four trials, with respect to 15
accused, in the first half of 2011. We aim to deliver the
remaining six judgments, with respect to seven
accused, before the end of 2011.
We have recently requested authorization for
three judges, whose terms of office has not been
extended, to be allowed to complete their assignments,
which will spill over into early 2011. I ask for the
Council’s support in approving the short extension of
those judges in order that they may complete their
judgements.
Four trials are currently ongoing, and we expect
evidence to be completed in the first quarter of next
year. In January 2011, the last new trial under current
projections will begin. As additional judicial workload,
we also anticipate one or more proceedings for
contempt of court and the hearings for preservation of
evidence in the cases of three fugitives under new rule
71 bis.
Council members may have read that the
Prosecutor has recently submitted three requests for
transfers of cases to Rwanda for trial — one in the case
of Jean Uwinkindi, who is in pretrial detention in
Arusha, and the other two in cases of fugitives. Last
week, I assigned the benches to rule on those requests.
The outcome of that judicial procedure will impact
upon the completion date for our trial work. I would
like to use this occasion to call on Security Council
members to consider accepting referral cases under
their home jurisdiction, as Rwanda is willing to do.
Of course, given the unpredictability of certain
factors, the judicial calendar can only provide
estimates of expected judgement delivery dates. For
example, it is difficult to foresee when fair trial
requirements may necessitate provision of additional
time to the parties. Nevertheless, we believe, based on
the current workload, that our goal of completing the
first instance trials within the next year can be
achieved, with a small caveat for the new trial, which
will commence only in January and for which the goal
of completion by December might seem ambitious.
The target date of the end 2011 means, for the
appeals, that we maintain the goal of completion by the
end of 2013. However, depending upon the staffing
situation — which I will address shortly — we cannot
exclude further delays in judgement delivery.

10-67368

S/PV.6434

As evidenced by the graphs presented in the
completion strategy report (S/2010/574), our trial
management initiatives have resulted in more
expeditious trials and pre-trial over the last years,
while upholding the highest standards of fair trial
rights. However, those advances cannot be maintained
if the pressing staff retention issue is not addressed.

Council and the General Assembly for their consideration
of the Secretary-General’s recommendations. The ad
litem judges have made and continue to make a
significant contribution to the work of the Tribunal. In
the interests of the completion strategy, I trust that the
General Assembly will acknowledge that contribution
in an appropriate way.

I want to highlight to this Council yet again the
very difficult staffing situation at the Tribunal and the
fact that that if left unaddressed the problem will lead
to significant additional delays. In 2010, Tribunal lost
almost 100 staff members. For Chambers alone, the
number is 19, which is a high percentage of our
staffing level.

I turn now to another important point: the issue of
State cooperation.

In order to stem the tide of departures and to
facilitate new recruitments, the Organization must
continue to be innovative in administering the Staff
Rules. We cannot ignore that the circumstances of a
downsizing institution are specific, and that creates
particular challenges. The Tribunal’s human resources
should not be treated like any standard staffing
situation in a permanent United Nations agency. For
example, rules such as the compulsory six-month break
for former consultants before a new appointment can
impact significantly on our ability to meet the
judgement delivery deadlines if they prevent the
speedy recruitment of experienced candidates, in
particular of former staff members.
After mine and President Robinson’s speeches in
June, the Council adopted two resolutions (1931 (2010)
and 1932 (2010)), which noted the importance of the
Tribunals being adequately staffed and called upon the
Secretariat to work with the Registrars of the Tribunals
to find practicable solutions to address that issue.
The resolutions also urged the Tribunals, once
more, to complete their work expeditiously. We are
indeed doing everything possible to complete our work
without undue delay. However, as staff continue to
leave at an alarming rate and our recruitment efforts
face significant obstacles, further delays in judgement
delivery are inevitable. We call upon Member States to
recognize the unique circumstances of a downsizing
institution such as ours and to encourage the
responsible bodies of the Organization to be flexible in
the application of the Staff Rules while preserving their
principles.

I intend to render decisions on the transfer of four
convicts to a Member State for the enforcement of their
sentences within the next weeks, and I would like to
thank all States that have concluded agreements with
the Tribunal to receive convicts for their cooperation.
Only two weeks ago, the Tribunal signed an additional
agreement with Senegal.
Despite significant efforts by the Registrar, three
acquitted persons have still not been resettled and
remain in safe houses in Arusha. As I stated in my last
speech, for one of them, André Ntagerura, it has now
been four years since the confirmation of his acquittal
by the Appeals Chamber.
Additionally, the issue of the relocation of
convicted persons who have served their sentences
needs urgent attention. Those persons are in a legal
vacuum, as we can currently see in at least one of those
cases. There will be many persons in that position in
the coming years. If the problem is not dealt with
through a comprehensive, long-term approach, the
interests of justice and the rule of law will not be
served. That is especially true as the problem will also
affect the International Criminal Court in the future.
The Tribunal therefore calls upon the international
community to urgently commence a review process to
develop a lasting mechanism for dealing with that
problem.
Ten fugitives still remain at large. The last arrest
of a fugitive was made over five months ago. The
Tribunal depends on the cooperation of Member States
for the tracking, arrest and transfer of fugitives.
Following resolution 1932 (2010), which called on
States, especially those in the Great Lakes region, to
cooperate to bring indictees of the Tribunal to justice,
Kenya recently met with representatives of the
Tribunal. I am sure the Prosecutor will provide you
with a more comprehensive briefing on that matter.

With respect to the terms and conditions of
service of the ad litem judges, I thank the members of the

10-67368

7

S/PV.6434

I want to thank the Council for the commitment
and support it has shown the Tribunal and to me
personally over the last years. As a citizen of a small
nation — Saint Kitts and Nevis — it is a special
honour for me and my country to serve the
international community.
The International Tribunals the Council created in
1994 established international criminal justice as an
essential tool in challenging impunity for the most
horrendous crimes. We should not forget, in our focus
on the completion strategy, the significant contribution
the Tribunals have made to international law and to the
acceptance of justice as an indispensable element of
international peace and stability. As our Tribunal, in its
current form, draws to a close, we should all redouble
our efforts to ensure its lasting legacy as a beacon for
international justice.
The President: I thank Judge Byron for his
briefing. I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: Once again, it is my duty and
pleasure to address the Security Council on the
progress of the Office of the Prosecutor towards the
completion of the Tribunal’s mandate. We have our
eyes firmly fixed on the completion of our activities.
Our challenge is to finalize our work expeditiously
while at the same time preserving the integrity of our
proceedings and the overall interests of justice.
Everyone present today has a common interest in
striking the right balance between those two important
objectives.
I am conscious of the fact that the original
deadline for completion of the Tribunal’s work — the
end of 2010 — will pass us by while we are still
occupied with multiple trials and appeals. As we have
explained in our completion strategy reports over the
years, culminating in our present report (see
S/2010/588), there are many reasons for that.
International criminal justice is a complex and
unpredictable endeavour. Nevertheless, I take
responsibility for the delays that can be attributed to
the Office of the Prosecutor.
We assure the Council that we are continuously
reflecting on our performance and devising strategies
to further improve the efficiency of our work. We
understand that the international community has finite
resources and many competing priorities. We reiterate
our commitment to ensuring that the international
community’s investment in justice and accountability

8

in the former Yugoslavia pays maximum dividends
within an acceptable time frame.
In my remarks today, I will emphasize our
Office’s top four current priorities.
First, we are focused on the successful and
efficient completion of our trials and appeals. The
Council has a large volume of information on the
progress of the Tribunal’s cases before it in the reports
submitted by the President (ibid., annex I) and by our
Office (ibid., annex II). We are moving ahead, and
several milestones were reached in the current
reporting period. Two trials and one appeal case were
concluded. Two other trials reached their final stage
and are scheduled for completion early next year, and
the Prosecution concluded the presentation of its
evidence in two further trials. Another case, Haradinaj
et al, has been remitted for a partial retrial. To cope
with the extra work, we have had to stretch thinner the
existing resources in our Office and use them in a more
flexible way.
Our Office is working at maximum capacity. The
increasingly frequent rates of staff departures,
particularly in the critical final phase of our cases,
means that we must ask more and more of those who
remain. The dedication of staff in our Office is notable,
and through their efforts we have been able to proceed
with our cases as required.
The second priority I want to mention today is
securing the cooperation of States.
When it comes to Serbia, cooperation in our
ongoing cases is proceeding well. Serbia is facilitating
our requests for access to documents and archives, and
witness related issues are being handled satisfactorily.
However, Serbia’s failure to capture the two
remaining fugitives — Ratko Mladić and Goran
Hadžić — is one of our foremost concerns. Serbia must
bridge the gap between its stated commitment to the
arrests and the effectiveness of its operations on the
ground. Time is passing, and we are not seeing results.
In our last completion strategy report (S/2010/270), we
made a number of recommendations aimed at
improving the effectiveness of Serbia’s efforts to
capture the fugitives. In my trip to Serbia this past
November, I saw that the authorities are working on
the implementation of our recommendations. But there
is still much left to be done, and the progress must be
faster.

10-67368

S/PV.6434

Overall, Serbia needs to adopt a more proactive
approach to arresting the fugitives. At the heart of that
more proactive approach should be a comprehensive
strategy that integrates all relevant actors and covers
all possible angles for exerting positive pressure
towards the arrests. For example, in addition to the
search activities, there must be a rigorous approach to
dealing with individuals or networks that support the
fugitives in their efforts to evade justice. The Serbian
authorities must clearly signal that those who harbour
the fugitives will be punished. Serbia holds the key to
arresting Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić. Those
fugitives can be brought to justice if all relevant actors
are sufficiently committed and effectively work
together to bring it about.
When it comes to Croatia, the authorities are
generally responsive to our requests for assistance. The
key outstanding issue remains our request for
important military documents relating to Operation
Storm. The task force established by the Government
to locate or account for the missing military documents
has now started working on exploring new
investigative avenues identified by my Office more
than one year ago. However, the reports sent to our
Office by the authorities reveal inconsistencies and
raise questions that have not been resolved. After I
submitted my written report to the Council, the
authorities sent an additional report to our Office
identifying a number of the problematic areas. We
encourage Croatia to address those problems and to
account for the missing documents.
When it comes to Bosnia and Herzegovina, again
we have seen satisfactory responses to our requests for
assistance. However, we ask the authorities to redouble
their efforts against fugitive networks. We continue to
support the full implementation of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina National War Crimes Strategy. While an
important development, we encourage courts dealing
with war crimes cases at all levels of the judicial
system to further improve their working relationships.
Coordinated
strategies
for
war
crimes
prosecutions are also important among the States of the
former Yugoslavia. Currently, barriers to extraditing
suspects and transferring evidence across State borders
are impeding efforts to establish accountability for war
crimes throughout the region. Solutions must be found
to these problems as a matter of urgency.

This brings me to the third priority, namely,
building the capacity of our counterparts in the region
of the former Yugoslavia. We want to be sure that, by
the time the Tribunal closes its doors, we have done
everything possible to transfer information and
expertise to courts in the region of the former
Yugoslavia so that they can successfully manage the
large number of remaining war crimes cases.
A key component of our efforts in this regard is
our European Union-funded liaison prosecutors
project, whereby three prosecutors from the region
work as liaison prosecutors in our Office in The Hague.
The liaison prosecutors are integrated with our staff
and have a unique opportunity to consult with in-house
experts and to access mainly Tribunal databases for the
purposes of their local war crimes investigations and
prosecutions.
The fourth and final priority I want to mention
today is our commitment to downsizing our Office and
ensuring a smooth and effective transition to the
proposed residual mechanism. During the reporting
period, our Office abolished 30 professional posts and
12 general service posts. This reduction of posts is part
of a process that will continue and gather further
momentum in the next reporting period as more trials
end.
At the same time, our Office continues to engage
in and contribute to discussions on the establishment of
a residual mechanism to take over the outstanding
aspects of our work when we close our doors.
Designing an appropriate mechanism is a complex
exercise, and we are making every effort to ensure that
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
established by this Council to carry out this task has
our support and the benefit of our experience.
In concluding, I return to the theme I mentioned
at the outset, namely, our common interest in striking
the right balance between the expeditious completion
of our activities and the integrity of our work. We are
unquestionably focused on the end of our activities but,
at the same time, we need the support of the
international community more than ever. We need its
commitment to ensuring that we have the resources
necessary to complete our mandate. After 17 years of
groundbreaking work and important accomplishments,
we must not falter at this final hurdle.
Crucially, we need the international community’s
help in securing the arrest of the two remaining

10-67368

9

S/PV.6434

fugitives. We have an obligation to ensure that those
two individuals face the charges brought against them.
We cannot abandon the victims of some of the worst
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia —
including the genocide in Srebrenica — and leave them
without full redress. More generally, the failure to
arrest Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić impedes
reconciliation in the region and damages the credibility
of the international legal system as a whole.
While the key to the arrests lies in Serbia, the
international community also has an important role to
play. With its assistance and the effective
implementation of conditionality policies, positive
incentives can be given to Serbia to precipitate the
arrests. With the concerted effort of all relevant actors,
we can prevail over the fugitives and their support
networks.
The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for his
statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Jallow: Since our last report to the Council
on 18 June 2010 (see S/PV.6342), the Office of the
Prosecutor at the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) has continued to focus its efforts on
the core activities for ensuring the trial readiness of
new cases; the completion of ongoing trials;
preparations for the renewal of our requests for referral
of cases to Rwanda for trial; preparations for the
commencement of rule 71 bis evidence preservation
proceedings; the conduct of appeals; the intensification
of our tracking efforts; and the provision of legal
assistance to national authorities in respect of cases
being investigated by them.
Today, with the delivery this morning in Arusha
of judgement in the Hategekimana case, we have now
received five judgements arising out of the cases in
progress. On our side, the Office of the Prosecutor has
completed the evidence phase in the Gatete case and
we have closed the prosecution phase in respect of
three other cases — Nzabonimana, Ngirabatware and
Ndahimana — that are now in the defence phase.
These three cases now join the ongoing trial of
Karemera and two others.
We are now ready to commence proceedings in
respect of the Nizeyimana case, now scheduled for trial

10

on 17 January 2011. Finally, since the last reporting
period, the Office was able to secure the arrest of JeanBosco Uwinkindi, an indicted fugitive in Uganda, on
30 June, and to have him transferred to the Tribunal on
2 July. I would like to record our appreciation to the
Government of Uganda for its cooperation in securing
the arrest of this and other accused persons in the past
and their transfer to the Tribunal. Indeed, the interval
between the arrest and the transfer of — this particular
accused was a record-breaking event in the way it was
diligently pursued.
Over the same period, the Office of the
Prosecutor also prepared and filed three prosecution
appeals and responded to one defence appeal.
Currently, work is under way in anticipation of appeals
in respect of several judgements, which we expect to
have delivered from December onwards.
On 4 November, following extensive law reform
and measure to build the capacity of the Rwandan legal
system to address the concerns of ICTR judges in the
first round of referral requests, my Office filed
applications for referral of three ICTR indictees to
Rwanda for trial. They are Jean-Bosco Uwinkindi, a
recent arrestee, and two other fugitives, Fulgence
Kayishema and Charles Sikubwabo. The referral of all
but three of the 10 fugitives to national jurisdictions for
trial remains a key element of the completion strategy
of ICTR. In the absence of acceptance of these cases
by other Member States, Rwanda continues to be the
focus of this strategy.
Two other cases — Bucyibaruta and
Munyeshyaka — referred to France on 20 November
2007, remain with the French judiciary. It is our hope
that Member States with the requisite capacity will
share this responsibility of the ICTR completion
strategy by accepting transfers from the Tribunals of
some of the remaining cases.
A determination of the referral of the cases for
which requests have been filed will have a clear impact
on the completion strategy of the Tribunal and on the
design, the timing, the size and the cost of the
international residual mechanism expected to inherit
the residual functions of the Tribunal. In the absence of
a transfer of these cases and with the probable arrest of
fugitives in the near future, the work of the Tribunal
could increase significantly, thus extending the
projected dates for the completion of trials. The
transfer of such a workload to the proposed residual

10-67368

S/PV.6434

mechanism would expand the size and perhaps alter the
nature of such an institution. However, the referral of
these cases now to national jurisdictions could possibly
see the end of trials at the Tribunal by the end of 2011.
Tracking efforts to secure the arrest and transfer
to ICTR of Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana continue to be a top priority of our
tracking team. We continue to count on the call of the
Security Council on all States to cooperate fully with
us. We are committed, in the meantime, to continuing
and intensifying our tracking efforts for as long as
these fugitives remain earmarked for trial at ICTR.
In relation to the case of Kabuga, and following
the invitation extended to me by the Government of
Kenya in November 2010, I was able to meet last
month with the Minister for Internal Security and other
senior Government officials in Nairobi. I am pleased to
report that the Government of Kenya and the ICTR
delegation agreed to re-establish the joint ICTR/Kenya
police task force, with the mandate to receive and
review all material in the possession of the
Government in respect of the fugitive; to investigate
and report on his whereabouts and fully investigate his
assets and other interests in Kenya so as to assist the
ICTR tracking team; and to address all other pending
issues in relation to the case. We have also agreed that
the task force should report back within three months. I
hope that this renewed promise of cooperation from the
Government of Kenya will assist in our investigations
and bring this matter to a favourable conclusion.
For over a year now, my Office has also been in
contact with the Government of Zimbabwe in relation
to the fugitive Protais Mpiranya, the former
Commander of the Rwandan Presidential Guard and a
top-level indictee of the Tribunal. There are indications
that Mpiranya has connections with that country and
had for several periods resided therein. During my visit
to Harare in 2009, I was assured by officials of the
Government of Zimbabwe of their cooperation in that
particular matter. Investigators from my office continue
to work with their Zimbabwean counterparts. All the
same, I would urge the Zimbabwe Government to
devote top priority to the case of this high-level
fugitive in order to secure his location, arrest and
transfer to Arusha.
The majority of the ICTR fugitives have been
located within the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On a number of occasions, I visited that country and

10-67368

held discussions with high-level Government officials.
We re-sent the indictments and arrest warrants
regarding the fugitives to the Government and have
been promised effective support and cooperation for
their arrest. Nonetheless, I regret to report that, despite
those regular efforts on the part of my Office, there has
been very little progress in securing the arrest of the
majority of the detainees who are in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is urgent that the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kenya, Zimbabwe and the neighbouring States
intensify their cooperation and search for the 10
fugitives, all of whom, according to our sources, are
within East, Central and Southern Africa.
Cooperation between the ICTR and national
prosecuting and judicial authorities continues to
strengthen, as more and more national jurisdictions opt
to investigate, prosecute or, otherwise, deny safe haven
to genocide suspects residing within their respective
jurisdictions. During the current reporting period, my
Office has already processed and attended to 58 such
requests from 11 Member States for assistance with
evidence. That represents a very significant increase
over the levels in 2009. We expect that those requests
will continue. The support that is expected from the
Office of the Prosecutor involves an extensive search
of our evidentiary database for relevant materials for
use by the law-enforcement authorities.
Work on the international prosecutors’ manual of
best practice for the investigation and prosecution of
international crimes, a concrete legacy product of the
Colloquium of Prosecutors of International Criminal
Tribunals, has received much needed support from the
Government of Canada. The manual is under
preparation and is expected to be ready by the middle
of 2011. Indeed, we are greatly indebted to Canada for
sponsoring that particular project.
In the months ahead, we expect to commence the
trial of Idelphonse Nizeyimana, to file additional
requests for the referral of the cases of the remaining
five fugitives to national jurisdictions, to prepare for
the commencement of evidence preservation
proceedings in respect of the cases of Kabuga,
Mpiranya and Bizimana, and, also, to continue our
tracking efforts.
All those activities — preparing new cases,
supporting ongoing trials and commencing fresh
proceedings under rule 71 bis, as well as tracking —

11

S/PV.6434

continue to be challenged by staffing constraints. As
reported at the last meeting (see S/PV.6342), the Office
of the Prosecutor continues, at this critical juncture, to
lose staff with experience and institutional memory in
trial and, particularly, in tracking. Attracting competent
and experienced staff to replace them for just a short
period of time has been a slow process.
Extended multitasking on the part of staff and
staff concerns about contract extensions and future
employment security all add to the continuous loss of
the critical human resources required for the timely and
effective completion of our mandate. A sympathetic
consideration of our difficulties in the current windingdown stage by the United Nations Secretariat and its
organs would greatly facilitate our efforts for a timely
and effective completion, to which we remain firmly
committed.
The cooperation of Member States and the
support of the Security Council, the other United
Nations organs and the Secretariat have been, in the
past, and will continue to be indispensable for the
success of our strategy. I would like to record our
appreciation of all such previous and ongoing support
and look forward to further support at the current
particularly crucial stage of our task.
The President: I thank Mr. Jallow for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to Council members.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Madam President, and the United
States on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of December. I would also like to thank the
United Kingdom for the leadership that it showed in
the month of November.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
briefings. In my statement today, I will first give an
update on the activities of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
which Austria has the honour to chair. Subsequently, I
would like to make some very brief remarks in my
national capacity.
Since the last briefing on 18 June 2010 (see
S/PV.6342), the Working Group has continued to meet
on a regular basis, and it has held 14 meetings. The

12

latest meeting with the Presidents, Prosecutors and
Registrars of both Tribunals took place on 1 December.
The members of the Group have also continued the
informal dialogue with affected countries of the
Tribunals. In particular, they had several meetings with
representatives of Rwanda regarding a proposal to
invite international judges to sit in Rwandan courts to
hear cases transferred by the ICTR.
During the past six months, the Working Group
has made important progress and is now close to
finishing its discussions on a draft resolution on the
establishment of an international residual mechanism
for the criminal tribunals. The Group completed its
third and fourth readings of the draft texts in mid-July
and early November, respectively. On 24 November,
the Chair presented a package consisting of the
following elements: first, a resolution to be adopted
under Chapter VII, in which the Security Council
would decide to establish a residual mechanism with
two branches — one for the ICTR and one for the
ICTY — to continue certain essential functions of the
Tribunals; secondly, annex 1 of the resolution,
containing the statute for the residual mechanism; and,
thirdly, annex 2 of the resolution, containing
transitional arrangements for determining the transfer
of functions and competences from the Tribunals to the
mechanism.
In his recent report to the General Assembly on
8 October (A/65/188), President Byron made a strong
call for an early adoption of the draft resolution on the
residual mechanism so as to help the ICTR to prepare
for a timely and smooth transition to the mechanism;
and today, he made that point again. Under the current
trial schedule, the ICTR expects to complete all
pending first instance trials in Arusha by 31 December
2011. If the ICTR branch of the mechanism is not
established in time, the ICTR will need not only to
complete all pending appeals but also maintain a full,
although potentially inactive, trial capacity to deal with
the eventual arrests of fugitives and related functions,
as President Byron explained today.
An analysis shows that that will entail significant
costs for the ICTR, which would be considerably
higher than the costs envisaged if the mechanism took
over the trial function of the ICTR at an early date.
Under any scenario, an overlap of the existence of the
Tribunals with the mechanism for some time is
inevitable. There is a sense of urgency for the Council
to reach an agreement now, so as to allow for sufficient

10-67368

S/PV.6434

time to make the necessary arrangements for a smooth
transition to the mechanism, while avoiding any
increase in costs.
After two years of negotiations, a final agreement
on the establishment of the residual mechanism is
within reach. Last Friday, the Working Group
conducted a final reading of all draft texts. There are
some questions still under discussion, all of which can
be resolved with the necessary flexibility and political
will. I am therefore optimistic that we can reach an
agreement before the end of this year.
In addition to the discussions on the residual
mechanism in May and June of this year, the Working
Group also considered various requests by the
Presidents of the Tribunals for extensions of judges’
mandates. On 29 June, the Council adopted resolutions
1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010), in which it extended the
terms of office of the trial judges until 31 December
2011, and the terms of office of the appeals judges
until 31 December 2012. In resolution 1931 (2010), the
Council further underlined its intention to extend, by
30 June 2011, the terms of office of the ICTY trial
judges based on the Tribunal’s projected trial schedule,
and requested the President of the ICTY to submit to
the Council an updated trial and appeals schedule no
later than 15 May 2011. Both resolutions also called on
States to intensify cooperation with the Tribunals and
noted the importance of retaining experienced staff.
By letters of September and November, the
Presidents of the ICTY and ICTR submitted new
requests to allow some judges to complete their cases
notwithstanding the expiry of their mandates by the
end of 2010. The Working Group is currently preparing
two draft resolutions, which are scheduled for adoption
on 14 December.
Before concluding with this part of my statement,
I would like to express my personal gratitude to
Minister Konrad Bühler, the legal counsel of the
Mission, who has effectively chaired the major part of
the meetings of the Working Group. It is therefore to
him and his instrumental efforts that the results
achieved so far — and, it is hoped, will continue to be
achieved to the end of this year — are due.
Turning now to the statement that I wish to make
in my national capacity, I would like to reiterate
Austria’s strong support for the work of the ICTY and
the ICTR, which carry out the crucial task of bringing
to justice those responsible for the most serious crimes.

10-67368

Austria fully supports the efforts of the Tribunals to
complete their work at the earliest possible date.
However, we note with concern that the most recent
reports reflect yet further slippage in the trial and
appeals schedules, suggesting that the Tribunals’ work
is not likely to be finished before 2014, or in one case
even 2015.
We urge the Tribunals to take all possible
measures to complete their work expeditiously. My
delegation is prepared to work constructively to assist
them in achieving this goal. In this context, we
acknowledge the importance of staff retention to
preventing further delays and stand ready to help
develop adequate strategies. I also want to recall
resolutions 1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010), which call
upon the Secretariat and other relevant United Nations
bodies to continue to work with the Registrar of the
Tribunals in order to find practicable solutions to
address this issue.
The arrest of the remaining 12 fugitives,
including Ratko Mladić, Goran Hadžić and Félicien
Kabuga, remains a top priority for the completion of
the Tribunals’ work. We call on all States concerned to
fully cooperate with the Tribunals.
With regard to the ICTY, the outstanding issue of
fugitive arrests is specifically mentioned in the
Prosecutor’s report regarding the cooperation of
Serbian authorities. Nonetheless — and I wish to
underline this — the report stipulates that Serbia
reported both in a timely manner and adequately in
connection with all other requests made by the Office
of the Prosecutor.
As to the cooperation of Croatia, the decision of
the Trial Chamber of 26 July constitutes an important
new development. Austria welcomes the continued
commitment of the Croatian Government under Prime
Minister Kosor to support the work of the inter-agency
task force established in October 2009. In particular,
we welcome the fact that the task force has begun to
explore important new avenues suggested by the
Prosecutor. We appreciate the regular dialogue and
communication between Croatian authorities and the
Prosecutor and remain confident that the work of the
task force will help to resolve the outstanding issues.
With regard to the ICTR, we appreciate the
Prosecutor’s filing of three new applications for the
referral of cases to Rwanda, as this might contribute to
the completion of the Tribunal’s work. We further

13

S/PV.6434

welcome the Prosecutor’s report about his recent
contacts with Kenyan authorities on the question of
locating and arresting Félicien Kabuga. We reiterate
the call on Kenya to render all the necessary assistance
to the ICTR.

where most of the fugitives reside, as well as in
Zimbabwe. On behalf of France, I would like to thank
Prosecutor Jallow and his entire team for their tireless
efforts towards dialogue with countries of the region to
ensure that the last of the fugitives are arrested.

In conclusion, as this will be my last briefing in
my capacity as Chairman of the Working Group, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Presidents, Prosecutors and Registrars and all of the
staff of the Tribunals for their important work for the
cause of justice. I would also like to express our
gratitude to all members of the Working Group for
their active and constructive engagement, as well as to
the Office of Legal Affairs and the Secretariat for their
invaluable support.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the arrest by
Serbian authorities of Mr. Radovan Karadžić
constituted considerable progress. We also await the
arrests of Mr. Mladić and Mr. Hadžić. As the Council
of the European Union reiterated in its decision of
25 October, both the Stabilization and Association
Agreement and the Interim Agreement require Serbia’s
full cooperation with the ICTY, which is an essential
precondition to joining the European Union. In that
regard, the Council of the European Union will
attentively follow the reports of the Office of the
Prosecutor on progress in that area. The European
Union has urged Serbia to implement the
recommendations made by the Office of the Prosecutor
to the Security Council in June with respect to Serbia’s
assistance, especially on the critical issue of the arrest
of the last two accused at large, namely, Ratko Mladić
and Goran Hadžić. That would constitute the most
convincing evidence of Serbia’s efforts in that area.

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for
introducing their quarterly reports (see S/2010/574 and
S/2010/588).
If we want the Tribunals to have lasting impact in
the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and other regions of
the world where political and military leaders still
believe that they can gain or remain in power through
violence, then we must enable the Tribunals to
appropriately and fully discharge their mandates. First
of all, this means that the Council’s vigilance must not
waver, in particular with respect to the cooperation of
States in arresting accused persons. The arrest and
transfer of fugitives to the Tribunals remains a priority.
Cooperation in this area is not only a bilateral matter
between the Prosecutors and the States concerned; the
international community and the Council, which
established the two Tribunals, have a direct interest.
With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the President and Prosecutor
Jallow have provided nuanced assessments to the
Council. Ten accused persons — among them three
high-profile accused — remain at large. But Kenya’s
cooperation, where the Council expressed some
questions in June, could now materialize with respect
to the Félicien Kabuga file. We welcome Kenya’s
open-mindedness and we hope, as does the Prosecutor,
that the ongoing dialogue will result in the rapid arrest
of Félicien Kabuga. We also hope for progress with
respect to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,

14

We must be very clear. Arrest warrants will not
disappear. The question of fugitives will not disappear
from the Council’s agenda. If they are not arrested in
the next few months, the ability to look for and arrest
them will depend on the residual mechanism, which
will, at the appropriate time, have to take over
responsibility from the Tribunals. That is the goal of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
which, under the effective leadership of Austria, has
developed a draft resolution on the statute for the
mechanism. I would therefore like to thank our
Austrian colleague for his leadership on this matter.
The briefing that we have just heard confirms the
trial timetables as well as the difficulties that the
Tribunals will have in keeping to the timetables if we
do not give them the wherewithal to conduct the trials
and appeals while fully respecting the rules of fairness.
We must find pragmatic solutions for the problems of
retaining staff and the length of the judges’ mandates
so that the Tribunals will step up the effectiveness and
the pace of their work.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I join previous speakers in
thanking the honourable Presidents and Prosecutors of

10-67368

S/PV.6434

the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their comprehensive reports on
their respective completion strategies (S/2010/588,
annexes I and II, and S/2010/574) and their work.
Since this is the last Security Council debate on
the two Tribunals this year, I wish to take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Thomas MayrHarting of Austria and his team for their remarkable
work in the chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals and also the diligent
way in which they conducted negotiations on matters
pertaining to both ad hoc Tribunals.
I would like to briefly address four points related
to the Tribunals: their completion strategies and the
progress achieved so far, staff retention, international
cooperation, and outreach activities.
Both Presidents have reported on the significant
challenges and obstacles that the Tribunals have faced
in their ordinary activities. We believe, however, that
despite those significant hurdles, both ICTY and ICTR
have indeed made clear progress in discharging their
functions and fulfilling their completion strategies.
Their efforts are commendable and should be further
supported by the Security Council in order to allow for
a prompt conclusion of all remaining judicial activities.
On staff retention, my delegation is deeply
concerned at the current situation and the trend noted
in both Tribunals with respect to personnel attrition.
Keeping qualified personnel at the Tribunals is
necessary to ensure that they will continue to carry out
the completion strategies while fully respecting the due
process of law. Therefore, we continue to believe that
some form of arrangement needs to be made in order to
ensure that the Tribunals continue to be staffed by the
most highly qualified people.
Cooperation between Member States and the
Tribunals remains a key element not only for the
success of their completion strategies but also for the
appropriate delivery of justice. All States concerned
should be encouraged to do their utmost to promptly
respond to requests issued by the Tribunals, including
with regard to arrests of fugitives and possible referral
of cases to national jurisdictions. We are encouraged
by the increasing cooperation with the Tribunals and
welcome the arrest of another fugitive.

10-67368

Regarding outreach, activities of that kind and
capacity-building become even more important as the
implementation
of
the
completion
strategies
progresses. The affected communities should be well
informed of the evolving process and how it is going to
impact the administration of justice. They should also
be made aware of the new mechanism that will replace
the Tribunals as soon as possible.
Furthermore, in view of the efforts to refer cases
to national jurisdictions, in particular with respect to
the ICTR, Member States interested in receiving those
cases should have access to enhanced international
cooperation to improve their national capacities, if they
so require. The Tribunals could play a central role in
that regard. Still on that topic, we took note with
interest of the request made by the Prosecutor of the
ICTR to refer three cases to a national jurisdiction. In
our view, that may contribute to the completion of the
Tribunal’s activities and allow States to exercise their
responsibilities in terms of the realization of justice.
Before concluding, I wish to say a few words on
the issue of the residual mechanism. One of the main
challenges in relying on an ad hoc tribunal instead of a
permanent one is precisely what to do when the
institution has fulfilled most of its core functions but
important tasks remain, such as eventual trials of
fugitives, supervision of the execution of sentences,
witness protection and preservation of documentation.
In devising a completion strategy, one should not
overemphasize the goal of a speedy conclusion of
activities to the detriment of the principle of due
process. Otherwise, the legacy of the tribunal may be at
risk and, consequently, its impact on the affected
communities’ perception of justice threatened. At the
same time, no effort should be spared to make progress
and comply with deadlines.
The early establishment of a residual mechanism
will add another element of certainty to the delivery of
justice. My delegation hopes the current efforts to
create such a mechanism for the International Tribunals
will bear fruit soon. Brazil has participated actively in
that endeavour and will continue to do so in the
coming days and weeks. The Council can continue to
count on my delegation in that regard.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank the Presidents of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for

15

S/PV.6434

Rwanda (ICTR) and their Prosecutors for their
inclusive briefings.
Lebanon appreciates the efforts made by the
leaders of the International Tribunals to implement the
completion strategies for their work as soon as
possible. We take stock of the progress that has been
made throughout all phases of the trials. We understand
the difficulties that the Presidents of both Tribunals
have not been able to overcome. These difficulties have
made it impossible for the Tribunals to complete their
work within the given deadlines, due above all to staff
attrition. Staff attrition has had a negative impact on
the capacity of the Tribunals to fulfil their mandates.
Lebanon thus reaffirms the need for the Security
Council to adopt necessary measures to enable the
Tribunals to complete their work as soon as possible
without sacrificing the judicial requirements. We call
for a transfer of a greater number of cases to national
jurisdictions that meet the necessary conditions for
holding just and fair trials. That in turn would ease the
workload of the ICTR and the ICTY and would help
expedite the implementation of the strategy.
Lebanon welcomes the cooperation demonstrated
by the majority of States with the two International
Tribunals, above all by the States of the former
Yugoslavia and the countries neighbouring Rwanda.
We call on those countries to extend their full
cooperation. The role played by those States is
essential in locating individuals who are at large,
leading to their arrest and extradition. Those States can
also
provide
information
and
evidentiary
documentation, making it possible to reach the truth to
ensure that justice is done.
Furthermore, Lebanon appreciates the efforts
made by the Informal Working Group on the
International Tribunals under the chairmanship of
Austria. Here we commend the Permanent
Representative of Austria and his team for their good
management of the Group’s work.
Lebanon hopes that the residual mechanism will
be established, as that will complete the work of the
two Tribunals. That mechanism will guarantee the
protection of witnesses, the arrest of fugitives and the
preservation of the archives of the proceedings, which
constitute a valuable reference framework for
international criminal law.

The establishment of two International Tribunals
expresses our rejection of the killing of innocents, of
impunity and of subversive actions. We believe that the
Tribunals’ success in achieving the anticipated goals is
the keystone for the protection of civilians, as it will
bring perpetrators to justice and ensure the rule of law,
at both the national and international levels.
That is therefore a mandatory right of passage to
turn a painful page in the history of the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, to bring about solid national
reconciliation, to maintain stability and deter future
criminals, to render justice to the victims and to ease
the suffering of their close family members. Lebanon
supports all initiatives and endeavours to ensure that
justice is done.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I wish
at the outset to extend a warm welcome and our
appreciation to Judges Patrick L. Robinson and Dennis
Byron, Presidents of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
respectively, as well as to the Prosecutors of the
Tribunals, Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow. Their
extensive briefings today, together with the reports
before us (see S/2010/588 and S/2010/574), reflect the
tireless work of the Tribunals and their efforts to
contribute to the overall fight against impunity.
Being the country most affected by the crimes
under the jurisdiction of one of the Tribunals, we
would like to emphasize how important it is to bring
justice to the victims and their families and hold
accountable those who committed the heinous crimes
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. In that context,
we reiterate the strong support of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the Tribunals and our commitment to
full cooperation.
After careful consideration of the reports, it is
evident that the Tribunals have undertaken every effort
to bring their work to an end in an efficient and
reasonable manner, especially bearing in mind that
they faced many obstacles beyond their reach and out
of their control. We should not allow the Tribunals’
groundbreaking
contributions
to
international
jurisprudence to succumb to the pressure to end their
mandate with partial results and without adequate
resolution.
Thus the support and encouragement of the
Council is both crucial and necessary at this sensitive

16

10-67368

S/PV.6434

and important period in the Tribunals’ existence. A
timely, efficient and complete transition to a residual
mechanism requires that the mechanism be very
carefully constructed as a credible and proper
continuation of the Tribunals’ functions.
In that regard, allow me to extend our
appreciation to Ambassador Mayr-Harting for his
strong leadership in chairing the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals and to commend the
entire Austrian delegation for its dedication and tireless
work. As a result of their efforts, the Group’s
deliberations are successfully moving toward the
creation of a residual mechanism that will adequately
reflect the Tribunals’ legacy.
Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina has, with
each new report, demonstrated a commitment to its
obligations and unwavering support for and dedication
to strengthening international criminal justice. That is
reflected in a record of continued and positive
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
ICTY. As stated, the authorities of my country have
effectively responded to all requests of the Office of the
Prosecutor, providing documents, enabling unobstructed
access to government archives and facilitating the
appearance of witnesses before the Tribunal.
Cooperation has been particularly constructive in regard
to the Rule 11 bis cases transferred by the Office of the
Prosecutor to the War Crimes Chamber of the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Five of the six cases
transferred to Bosnia and Herzegovina have been
concluded with final decisions.
Bearing all that in mind, it is disappointing and
frustrating that the Tribunals still account for 12
fugitives and especially that Félicien Kabuga, Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadžić are still at large,
undermining and ridiculing the very notion of justice
that we are all dedicated to. Therefore, the Tribunals’
efforts to comply with the completion strategy and our
tireless work in developing a residual mechanism are
useless until we take firm steps and serious measures to
bring those criminals to justice. Additionally, the
unconditional cooperation of relevant international and
regional organizations and States is essential for the
fulfilment of the Tribunals’ mandates.
Finally, I would like once again to voice Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s support for the work of both
Tribunals, which we regard as highly important. At the
regional level, it has brought justice to those who

10-67368

suffered the most, contributed greatly to the
advancement of the rule of law and paved a path
towards reconciliation. At the global level, it is
considered a milestone in the existing system of
international criminal justice. As such, it needs to be
respected and preserved.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
respective Tribunals for briefing us on the latest
developments concerning their completion strategies.
The contribution of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) to the
development of international criminal justice cannot be
overstated.
Today, I would like to touch upon three points,
namely, the completion strategy, cooperation and the
residual mechanism.
First, the completion strategy. Japan had been
strongly urging and expecting the Tribunals to
complete all judicial proceedings by the end of 2010,
in accordance with resolution 1503 (2003). Although
Japan recognizes that proceedings are ongoing, it is
regrettable that the goal of completion could not be
achieved. We would like to strongly encourage the
Tribunals to complete their work expeditiously and
urge them to make all possible efforts to bring their
tasks to completion while continuing to ensure fair
trials.
Regarding the requests of the Tribunals for
extension of the terms of judges, we consider that a
necessary measures in order to accomplish the
completion strategies in an expeditious and costeffective manner. Japan therefore is prepared to take
active part in the work on the required measures
together with other members of the Council.
We also take note of the necessity of staff
retention for the success of the work of the Tribunals.
We take this occasion to state our high appreciation of
the Judges, Prosecutors, Registrars and all the other
staff of the Tribunals for their unyielding commitment
to the fight against impunity.
Now I would like to draw attention to the issue of
cooperation, cooperation by States. The arrest of the
remaining fugitives is absolutely essential for success
of the Tribunals. It is regrettable that two suspects
indicted by the ICTY — Ratko Mladić and Goran

17

S/PV.6434

Hadžić — and 10 under indictment by the ICTR,
including Félicien Kabuga, have yet to be
apprehended. We continue to encourage the relevant
States to cooperate fully in securing the arrest of all
indictees as soon as possible.
The referral of cases to national jurisdiction is
also an important part of the completion strategy.
Among others, we highly appreciate the efforts made
by the Rwandan authorities to realize the referral of
cases.
With regard to the ICTY, cooperation by States of
the former Yugoslavia in areas such as access to
archives, documents and witnesses is also vital. We
take positive note of the efforts made by Croatia
through its task force to further improve the quality of
the administrative investigation in response to the
request of the Prosecutor regarding the missing
documents. We take positive note as well of the
expeditious support by Serbia for the cases before the
court, and the satisfactory support provided by Bosnia
and Herzegovina in response to the requests of the
Prosecutor, including witness protection. We trust that
those States will continue their efforts in that direction.
Now, on the issue of the residual mechanism,
Japan attaches great importance to the rule of law and
considers that impunity in the case of the most serious
crimes must not be condoned and that the individuals
involved must be brought to justice in accordance with
international standards. The residual mechanism of the
ICTY and the ICTR should serve to that end. Japan has
been actively participating in the discussion on the
mechanism in the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, under the chairmanship of
Austria. We appreciate the efforts of the Office of
Legal Affairs, which recently submitted an additional
report on the location of the mechanism. We will
continue to consider actively and carefully the relevant
draft resolution and statute, with a view to their early
adoption.
In conclusion, the present reports of the two
Tribunals will be the last before Japan concludes its
present term of membership in the Security Council. I
would like to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation for the sincere efforts made by the
Presidents, the Prosecutors, the Registrars and all staff
members of the Tribunals, as well as those of Austria in
its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group,
towards the achievement of justice.

18

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Many thanks
indeed to Presidents Robinson and Byron and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings
this morning, their comprehensive reports (see
S/2010/588 and S/2010/574) and their reminders of the
nobility and importance of their work in the interests of
international justice. I would like to start by reiterating
the United Kingdom’s continuing support for the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in combating impunity
and bringing justice to victims in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We thank all the judges and
staff of the Tribunals for their contributions to these
important efforts.
The United Kingdom welcomes the ongoing work
to implement the completion strategies of the two
Tribunals, although we remain concerned that further
slippages have taken place in the forecast completion
dates. However, we welcome the rapid commencement
of the ICTR trials of two fugitives arrested during the
past year, which have successfully been incorporated
within the ICTR completion strategy without undue
delay. We also note with satisfaction that a significant
landmark in international criminal justice is forecast
with the completion of first-instance trials at the ICTR
by the end of 2011.
The United Kingdom also acknowledges the
Tribunal’s efforts to expedite trials without sacrificing
due process and to reduce the impact of contempt
proceedings. We note the successful time- and costsaving measures, for example, greater efficiencies in
the provision of documents. We encourage all parts of
both Tribunals to look for such innovative approaches
and to share best practices where possible, with a view
to avoiding further delays in completion.
We recognize, however, that both Tribunals
continue to face difficulties caused by staff losses,
which have contributed to delays in the progress of
trials and appeals. Staffing matters are not directly
within the competence of the Security Council. Taking
Judge Robinson’s analogy of the Council as the
architect of the Tribunals, the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly are the quantity
surveyors. But we take this opportunity to express our
support for action by the Secretariat and the
responsible organs of the United Nations in order to
find practical solutions to address these problems. The

10-67368

S/PV.6434

Tribunals need to be adequately staffed to enable them
to complete their work.
State cooperation is vital to enable the Tribunals
to fulfil their mandates, in particular in relation to the
provision of documents and in tracing fugitives. The
work of the Tribunals will not be complete until all
fugitives have been brought to justice. We note with
satisfaction the arrest of one of the remaining fugitives
from the ICTR in the past six months. We note also
Prosecutor Jallow’s report this morning of recent
progress in his discussions with Kenya, which we hope
will bear fruit in relation to the search for Félicien
Kabuga. The United Kingdom is encouraged by these
positive developments. We call on Kenya to continue
to work with the Prosecutor and to supply all the
relevant information it holds on the current
whereabouts of the fugitive Kabuga. In the light of the
Prosecutor’s briefing this morning, we also call upon
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe
to step up their cooperation with the Tribunal in order
to bring the remaining ICTR fugitives to justice.
The United Kingdom has noted Prosecutor
Brammertz’s assessment of cooperation with the ICTY
by the States of the former Yugoslavia. We welcome
the steps now being taken by Serbia and Croatia and
urge both States to maximize coherent and expeditious
efforts across all relevant Government agencies to
provide documents and access to witnesses, to resolve
inconsistencies and to bring the fugitives to justice as
soon as possible. These efforts are key to the
successful completion of the Tribunal’s work. We will
continue to follow events closely to ensure that as
much as possible is being done.
As the two Tribunals approach the completion of
their mandates, the Security Council must establish a
mechanism to carry out the essential residual functions
of the Tribunals that need to continue after their
closure. The Security Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals has been working
steadily on these complex and novel issues over
several years, and has made significant progress in
recent months towards the finalization of a draft
resolution, as reported by Ambassador Mayr-Harting in
his statement. I would like to take this opportunity to
commend Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his
delegation for their hard work, dedication and
leadership in taking this issue forward during their time
on the Council.

10-67368

The United Kingdom believes that the time is
now ripe for the adoption of a draft resolution to
establish a residual mechanism. The adoption of such a
draft resolution would, for the first time, provide a
clear road map for the closure of the Tribunals while
maintaining essential legal safeguards and signalling
that fugitives will not be able to outlast justice. We call
on all members of the Security Council to engage
positively over the coming days to reach a successful
result.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
congratulating the delegation of the United States on
its assumption of the presidency of the Council. I also
wish to thank the Mission of the United Kingdom for
its excellent handling of the Council’s business last
month.
I wish to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for the comprehensive briefings they
have just provided. The work carried out by the
Tribunals since their inception is of significant
importance to the fight against impunity and to
advancing the rule of law and paving the way for
reconciliation among the States concerned. We also
acknowledge the significant contribution the Tribunals
have made to international criminal justice.
However, in spite of their dedicated work and
continued efforts to pursue the completion strategy, the
Tribunals are not able to finish their work before the
target dates envisaged in resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (1534), respectively. Thus, we are now at a point
where all the necessary steps must be taken to establish
an international residual mechanism for criminal
tribunals, which should have competence to complete
all pending trial proceedings. The issue is still under
consideration by the Informal Working Group chaired
by Austria, which has made substantial progress in
bringing such a mechanism to life. We expect a draft
resolution to be adopted before the end 2010. We thank
the Austrian delegation for their valuable efforts. We
also appreciate the fact that the Tribunals have
undertaken several measures in preparation for the
transition to a residual mechanism. We encourage them
to continue their efforts.
We take note of the comments of both Presidents
concerning the terms and conditions of staff and judges
of the Tribunals. As members will recall in connection

19

S/PV.6434

with the issue of extending judges’ mandates, the
Council responded positively to the demands of the
Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunals in its
resolutions 1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010) of 29 June.
We are confident that at such a critical juncture further
extension requests will also be accommodated by the
Council in the days to come.
We are still concerned by the fact that the number
of fugitives remains unchanged since the last biennial
reports of the Tribunals. All States, especially those in
the regions concerned, must fully and effectively
mobilize all available resources and continue to give
full support to the operational services that have been
tasked with tracking and apprehending the remaining
fugitives, including Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić.
In that respect, cooperation by the States of the former
Yugoslavia remains crucial.
Effective cooperation by States in other areas,
such as access to archives, documents and witnesses,
continues to be an essential part of the work of the
Tribunals. We take positive note of Croatia’s continued
and serious efforts regarding cooperation with the
Office of the Prosecutor. We note that the Prosecutor’s
report recognizes the responsiveness of the Croatian
authorities in general and refers to the access provided
to witnesses and evidence. Within that context, we
welcome the work of the Croatian Interagency Task
Force to locate or account for the missing military
document that was requested by the Court.
We also welcome Serbia’s continued cooperation,
as well as the adequate response by Bosnia and
Herzegovina to requests from the Prosecutor. Likewise,
we appreciate Rwanda’s continued cooperation with
the ICTR in various areas. We commend those
countries for their improved level of cooperation and
hope that it will lead to the achievement of full justice
and reconciliation.
In conclusion, I should like to express once again
our sincere thanks to the Presidents, Prosecutors and
all judges of both Tribunals for their professionalism
and dedicated work.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): First, I should like to add
my voice to those who have expressed appreciation to
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their very comprehensive and lucid
briefings on the work of the Tribunals. We commend

20

the ICTY and ICTR for their steady progress in
implementing their completion strategies in spite of
daunting challenges. It is encouraging that they have
remained firmly committed to expediting their
proceedings, while complying with due process
standards.
It is a matter of deep concern that the work of the
Tribunals has been fraught with delays. Staff
constraints, especially the loss of highly experienced
personnel, have continuously undermined the
expeditious and efficient completion of the Tribunals’
mandates. Indeed, we cannot overemphasize the urgent
need for measures to support staff retention as well as
recruitment, particularly at this critical stage in the
Tribunals’ life. We believe that only concerted action
will reduce the rate of staff attrition.
We also note that efficient cooperation with all
Member States with the Tribunals will be crucial for
the success of the completion strategy. Such
cooperation will, we believe, ensure the arrest of the
remaining fugitives, the referral of cases to national
jurisdictions, the transfer of convicts for the execution
of their sentences and the relocation of acquitted
persons, as well as of those who have served their
sentences.
It is distressing that some fugitives have
remained at large. We urge all States to cooperate with
the Tribunals to ensure that those fugitives are
apprehended and brought to justice.
We note with satisfaction the increased referrals
of cases to national jurisdictions during the reporting
period. The expected result is a reduction in the overall
workload of the Tribunals. It is a positive development
that the Tribunals have continued to make vigorous
efforts to strengthen the capacity of national
jurisdictions in the prosecution and trial of violations
of international humanitarian law. In the same vein, we
commend the efforts by the ICTR to establish a
response mechanism for mutual legal assistance
requests from national prosecuting authorities. Such
capacity-building activities must be intensified, since
they will serve as precedents to guide the activities of
national authorities.
We commend the ICTY and the ICTR for their
efforts to improve awareness of their work through
outreach programmes. In addition to providing
information of their achievements, we believe that such
activities serve to highlight the challenges that the

10-67368

S/PV.6434

Tribunals encounter in implementing their completion
strategies. They also support the fight against impunity
with regard to genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
We encourage the ICTR to sustain its trainertraining programme in view of the Tribunal’s role in
promoting self-sustaining knowledge transfer to
national authorities. We support efforts to establish
sustainable reference centres of information and
archives on the activities of the Tribunals as part of
their outreach activities.
Let me take this opportunity to commend the
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, led by Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting,
for its sterling work. We believe that it has set the
pattern for attaining justice.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
respective statements on the implementation of the
Tribunals’ completion strategies pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
I should also like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, the outgoing Chair of the Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
for the skill he has shown in guiding the work of that
Group. Under his leadership, the Working Group
reached agreements that represent an important step
towards the finalization of draft resolutions and
statutes establishing the residual mechanism.
My delegation is of the view that there are three
crucial areas that require the attention of the members
of the Council so as to enable the Tribunals to best
accomplish their mandates, namely, support for the
Tribunals; cooperation between States and the
Tribunals; and the strengthening of national judicial
capacities.
With regard to support for the Tribunals, my
delegation welcomes the measures taken by the
Council with a view to supporting the efforts being
made by the Tribunals in spite of the challenges
encountered in carrying out their mandates. Indeed, the
constant support of the Security Council for the
activities of the Tribunals is indispensable for their
proper functioning.

10-67368

While we appreciate the steps taken under
resolutions 1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010), my
delegation encourages the Council to continue working
in that direction in order to strengthen the effectiveness
of the Tribunals. In that regard, it is important to step
up the resources available to the Tribunals in order to
allow them to retain the qualified staff whose expertise
is indispensable to the Tribunals’ optimal functioning.
The effectiveness of the Tribunals also depends
upon cooperation with Member States, in particular
when it comes to the fight against impunity. Such
cooperation could lead to the arrest of the 12 highranking fugitives, including Ratko Mladić, Goran
Hadžić, Félicien Kabuga, Portais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana. If they are not tried in the near
future, the credibility of the Tribunals will be
tarnished. We therefore encourage the States of Europe,
the Great Lakes region and southern Africa and
neighbouring countries to enhance their cooperation
with the Tribunals so that they may implement their
completion strategies. In that regard, the exemplary
cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is to be
commended.
As we stressed at the last debate on this item (see
S/PV.6342), strengthening the capacities of national
judiciary systems would also play a role in ensuring the
full success of the completion strategies. The training
of staff of national judiciary institutions, in particular
judges and auxiliary agents, should be continued and
remain a fundamental aspect of the implementation of
the completion strategies. To that end, my delegation
welcomes the special provisions that the Rwanda
Tribunal plans to implement in order to respond
effectively to the requests for mutual legal assistance
made by 11 States of the Great Lakes region in the
context of the proceedings against Rwandan fugitives.
The International Tribunals undeniably contribute
to the development of international criminal law and
the fight against impunity. They therefore constitute an
institutional and legal legacy that must be preserved.
My country supports the efforts of the Tribunals and all
actors involved to meet that noble objective.
The outreach work concerning the Tribunals’
scope of work, involving Governments, international
organizations, national courts, non-governmental
organizations and universities, shares the same
objective and deserves our fullest support. What is at

21

S/PV.6434

stake is the need to render justice to the victims and to
fight impunity.
Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank President Robinson,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Byron and Prosecutor
Jallow for their briefings on the implementation of the
completion strategies of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and for the
reports submitted to the Council (see S/2010/588 and
S/2010/574).
We note that the work of the Tribunals continued
to register new progress during the reporting period.
We acknowledge that progress. In 2003, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1503 (2003), establishing
the timetable for the completion strategies and calling
on the Tribunals to complete all their work by 2010. As
we approach 2011, we note that the timetables
established by the Security Council will not be met.
According to the latest reports of the two Tribunals, the
ICTR’s timetable will be extended to the end of 2013,
while that of the ICTY will be extended to 2015. We
express our concern over the delays in the relevant
work.
We understand that there are many reasons
behind the delays, some likely beyond the anticipation
of the Tribunals. The Tribunals have worked
strenuously to enhance the efficiency of their work, but
as noted in the ICTR’s report, “[c]ontinuing efforts to
further improve pretrial and trial management as well
as the judgement drafting process are therefore crucial”
(S/2010/574, para. 34). We hope that the Tribunals will
pursue their efforts in that regard, accelerate the pace
of their work and complete their tasks as soon as
possible. We also note the concern expressed by both
Tribunals regarding the retention of staff. It is our hope
that appropriate solutions can be found to this problem.
Referring cases and fugitives, to the maximum
extent possible, to countries willing and able to handle
them will be an important step in the implementation of
the completion strategies. We note that the ICTR
Prosecutor has asked to refer three cases to Rwanda for
trial. We welcome this development and hope to see
positive results. We also support the countries
concerned in rendering full cooperation to the Tribunals.
The Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals is conducting intensive
consultations on a draft resolution on the residual

22

mechanisms for the two Tribunals, in the expectation
that agreement can be reached by the end of the year. I
take this opportunity to thank Austria, as Chair of the
Working Group, and the United Nations Office of
Legal Affairs for their tireless efforts on behalf of the
Working Group. We will continue actively and
constructively to participate in the consultations, and
look forward to reaching agreement by the end of the
year.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the Tribunals for the information they have provided
on their efforts to implement their completion
strategies. Their briefings are especially important now
as the Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals is seeking to convert the
Tribunals into a residual mechanism. We acknowledge
that completing the work of those two international
judicial bodies is a rather complex task, both for the
Tribunals themselves and for the Security Council.
Based on the reports before us (see S/2010/588
and S/2010/574), it is clear that most of the path to
completion has been travelled. Many violators of
international law have been found guilty, and the
Tribunals’ contribution to the development of national
judiciary systems has been great. The States
established on the territory of the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda are prepared independently to uphold a
high standard of criminal justice.
Against that backdrop, we are even more
concerned about the continued prolongation of the
Tribunals’ existence. The members of the Council have
always been understanding of the practical problems
encountered by the Tribunals and have accorded many
mandate extensions. However, there are reasonable
limits. Six months ago, the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) reported that it was
prepared to complete the first instance cases in 2012,
and the subsequent appellate work in the Karadžić case
in 2014. We have now heard that this may be 2015. We
have observed such developments in the Council for
many years now.
Our analysis of the information provided by the
Tribunal shows that it is difficult to explain this delay
by objective criteria, such as the emergence of new
evidence, the obstructionist behaviour of the
defendants, or the slowness of witnesses to testify. It is
very difficult for us to understand why defendant

10-67368

S/PV.6434

Šešelj had to wait more than six years for proceedings
to start in his case. It is difficult to understand why the
purely technical work of establishing a sentence should
take a year. We are not especially swayed by the
argument that it will take a year to hand down
sentences in the Prlić et al. case because there are six
accused involved.

still at large must appear before the Courts. The
apprehension of fugitives and the prompt completion
of the Tribunals’ mandates can be accomplished
through the conscientious cooperation of regional
States with the Tribunals. We call on those States to
make every necessary effort to promote the highest
level of cooperation with the Tribunals.

The judges of the ICTY have sufficient qualified
assistance effectively to discharge their technical work,
and with all due respect to that Tribunal, we note that
even the International Court of Justice — working on
the most problematic cases with huge political
resonance and legal significance — does not encumber
its case work with such lengthy time frames. Another
example was the Nuremberg Tribunal, which took
barely more than a year to find guilty those who may
well have been the most monstrous criminals in the
history of mankind.

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Madame
President, for convening this meeting, and I
congratulate you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. I also thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its outstanding work in leading the
Council during the month of November. We welcome
the presence of the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia, and we thank them for their briefings.

On that basis, we are deeply concerned by
accounts that the delays in a number of cases before
the Tribunal are artificial and caused by the slowness
of some judges and other personnel in their work. We
express the hope that these reports are merely rumours;
nevertheless, we would be grateful if the Presidents
were to take a second look at issues of discipline and
performance.

The Security Council, by resolutions 1503 (2003)
and 1534 (2004) set timeframes during which the
Tribunals were expected to complete all trial activities,
and has stressed the importance of fully implementing
the completion strategies. We therefore welcome the
trial management initiatives undertaken by the
Tribunals, which have resulted in more expeditious
trials. We also recognize that the discovery of new
evidence — such as the finding of Mladić’s diaries —
may lead to further delays. Accordingly, we support the
requested extensions to enable the judges to complete
their cases with due regard for the envisaged
completion strategies.

For our part, we believe that the effective
completion of the Tribunals’ work would be expedited
by the identification, in the draft resolution currently
under consideration by the Council on the residual
mechanism, of explicit and realistic deadlines for
moving the Tribunals’ work to completion. It is our
intention to work constructively with all our Council
colleagues on this issue.
With respect to our view of the parameters of the
residual mechanism, we have consistently advocated
for a mechanism that is compact, effective and guided
by reasonable timelines for beginning and ending its
work. In the case of fugitives from either Tribunal
being apprehended during the final phase of that
Tribunal’s operation or after its completion, such
fugitives must be tried by the mechanism. Accordingly,
the mechanism must have all it needs in order to
discharge that function.
The Russian Federation is committed to
dispensing international criminal justice according to
the highest legal standards. There is no doubt that those
indicted by the Tribunals who for various reasons are

10-67368

We are concerned by the high turnover of highly
qualified and essential staff, which exacerbates an
already difficult situation, further impacting the
expeditious completion of the trials. The loss of about
100 staff members this year alone is a cause for
concern. We call upon the Office of Human Resources
Management of the United Nations to recognize the
unique repercussions of downsizing the Tribunals and
to exercise the necessary flexibility in order to forestall
this staff attrition. We therefore commend the staff
members who have continued to serve at the Tribunals
amidst the uncertainty of job security.
We welcome the plan of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to transfer some cases
for appropriate action within the Rwandese judicial
system. We also welcome the increased tracking efforts
to secure the arrest and transfer to the Tribunal of

23

S/PV.6434

Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and Augustin
Bizimana. We commend the increased cooperation
between the Prosecutor and the authorities in Kenya,
Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in an effort to successfully track those suspects.
It is important to ensure that the relocation of
witnesses, discharged convicts and acquitted persons is
properly handled in order to avoid long-term
ramifications for international justice, as was expressed
in the briefings. In this regard, we therefore welcome
the recent signings of the cooperation agreement
between the Government of Senegal and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
It is essential to ensure not only that justice be
done but that it be seen to be done. That should also be
reflected in the compensation of those charged with
dispensing justice. My delegation is hopeful that the
General Assembly will appropriately address the issue
of inequality in emoluments between permanent and ad
litem judges.
Finally, I would like to thank the staffs of the two
Tribunals for their very good work, and I also thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting and the delegation of
Austria for the important work they have done in the
past two years as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like first of all to congratulate you, Madame President,
your delegation, and Ambassador Susan Rice on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. We also wish to express our
appreciation to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for its excellent work in the presidency during the
month of November, carried out with imagination and
creative spirit.
My delegation would like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia for introducing their respective
biannual reports on progress in their completion
strategies (see S/2010/574 and S/2010/588).
Mexico recognizes the efforts that both Tribunals
have made to expedite the completion of their judicial
activities in a responsible and efficient way, as well as
the progress made in the implementation of their
completion strategies over the past six months, and the
manner in which they have guaranteed the rendering of

24

justice and respect for the rights of the accused, the
witnesses and the victims.
However, considering the reports before us this
morning, it is clear that the Tribunals will be unable to
conclude their work by the dates that were set in
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) and that their
work will continue beyond 2010 and most likely until
the end of 2013. Factors such as the lack of
cooperation, the difficulty of retaining qualified staff
and of referring cases to national courts, and the lack
of agreement about the relocation of acquitted persons,
among others, pose significant challenges to the
prompt conclusion of the Tribunals’ mandates.
Therefore, it is important that both Tribunals be given
the means to conclude their judicial work as soon as
possible. It is necessary to extend the terms of office of
their respective judges in order to allow them to
conclude the cases they have been assigned.
The cooperation that States provide to Tribunals
is also key. In that respect, we call upon the States
concerned to respond without delay to requests made
by the specialized bodies of the Tribunals, in particular
with regard to locating and arresting the fugitives
mentioned. We commend in particular the valuable
judicial cooperation provided by the Government of
Uganda in apprehending Mr. Jean-Bosco Uwinkindi on
30 June. We also express our appreciation for the
cooperation demonstrated by the Government of
Croatia, which we encourage to continue to cooperate
with the same readiness regarding matters pending
before the Tribunal. We also acknowledge the
constructive attitude of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
For my delegation, the referral of cases to
national jurisdictions is also fundamental for the
successful conclusion of the Tribunals. We therefore
deem it crucial that international tribunals continue
their task of facilitating the strengthening of the
capacities of national tribunals.
Even given the complex and highly detailed
considerations that we have heard today, the Security
Council must not lose sight of the principle objective
of guaranteeing that justice is carried out with regard to
the most serious crimes and atrocities against
humankind committed in the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. At the same time, however,
we should not overlook the fact that international
tribunals face an ongoing challenge, namely, achieving

10-67368

S/PV.6434

a balance between the rendering of justice,
administrative
efficiency,
guaranteeing
the
fundamental rights of the accused, witnesses and
victims, and completing their work as soon as possible.
For this reason, the Security Council should strive to
conclude negotiations on the residual mechanism in a
manner that is satisfactory for all parties.
Finally, my delegation wishes to fully
acknowledge the work accomplished by the Informal
Working Group on Criminal Tribunals under the
Austrian chairmanship, led by Ambassador MayrHarting, in finalizing work on the establishment of the
residual mechanism.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.
The United States commends the Prosecutors and
Presidents for their efforts to bring to justice those
responsible for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Since their creation, the Tribunals have
answered lawless violence with historic justice and, in
myriad ways, produced an impact far beyond the
confines of their courtrooms. Today, we take stock of
what the Tribunals have accomplished over the past six
months and examine the strategies that they are pursuing
to bring their vital work to a successful completion.
The legacy of the Tribunals must be assured by
the creation of a durable and appropriate institution
that will outlast the Tribunals themselves and complete
their functions. We applaud the work that the Tribunals
have done to advance that goal thus far. We urge both
Tribunals to strive to complete their work at the earliest
possible date; yet, we are mindful of the importance of
doing so with appropriate care, leading to a smooth and
efficient drawdown.
We welcome the Tribunals’ efforts to increase
efficiency and believe that fairness and efficiency can,
and should, go hand in hand. We therefore urge the
Presidents and the judges, in their roles as managers of
the courtrooms, to take any additional steps needed to
ensure that the trials are both expeditious and fair. We
continue to support initiatives to complete trials, where
necessary, through the contributions of ad litem judges,
extensions of terms and the redeployment of trial
judges to the Appeals Chamber.
We must act urgently to ensure that individuals
indicted by the Tribunals are brought to justice. The
arrests of Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić are crucial

10-67368

to the achievement of justice in the Balkans. The
United States is committed to doing all that is
necessary to ensure that this happens. We welcome the
Government of Serbia’s recent efforts to apprehend and
transfer indicted war criminals, and call on Serbia to
continue to fulfil its obligations and to cooperate with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and ensure that Mladić and Hadžić
are arrested and transferred to The Hague. We also
recognize Croatia’s efforts to fulfil its obligations to
the ICTY, particularly the actions of its task force in
exploring new avenues in order to locate or account for
missing military documents. We urge it to continue
these efforts. For States of the former Yugoslavia, full
cooperation with the ICTY is key to their progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
The United States reaffirms its commitment to
see the architects of the genocide in Rwanda brought to
justice. We renew our calls for the immediate arrest of
Protais Mpiranya and Félicien Kabuga. We expect all
States to fully cooperate with the Tribunal in its efforts
to locate Mpiranya, Kabuga and other fugitives.
The ability of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) to transfer cases to States when
appropriate is an important, critical step towards
meeting the Tribunal’s completion strategy. The United
States acknowledges Rwanda’s desire to receive cases
transferred from the ICTR. We also acknowledge the
Government of Rwanda’s judicial sector reform,
enhanced judicial capacity and positive engagement
with the Security Council on steps to facilitate such
transfers.
The United States commends the Austrian Chair
of the Working Group on Criminal Tribunals for his
excellent work in shepherding the Group to a new era
in international criminal justice. We would also like to
thank the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs for its
ongoing and tireless assistance in helping to craft the
residual mechanism. I also thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors, Registrars and staff of the Tribunals for
their contribution to the fight against impunity and for
promoting the cause of international justice.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Madame President, on your country’s

25

S/PV.6434

assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, as well as to express our confidence
that, under your able guidance, the Council will
successfully undertake its many duties and
responsibilities and conclude another challenging year.
At the same time, let me extend my appreciation
to Presidents Robinson and Byron, as well as to
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, for their detailed
reports on the work of the Tribunals and on the
progress and challenges in the implementation of the
completion strategy.
The Tribunals’ determined performance aimed at
the steadfast prosecution of perpetrators of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide has not only
served as a basis for an emerging culture of
accountability but also as a staunch reminder that grave
crimes, committed by whomever, will not go
unpunished. Croatia recognizes the efforts of the
Tribunals to comply with the strategy elaborated for
the finalization of their groundbreaking work and for
their transformation into residual mechanisms.
However, we are aware of the unprecedented
challenges faced by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as stated in Judge
Robinson’s report (see S/2010/588). We firmly believe
that this widely desired and legitimate objective should
not be pursued at the expense of the mandate with
which the ICTY was established, nor compromise full
respect for due process standards. In that context, let
me particularly stress that the ICTY mandate could not
be considered accomplished without bringing to justice
the two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladić and Goran
Hadžić, indicted for the gravest atrocities in Europe
since the Second World War, namely, the massacres in
Srebrenica and Vukovar.
Croatia remains strongly committed to its
unequivocal cooperation with the Tribunal. This
commitment has been largely demonstrated by the
prompt execution of all orders and other binding
decisions of the Tribunal, as well as by full compliance
with the assistance requests received from the Office of
the Prosecutor. To date, Croatia has received and
completely fulfilled 883 such requests.
In regard to one request in the Gotovina et al.
case, which the Office of the Prosecutor considered to
have been only partially fulfilled, Prime Minister
Kosor established last fall a special task force in order
to further intensify and broaden an ongoing

26

administrative investigation, as well as to improve its
quality and efficiency in line with the suggestions
received from the Office of the Prosecutor.
My delegation welcomes the comments of
Prosecutor Brammertz on the professionalism of the
task force, as well as his recognition that the task force
has begun to explore important new avenues in the
investigation. My delegation equally appreciates the
assessment of Prosecutor Brammertz, in which he
stated that Croatia is generally responsive to requests
by Office of the Prosecutor for assistance. These
requests are answered adequately and access is
provided to witnesses and evidence.
Regarding the Prosecutor’s remark on possible
inconsistencies revealed in the last three reports of the
task force, my delegation would like to confirm the
strong commitment of the competent Croatian
authorities to continuing their work and further
clarifying those issues, including by opening new
avenues as suggested by the Office of the Prosecutor.
At the same time, my delegation appreciates all the
support for the activities of the task force extended
today by the members of this body, which we take as
an important additional acknowledgment of our efforts.
Over the reporting period, Croatian officials at the
highest level remained engaged in direct dialogue with
the Tribunal and the Prosecutor, while the Ministry of
Justice and the Office of the State Prosecutor continued
to nurture close and intense working relationships with
the Office of the Prosecutor.
Prosecutor Brammertz visited Zagreb on 20 and
21 October 2010 and met with the President, the Prime
Minister, members of the Council for Cooperation with
International Criminal Courts — which includes the
Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of
Interior, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Minister of Defence — the State Prosecutor and
members of the task force.
This reporting period was marked by the final
decision of Trial Chamber I on this very last open
issue. On 26 July, after extensive litigation lasting
more than two years, during which time Croatia
produced 16 reports, introduced a significant number
of documents, performed a great number of
investigative activities and brought criminal charges
against 19 individuals — four of whom have already
been convicted — Trial Chamber I decided to deny the
prosecution motion.

10-67368

S/PV.6434

By this decision, Trial Chamber I explicitly
recognized the proactive cooperation of Croatia with
the Tribunal and indicated that new information was
received on an ongoing basis. By applying common
sense in this delicate matter, Trial Chamber I not only
“declined to order Croatia to produce documents due to
uncertainties surrounding the whereabouts of the
documents” (S/2010/588, annex II, para. 71), but also
concluded that uncertainties regarding the creation of
the documents, as well as uncertainties regarding their
continued existence or accessibility to Croatia, had
prevented Croatia from locating and delivering the
documents requested.
The documented position of Croatia, as well as its
proactive approach, obviously led Trial Chamber I to
the opinion that it would be of no avail to issue further
orders to Croatia when, after careful consideration of
each and every document requested, serious doubts
about the ability of Croatia to produce the
aforementioned documents still prevailed.
In full respect of the decision of Trial Chamber I,
Croatia is strongly determined to proceed with its
investigation and continue to undertake all reasonable
and feasible measures at its disposal in order to clarify
this matter. Croatia is absolutely aware that the
cooperation of States in the region remains crucial to
the successful accomplishment of the ICTY mandate
and the achievement of its completion strategy goals,
and will do its share in this regard.
As the Tribunal is beginning to downsize,
strengthening relationships between the Office of the
Prosecutor and national prosecutorial authorities is
becoming increasingly important. A considerable part
of the Tribunal’s legacy is aimed at strengthening the
capacities of national jurisdictions to continue the fight
against impunity through the appropriate adjudication
of grave violations of international humanitarian law.
Croatia is determined to continue with domestic
efforts to prosecute all war crimes committed on its
territory since 1991, and in that context we deem it
particularly important to further enhance our working
relationship with the ICTY and to continuously
strengthen cooperation between prosecutorial and
judicial authorities in the region.
In conclusion, let me express our sincere
gratitude to Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria and
his team, who, while presiding over the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, have made

10-67368

tireless efforts in setting up a residual mechanism to
replace the Tribunals. It is our understanding that this
work is now at its end, and we hope that the agreed
solutions, in particular regarding the management of
archives, the protection of witnesses and the serving of
sentences, will help safeguard the Tribunal’s legacy
and ensure the successful fulfilment of its residual
functions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Vilović (Serbia): At the outset, allow me to
express the satisfaction of the Republic of Serbia with
all the efforts of the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Patrick Robinson and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, related to the cooperation of Serbia with
the Tribunal, and with their thoroughly professional
approach in submitting their reports to the Security
Council.
At the same time, allow me to take this
opportunity to pay my respects to the President and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, Judge Dennis Byron and Mr. Hassan B. Jallow.
As on previous occasions, the cooperation
between Serbia and ICTY described in the reports of
the President and the Prosecutor (see S/2010/588) is in
line with the assessment by Serbia of the level of
cooperation achieved so far. There are no outstanding
requests for assistance in regard to the provision of
documents to the Tribunal, while the requests
pertaining to witnesses and access to the State archives
are being processed on time and without difficulties.
In other words, during the reporting period,
Serbia fully respected the recommendations of the
Prosecutor to continue responding effectively and in a
timely manner to the his Office’s requests for
assistance. The level of cooperation achieved in this
area will undoubtedly continue in the coming period.
As far as cooperation relating to the arrest of the
two remaining fugitives is concerned, it is evident that
political will to resolve this problem exists in Serbia
and has been expressed by the country’s highestranking officials. We consider it very important that the
Prosecutor states in his report that the prosecution
maintained regular and close contact with the Serbian
agencies in charge of locating and arresting the
fugitives, and that this interaction had intensified in

27

S/PV.6434

recent months. This kind of interaction will certainly
continue in the future. It is also significant that the
Prosecutor has recognized Serbia’s efforts to
implement the recommendations presented in his
previous report (see S/2010/270).
These facts, along with the unambiguous
determination of Serbia to bring the two remaining
fugitives to justice, as was the case with the 44
individuals it transferred to the Tribunal, give us reason
to expect that the results awaited by both the Tribunal
and Serbia will be achieved.
In addition, Serbia continues to give its full
support to the implementation of the Tribunal’s
completion strategy, including issues related to the
archives, as well as the establishment of the residual
mechanism, which should have the power to prosecute
the persons indicted by ICTY who are still at large. In
that connection, Serbia reiterates its position submitted
to the Security Council in October 2008 and March
2009, and it is ready to continue to actively participate
in all future discussions on this matter.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
goals of Serbia and of the Tribunal are identical. They
include, on the one hand, maintenance of the level of
cooperation reached in the area of the provision of
documents and access to witnesses and the archives,
and, on the other hand, the location, arrest and transfer
of the two remaining fugitives to the Tribunal. The
fulfilment of those goals will be of exceptional
importance for the realization of international justice
and the successful completion of the Tribunal’s
mandate, while certainly contributing to the further
normalization of the situation and the improvement of
relations between the States established on the territory
of the former Yugoslavia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of December. I wish you every
success in your task and assure you of my delegation’s
support during your presidency. I also thank you for
this opportunity given me to speak in this debate. I also
thank the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as the Prosecutors of both

28

Tribunals, for presenting their reports (see S/2010/574
and S/2010/588) and for the efforts that they
continuously make to successfully complete their
work. Allow me also to pay tribute to my colleague and
dear friend Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the
impeccable work done.
Since the establishment of the ICTR, the
Government of the Republic of Rwanda has always
given it the necessary cooperation to enable it to
complete the mission entrusted to it by the Council for
the well-being of the victims of genocide perpetrated
against the Tutsis and for the good of humanity. During
this past year, Rwanda has continued to facilitate
access to witnesses of both the prosecution and the
defence, including by supporting the National Witness
Protection Service established at the Office of the
Prosecutor in Kigali. My Government also continues to
provide all necessary documents for the smooth
conduct of the investigations and the holding of the
trials.
While regretting the pace of the proceedings and
the delay with regard to the time frame initially
established, the Rwandan Government still supports
the Tribunal’s completion strategy, as set out in
resolution 1503 (2003), and takes note of the its
commitment to completing the first-instance trials by
the end of 2011 and the appeal trials by the end of
2013. In that regard, we appreciate the efforts made by
the Tribunal to reduce the time for the proceedings
despite its staffing issues, and we encourage the
Tribunal to continue in that direction in order to meet
the aforementioned deadlines.
As the end of the work nears, and given that the
Tribunal clearly will not be able to try all the people
sought, Rwanda reiterates its request, made on many
occasions, for a transfer of the pending cases to our
country’s jurisdiction. In that regard, we welcome the
request of the Prosecutor of the ICTR of 4 November
for the transfer of new cases to Rwanda, in addition to
the 25 already handed over on 8 June. Our country
will, of course, continue to cooperate with the Tribunal
in order to remove any obstacle to the transfer of those
files, as it has already done by carrying out many
judicial, penal and prison reforms.
Need we recall that our request to transfer those
files is based simply on the fact that the crimes tried by
this Tribunal were committed on national territory
against Rwandan citizens by their compatriots.

10-67368

S/PV.6434

Rwandan justice, which has acquired a certain
experience with genocide trials in over 16 years now, is
thus the best placed to know about those matters, all
the more so as it has the advantage of proximity to the
witnesses and the scene of the crime. Lastly, the
judicial proceedings conducted in Rwanda will also
play a major didactic role in national reconciliation.
Today we welcome the life sentence of
Lieutenant Ildephonse Nizeyimana, which we learned
of some minutes ago. My Government welcomes the
arrest of several genocide fugitives during this year and
thanks the Governments of brotherly countries that
have acted, namely, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda. Our gratitude also goes to the
many Governments that have arrested and tried, on the
basis of their national laws, the suspects of genocide
present on their territory. Lastly, we express our
appreciation to Senegal, which has just signed an
agreement with the ICTR to transfer detainees.
Rwanda also welcomes the efforts made by the
ICTR to find and arrest the 10 remaining fugitives,
including one of the main architects of the genocide,
the billionaire Félicien Kabuga. The Interahamwe
militia, which he financed and armed, are still there in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and now, as the
Council knows, make up the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda.
However, it is not up to the ICTR, but it has
proved necessary to draw attention to the fact that that
terrorist movement, which still rages in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and against which this Council
has just renewed sanctions (resolution 1952 (2010)),
has recently acquired new unexpected support, as the
most recent report of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) noted in its paragraph 164
(S/2010/596). That support, which is from senior
officers discharged from the Rwandan army,
unfortunately enjoys the protection of certain countries,
as is currently the case with Félicien Kabuga.
Rwanda therefore requests the Security Council
to use its weight so that history does not repeat itself
and so that individuals who cooperate with terrorist
movements to destabilize the Great Lakes region with
impunity, while enjoying the protection, even the
complicity, of certain States, are arrested, given that
what is behind that terrorist movement is none other
than genocidal ideology.

10-67368

Moreover, my Government’s view on the transfer
of the ICTR archives to Rwanda is well known. Our
Government will not compete with anyone on that
point. We simply recall that the ICTR archives are an
integral part of our history and are therefore crucial to
preservation of the memory of the genocide, the
education of future generations and the prevention of
genocide. My Government of course remains ready to
make its contribution to the discussions under way on
that matter within the United Nations.
Unfortunately, the denial and trivialization of the
genocide are phenomena that tend to grow and be
trivialized even in the community of defence lawyers
in Arusha. Here, I am not talking about their pleadings,
covered by professional immunity, but of their activism
outside the courtrooms, in particular, in the
international media and at public conferences.
The Government of Rwanda is therefore
concerned about that everyday denial, which goes
beyond the simple defence of the accused and which is
not only likely to reopen the wounds of a people on the
way to reconciliation, but especially is a crime
punishable by law, like Holocaust denial in many
countries. I therefore call on the Security Council and
the ICTR to take the necessary measures to put an end
to that situation. For our part, the Government will
remain steadfast in ensuring that perpetrators of such
crimes, be they foreigners or attorneys of the Court,
will be brought to justice pursuant to Rwandan law.
In conclusion, the Government I represent calls
on the ICTR to pursue its mission with determination,
but also urges it to respect as much as possible its
completion strategy. At the end of its mandate, the
transfer to Rwanda of residual cases and archives
would be the most appropriate option for justice, for
the task of remembrance, for history and for the future
of our generations.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.
I take this opportunity, on behalf of the Council,
to thank Judge Robinson, Judge Byron, Prosecutor
Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings to
the Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

29
