S/PV.9241

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9241st meeting

Thursday, 12 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hayashi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Holguín Maldonado
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Cassis
Mr. Al Sayegh
Mr. Rutley
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security
The rule of law among nations
Letter dated 3 January 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01350 (E)
*2301350*

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.

The promotion and strengthening of the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace and
security
The rule of law among nations
Letter dated 3 January 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/1)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General and the Ministers and other highlevel representatives. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, India,
Ireland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Pakistan, Panama, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine, Uruguay and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Joan E.
Donoghue, President of the International Court of
Justice; and Mr. Dapo Akande, Professor of Public
International Law, University of Oxford.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
2/30

12/01/2023

with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/1, which contains the text of
a letter dated 3 January 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I congratulate Japan on
its presidency at the beginning of its tenure on the
Security Council, and I thank you, Sir, for opening
the new year with this debate on the rule of law. I
also welcome my two fellow briefers — Judge Joan
E. Donoghue, President of the International Court of
Justice, and Professor Dapo Akande.
The rule of law is foundational to the United Nations
and to our mission of peace; the Security Council has
a vital role in upholding it. The cornerstone of the rule
of law is that all people, institutions and entities, public
and private, including the State itself, are accountable
before the law. From the smallest village to the global
stage, the rule of law is all that stands between peace and
stability and a brutal struggle for power and resources.
The rule of law protects the vulnerable. It prevents
discrimination, harassment and other abuses. It is our
first line of defence against atrocity crimes, including
genocide. It creates and bolsters trust in institutions.
It supports fair, inclusive economies and societies.
And it is the basis of international cooperation and
multilateralism. As the Charter states,
“We the peoples of the United Nations [are]
determined … to establish conditions under which
justice and respect for the obligations arising from
treaties and other sources of international law can
be maintained”.
The 1970 Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States and the 2012 Declaration of the Highlevel Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of
Law at the National and International Levels further
develop the principles set out in the Charter. The body of
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

international humanitarian law saves lives and reduces
suffering amid conflict. The Geneva Conventions,
agreed after the horrors of the Second World War,
demonstrate that even wars have laws. Today’s debate
sends a strong message that ensuring the rule of law
is our priority and that all countries must adhere to
international standards.
All stakeholders — Member States, regional
organizations, civil society and the private sector — have
a responsibility to contribute to building and upholding
the rule of law. But the international situation shows
that we still have far to go. We are at grave risk of
the rule of lawlessness. In every region of the world,
civilians suffer the effects of devastating conflicts, loss
of human life, increasing poverty and hunger. From the
illegal development of nuclear weapons to the illegal
use of force, States continue to flout international law
with impunity.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has created
a humanitarian and human rights catastrophe,
traumatized a generation of children and accelerated
the global food and energy crises. Any annexation of
a State’s territory by another State resulting from the
threat or use of force is a violation of the Charter and of
international law.
The year 2022 was a deadly one for both Palestinians
and Israelis. We condemn all unlawful killings and acts
by extremists. There is no justification for terrorism. At
the same time, the expansion of settlements by Israel,
as well as home demolitions and evictions, are driving
anger and despair. I am also very concerned by the
unilateral initiatives that we have seen in recent days.
The rule of law is at the heart of achieving a just and
comprehensive peace, based on a two-State solution, in
line with United Nations resolutions, international law
and previous agreements.
Unconstitutional changes in government — coups
d’état — are regrettably back in fashion. They are
particularly worrying in places that are already enduring
conflict, terrorism and food insecurity, namely, in the
Sahel. The United Nations is ready to support regional
efforts to strengthen democratic governance, peace,
security and sustainable development.
The unlawful nuclear weapons programme being
pursued by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
a clear and present danger, driving risks and geopolitical
tensions to new heights. The onus is on the Democratic

S/PV.9241

People’s Republic to comply with its international
obligations and return to the negotiating table.
In Afghanistan, unprecedented systemic attacks on
women’s and girls’ rights and the flouting of international
obligations are creating gender-based apartheid. This
deliberately undermines the development of a country
that desperately needs the contributions of all in order
to return to sustainable peace.
The breakdown of the rule of law in Myanmar
since the military takeover in 2021 has led to a cycle of
violence, repression and severe human rights violations.
I urge the authorities to listen to their people and return
to the democratic transition.
The situation in Haiti is characterized by a deep
institutional crisis and weak rule of law, widespread
human rights abuses, soaring crime rates, corruption
and transnational crime. I call on Haitian stakeholders
to work together to restore inclusive democratic
institutions and the rule of law.
All those examples illustrate that adherence to
the rule of law is more important than ever. All States
Members of the United Nations have a responsibility to
uphold it at every turn.
The rule of law is foundational to efforts by the
United Nations to find peaceful solutions to all these
conflicts, disasters and crises and more, and to support
the most vulnerable people and communities around the
world. The strong and mutually reinforcing relationship
between the rule of law, accountability and human
rights is reflected in my call to action on human rights.
Ending impunity is fundamental. From the
International Court of Justice to the Human Rights
Council and its fact-finding missions and commissions
of inquiry, United Nations entities and mechanisms
promote and implement the rule of law. With its
unique mandate, the International Court of Justice
occupies a special place. I note the importance of
accepting the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court
and call on all Member States to do so without any
reservations. Members of the Security Council bear a
special responsibility in that regard and should take a
leading role.
Around the world, the United Nations is mobilized
against impunity and is committed to holding
perpetrators to account through fair, independent
judicial proceedings. We also strengthen the rule of
law by supporting victims and survivors and providing

23-013503/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

access to justice, remedy and reparation. The courts
and tribunals established by the Security Council in
the 1990s and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals have held to account a number
of those responsible for atrocity crimes in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Today the International
Criminal Court is the central institution of the
international criminal justice system and embodies the
aspiration for accountability for the most serious crimes.
I now turn to how Member States can further
strengthen the United Nations and its organs with a
view to promoting the rule of law. First and foremost,
I urge all Member States to uphold the vision and
the values of the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to abide by
international law; to settle disputes peacefully, without
recourse to the threat or use of force; to recognize and
promote the equal rights of all people; and to commit
to non-intervention in domestic affairs, the selfdetermination of peoples and the sovereign equality of
Member States.
I count on Member States to support our efforts
to promote the rule of law across the board, including
in the Security Council. Disputes in one area must
not prevent progress elsewhere. While the challenges
are many, the primacy of the rule of law is essential
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and for peacebuilding efforts. This includes clear rules
governing the threat or use of force, as set out in Article
2, paragraph 4, and in Chapter VII of the Charter.
Secondly, I urge Member States to make full use of
the rule of law as a preventive tool. At the international
level, the Charter devotes an entire chapter to the pacific
settlement of disputes, including through negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration and judicial
settlement (United Nations Charter, Chapter VI). This
is prevention in action, rooted in international law.
At the national level, the rule of law builds trust
between people and institutions. It reduces corruption
and creates a level playing field. It enables societies
and economies to run smoothly, for the benefit of all.
Conversely, when the rule of law is weak, impunity
prevails, organized crime flourishes, and there is a high
risk of violent conflict.
Thirdly, I urge Member States to reinforce the
rule of law as a key enabler to achieving the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development Agenda and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Goal 16, on
4/30

12/01/2023

access to justice for all and effective, inclusive and
accountable institutions is a critical enabler for the
other SDGs. Poverty, injustice and exclusion can only
be addressed through effective, non-discriminatory,
inclusive public policies.
Democratic legitimacy can never be used as a
rationale for measures that weaken or undermine the
rule of law. Civil society and other stakeholders have an
essential role to play in that regard. The United Nations
stands ready to support Member States through our
country teams around the world.
(spoke in French)
Looking to the future, my report entitled Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) proposes a new vision
of the rule of law, which provides an opportunity to
reaffirm and strengthen the centrality of the rule of law
to all of our work. This new vision will set out the links
between the rule of law, human rights and development,
and advocate a people-centred approach that ensures
that laws and justice are accessible to all. I will ensure
that it is implemented throughout the Organization,
including those elements that correspond to the work
of the Security Council. The importance of respect for
the rule of law will also be reflected in the new agenda
for peace.
The rule of law is essential to meeting current
and future challenges, from nuclear disarmament to
the climate crisis, from the collapse of biodiversity
to pandemics and dangerous diseases. Our rule-oflaw efforts must adapt to a changing environment and
technological advances.
The United Nations is uniquely positioned to
promote innovation and progress under the rule of
law. No other global organization has the legitimacy,
convening power and normative authority of the United
Nations. The Security Council has a critical role to
play in advancing the rule of law through its efforts
to maintain international peace and security, protect
human rights and promote sustainable development.
Together, let us commit to advancing the rule of
law to create a more stable and secure world for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Donoghue.
Judge Donoghue: I am grateful to Japan and
Foreign Minister Hayashi in particular for convening
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

an open debate on the rule of law among nations, which
I am honoured to join via video-teleconference from the
seat of the International Court of Justice in the Hague,
the Netherlands. I am particularly pleased to speak
after the Secretary-General’s informative briefing, for
which I thank him.
My remarks today focus on the role of the peaceful
settlement of international disputes in advancing the
rule of law. Over the past several decades, Member
States have made progressive efforts to articulate and
affirm their commitment to the rule of law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Notable
among those efforts is the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States, adopted by the
General Assembly by consensus in 1970. Among other
things, the Declaration expounded on the requirement
that States:
“settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace
and security and justice are not endangered”.
(General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex)
The relationship between the obligation to settle
disputes peacefully and the prohibition on the threat or
use of force was further addressed, 12 years later, in
the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes, which states that:
“[n]either the existence of a dispute nor the
failure of a procedure of peaceful settlement of
disputes shall permit the use of force or threat of
force by any of the States parties to the dispute.”
(General Assembly resolution 37/10)
A central objective of the General Assembly in
adopting the Declaration on Friendly Relations was to:
“promot[e] the rule of law among nations and
particularly the universal application of the
principles embodied in the Charter”. (General
Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex)
Since then, the term “rule of law”, which did
not appear in the Charter itself, has been used in
numerous resolutions and reports produced within
the Organization. The content of the rule of law has
been rather well developed as applied at the national
level, although, even in that context, competing
definitions have been put forward. For example, some
such definitions place emphasis on substantive norms,
such as equality before the law, while others focus on

S/PV.9241

structural elements, such as the review of executive
actions by an independent judiciary.
There is, however, broad agreement that the
concept of the rule of law is not easily transposed from
the national to the international level. That difficulty
is especially obvious when one considers the role
of adjudication in advancing the rule of law. At the
national level, one well-recognized aspect of the rule of
law is the constraint imposed on what has been called
the “otherwise all-powerful governing authority” of
the State by the existence and operation of a judiciary
that is empowered to strike down acts that exceed the
powers assigned to the executive organ.
Within a national system, of course, the executive
organ and other entities cannot avoid the jurisdiction of
national courts by refusing to consent to it. But at the
international level, States can avoid compulsory and
binding international dispute settlement by withholding
consent to jurisdiction. That means that, as a structural
constraint, international adjudication is far less robust
than adjudication by independent national courts.
On the international plane, it is the behaviour of
States that largely determines whether the rule of law
is being respected. If States mean what they say when
they proclaim their fidelity to the rule of law at the
international level, it is incumbent on them to exercise
restraint and forbearance. They may not settle their
disputes by using or threatening force and must be
prepared to have the legality of their conduct evaluated
by international courts and tribunals.
The rule of law among nations demands that States
incorporate systemic community priorities within their
conceptions of self-interest, even when those broader
priorities might seem to be in tension with short-term
objectives in relation to a particular situation.
Every person in this Chamber today knows
perfectly well that States prize their autonomy and
strive to safeguard whatever levers of power they hold.
We also know that national leaders often prioritize
near-term and parochial objectives over broader and
longer-term interests. At the international level, the
concept of the rule of law is in a constant battle with
those competing tendencies. However, this is not a time
for the rule of law to wave the white flag of surrender.
In particular, the ways in which Member States engage
with international adjudication can have a significant
impact on the realization of the rule of law at the

23-013505/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

12/01/2023

international level. I offer a few specific comments in
that regard.

them by the Charter in the pursuit of the Organization’s
fundamental objectives.

First, States that are truly committed to the rule
of law must entrust international courts and tribunals
with the judicial settlement of legal disputes. When
a State avoids binding and compulsory third-party
dispute settlement, its invocations of the rule of law
sound hollow.

The President: I thank Judge Donoghue for
her briefing.

Secondly, engagement with international dispute
settlement means more than accepting jurisdiction.
States must also participate in proceedings that may be
brought against them. If they believe that a particular
body lacks the jurisdiction to decide a dispute, they
should appear before that body and make that argument.
Thirdly, the rule of law requires States to comply
systematically with the decisions of international
courts and tribunals that are binding on them, even if
they disagree with those decisions. It is encouraging
to note that there has been compliance with the vast
majority of cases decided by the International Court of
Justice to date.
Finally, the rule of law at the international level
demands that States remain steadfast in their willingness
to have their conduct judged by international courts and
tribunals, even when adverse judicial decisions create
pressure at home to retreat from the jurisdiction of
those courts and tribunals.
Concrete steps such as those that I suggest today
may appear more difficult for national leaders than
recitations of the importance of the rule of law. However,
the long-term strategic interests of States committed
to the rule of law are best served by maintaining and
bolstering a robust system of international adjudication.
As a final remark, I note that the concept of the
rule of law at the international level applies not only
to States, but also to the organs of international
organizations, including the International Court of
Justice. I cannot call upon Member States to do more
to align their conduct with the rule of law without
also stressing that international courts and tribunals
must also do their part by deciding disputes submitted
to them in a conscientious and impartial manner, in
accordance with international law and within the
limits of the jurisdiction conferred upon them by the
consent of States. The judges of the International
Court of Justice take those responsibilities seriously
and are mindful of the important role bestowed upon
6/30

I now give the floor to Professor Akande.
Mr. Akande: I congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your delegation on assuming the presidency of
the Council.
In many of our national societies, we aspire to
observance of the rule of law. While there are many
ideas as to what precisely the rule of law means, at least
one thing is clear: the rule of law requires that those
who exercise public power must act in accordance with
the law. That, in turn, means that all those who are
the subjects of the law are entitled to the protection of
the law.
Those principles are equally true in the international
community. The international community, particularly
through the General Assembly and also in this organ,
has time and again affirmed its commitment to the
promotion of the rule of law in international affairs. We
see clearly, in the preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations, the determination of the drafters to:
“establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties
and other sources of international law can
be maintained”.
One of the main purposes of the United Nations is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Article 1 of the Charter clearly links that task of
maintaining peace and security with the settlement of
disputes and the adjustment of situations in conformity
with principles of justice and international law. As
the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States, adopted by consensus, stresses, the fulfilment
in good faith of the obligations assumed by States,
in accordance with the Charter, is of the greatest
importance for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
In order to ensure the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security, attention needs to
be paid to the observance of international law by States
and also by the United Nations as forum for advancing
collective security.
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

First, States are the primary addressees of the rules
of international law that are aimed at upholding and
securing peace. The central rules in that respect are
those that seek to restrain the use of force by States.
States are not permitted to seek to impose their will on
other States by using force. Sadly, the world continues
to bear witness to the immense suffering that the
unlawful use of force brings to human beings.
The basic rules of international law on the use of
force, as contained in the Charter and in customary
international law, are clear. The threat or use of force in
international relations is prohibited. Force may be used
lawfully only in two circumstances — when authorized
in accordance with the collective security scheme
established by the Charter, or when used in the exercise
of individual or collective self-defence. In particular,
the Charter is clear that force may not be used against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
another State. The use of force in order to advance
national policy and interests is clearly inimical to the
maintenance of peace and to the rule of law. States have
an obligation to fulfil their obligations, including those
relating to the use of force, in good faith. While there is
ambiguity about some aspects of the law relating to the
use of force, it is important to ensure that those areas
are not abused for purposes that undermine the rule
of law.
Together with the obligation not to use force, States
also have an obligation under the Charter to settle their
disputes by peaceful means and, to cite the Charter
again, “in such a manner that international peace and
security, and justice, are not endangered”. States have
a range of dispute settlement mechanisms available to
them, but commitment to the rule of law involves a
commitment to the idea expressed in Article 1 of the
Charter that disputes are to be settled in accordance
with international law. A willingness to settle disputes
in accordance with international law should mean that
in cases where those disputes involve disagreements
relating to the application of the law, States should be
prepared to submit their disputes to bodies that are able
to pronounce on those legal questions.
Today, in addition to the International Court of
Justice, we have a range of arbitral and judicial bodies
that could, in principle, deal with inter-State disputes
that involve questions of law. However, international
tribunals can act only where States provide consent
to their jurisdiction. It would be an important advance
in the rule of law among nations for States to increase

S/PV.9241

the range of instruments by which they provide such
consent. While many of those courts, including the
International Court of Justice, are busier than they have
ever been, there is, paradoxically, a declining tendency
for States to provide consent to the jurisdiction of the
Court. To date, only 73 States have made declarations
recognizing the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. That is barely more than
a third of the membership of the United Nations, and
the number has hardly increased in the past couple
of decades.
Similarly, while it used to be routine to include
clauses in multilateral and bilateral treaties permitting
each party to refer a dispute under the treaty to
the International Court of Justice, that has become
relatively rare in recent treaties. It has been a trend now
for a couple of decades and unfortunately represents
a retreat from the idea, emblematic of the rule of law,
that disputes involving legal rights should be settled on
the basis of law. While courts and tribunals may not be
able to settle all aspects of international disputes, they
can at least deal with the legal issues. The increased
acceptance of the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice and other tribunals would mark an important
advance in the rule of law and contribute to the
maintenance of peace. It is a positive sign for the rule of
law that States seem more willing than ever to submit
cases for adjudication, but it is also important that when
courts and tribunals pronounce on those disputes, their
decisions are respected and complied with. The notion
that it is the law that rules, not arbitrariness or force,
applies all the more in situations where one is not in full
agreement with the outcome dictated by the law.
Let me now turn to the role of this organ and of the
United Nations more generally in the promotion of the
rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Three points connect the rule of law to the
activities of the Security Council.
First, the Council has a responsibility to maintain
peace and security. Any failure by it to fulfil its
responsibilities undermines the rule of law, since
maintaining the peace creates conditions in which
justice and international law are observed.
Secondly, in order to promote the legitimacy of
its own activities, this organ needs to ensure that
international law is complied with in relation to
its own activities, the activities that it authorizes
and the demands that it makes of others. In that

23-013507/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

regard, the regular references to international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights, in resolutions regarding situations of conflict
are encouraging.
Thirdly, the rule of law requires that the law be
applied equally. To continue to be seen as legitimate,
the Council must ensure that like situations are
treated alike.
While there is an obligation on the Council
to ensure observance with international law, that
responsibility ultimately falls on individual Council
members, who have a responsibility — together with all
States — to observe the law themselves and ensure that
the Council collectively does too. Where the Council
collectively fails to fulfil its responsibilities, there is a
secondary responsibility on the part of other organs of
the United Nations to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and thereby to the promotion of the
rule of law. States have an obligation under the Charter
to cooperate with regard to the maintenance of peace.
They also have an obligation under international law to
cooperate in order to bring an end to serious violations of
the most important obligations under international law.
Even where States cannot engage in such cooperation
in this organ, those obligations for cooperation remain.
The President: I thank Mr. Akande for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
I thank all Ministers, fellow Security Council
members and States Members of the United Nations
for their participation today. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres, Judge Donoghue, President of the
International Court of Justice, and Mr. Akande, of
the University of Oxford, for their informative and
insightful briefings.
We live in a world that needs the Security
Council more than ever. Today we are beset by a war
of aggression in Europe and by conflict, violence,
terrorism and geopolitical tensions ranging from Africa
to the Middle East to Latin America to the Asia-Pacific.
Those situations are further complicated by energy
and food crises, fragile supply chains, climate change
and global health challenges. Faced with all of those
complex problems, the expectations that the Council
has to live up to are much higher than before. Yet we
sometimes hear voices questioning the relevance of
the Council. The Permanent Representative of Kenya
8/30

12/01/2023

said in this Chamber that “[m]ultilateralism lies on its
deathbed” (S/PV.8970, p.9). But we must not let it die.
Let us remind ourselves that this is not the first time
that we have been divided. In the past we have always
managed to find a path to overcome those divisions.
We have accumulated wisdom that still resonates with
us today. That is the significance of the rule of law
among nations.
All Member States, large or small, can be free from
the fear of brute force under the rule of law, but not under
rule by force. The maintenance of international peace
and security, as stipulated by the Charter of the United
Nations in its very first Article, cannot be achieved
unless international law is respected and implemented
in good faith. That is the belief that brought me to this
meeting today to listen to the voices of Member States.
I believe that the rule of law is intrinsically linked
with the responsibility of the Council. I believe that it
is only through multilateralism that we can uphold the
rule of law globally. I believe that the United Nations
should be at the core of multilateralism. And I believe
that the Security Council should be the guardian
of multilateralism.
Allow me to make a call here: let us unite ourselves
once again around the principle of the rule of law.
Uniting for the rule of law must be the keyword for us.
The rule of law among nations is a universal
concept. It is not about choosing camps. It is not about
taking the middle ground between opposing camps.
It is about returning to the unshakable principles that
Member States have built upon since 1945. We can
draw such principles, first and foremost, from the
Charter of the United Nations. We can also turn to
the landmark Declaration on Principles of Friendly
Relations, adopted by the General Assembly in 1970
as resolution 2625 (XXV), and General Assembly
resolution 66/102, on the rule of law adopted by our
Heads of State and Government in 2012. From those
fundamental documents, we can focus on the following
three points as essential elements of the rule of law
among nations.
First, the rule of law should be anchored in trust
among nations. If agreements are not observed in good
faith, then the rule of law does not exist and the world
becomes a jungle of brute force and coercion. The same
applies to the Charter of the United Nations, resolutions
of the United Nations and judgments and awards by
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

S/PV.9241

international tribunals. They are not just pieces of
waste paper; they must be implemented in good faith.

Confidence in the United Nations is now eroding.
But as Dag Hammarskjöld once said,

General Assembly resolution ES-11/1 entitled
“Aggression against Ukraine” and adopted on the
2 March 2022, reflects the voices of the Member
States seriously alarmed by the lack of good faith in
observing rules of international law. Furthermore, the
International Court of Justice order on provisional
measures of 16 March 2022 must be implemented
immediately, which includes the immediate, complete
and unconditional withdrawal of Russia’s military
forces from Ukraine.

“We need [the United Nations] as a foundation
and a framework for arduous and time-consuming
attempts to find norms in which an extra-national — or
perhaps even supranational — influence may be
brought to bear in the prevention of future conflicts.”
(Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of The
United Nations, vol. IV, p. 374)

Secondly, the rule of law never allows any country
to rewrite borders by force or through the flexing of
muscles. That applies to any coercion, including the
deployment of armed personnel beyond internationally
recognized borders, or to territory under the peaceful
administration of another State to create a fait accompli.
By no means can such actions be justified through
arbitrary interpretations of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including the right of
self-defence.
Thirdly, we, the Member States, should unite for
the rule of law and cooperate with each other to stand
up against violations of the Charter, such as aggression
against, or the acquisition of territory by force from,
a Member State. Japan welcomes efforts by Member
States in that regard and calls for further actions to
end the aggression against Ukraine. Let us refrain
from recognizing territorial acquisitions by force or
supporting aggression, directly or indirectly.
The rule of law is strongly interrelated with
national governance and development. They are
mutually reinforcing. The rule of law leads to greater
predictability, transparency and fairness in society,
which in turn serves as the foundation of economic
development and human security. That, in return, helps
to strengthen the rule of law.
Japan is a proud supporter, when requested, of
national efforts to build legal institutions and develop
human resources around the world. I hope that Japan’s
assistance has been helpful in the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations of Bangladesh,
Sri Lanka, Mongolia, Kenya and Côte d’Ivoire, just to
name a few. Japan will continue to work together hand
in hand with other States to let the rule of law permeate
at the national and international levels.

No other organization can, or should, replace the United
Nations. We need to enhance the functions of the whole
United Nations as the bulwark of multilateralism and
the rule of law. That includes strengthening the roles
of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and
other organs.
The most pressing aspect of that effort is Security
Council reform. The Council should be enlarged, in
both the permanent and non-permanent categories, to
better reflect the realities of the current world, not that
of 78 years ago. That is especially true for Africa.
The International Court of Justice is the final
gatekeeper of the rule of law, and we should reinforce
its role. I call upon all States that have not yet done so to
accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice.
I hope that today’s open debate can be an
opportunity for Member States to share concrete ideas
and proposals to strengthen the rule of law. I look
forward to a vibrant discussion.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cassis (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland congratulates Japan on its presidency and
thanks it for organizing this debate. In my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs, I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the International
Court of Justice and Professor Dapo Akande for their
valuable contributions.
This is the first time I have the honour to speak
as an elected member of this organ. I would like to
stress that Switzerland looks forward to working for
international peace and security with all the members
of the Security Council.

23-013509/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

12/01/2023

Today international law governs the fundamental
aspects of our coexistence. As an international
community, we have succeeded over the past decades
in building together a multilateral system based on
universal rules. The rule of law is the backbone of that
system, which is based on the Charter of the United
Nations. It is the duty of every State to respect the
norms and principles set out in it. The Charter prohibits
the use or the threat of the use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of another
State. It obliges States to settle their disputes peacefully.
And it is also in the Charter of the United Nations that
fundamental human rights and fundamental freedoms
are anchored. It is our duty, as members of the Security
Council, to ensure that those rules are respected.

instance, in its decisions on peacekeeping and special
political missions.

The principles of the Charter are being put to the
test today. They have been flagrantly violated in the
case of the Russian military aggression against Ukraine.

Mr. Holguín Maldonado (Ecuador) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Japan for organizing today’s
open debate, which reminds us of the importance of
promoting, strengthening and respecting the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
I acknowledge the briefings by Secretary-General
António Guterres, President Joan E. Donoghue of the
International Court of Justice, and Mr. Dapo Akande.
Several of the elements that they raised are key to
addressing the current state of international conflicts.

A key principle of the rule of law is respect for
due process. In order for the Council to strengthen its
credibility, it must itself respect those standards and act
in a transparent and consistent manner. In that regard,
Switzerland welcomes the work of the Ombudsperson
to the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, to ensure the rule of law in
United Nations sanctions. We intend to work with all
Council members to ensure that other sanctions regimes
also benefit from such a mechanism.
International humanitarian law continues to be
violated in many armed conflicts. Serious violations
of human rights take place every day. Switzerland
condemns those serious violations of international
law, wherever they occur in the world. Moreover,
international criminal law and accountability are not
being adequately implemented. Against that backdrop,
we must not give up but should rather all support
the work of international bodies such as the Human
Rights Council, the International Court of Justice, the
International Criminal Court and the various United
Nations investigation and fact-finding mechanisms. It
is crucial that all States, as well as the Security Council,
cooperate fully with those bodies. It should also be
borne in mind at the national level that the erosion of
the rule of law and human rights violations can often
be early indicators of violence or armed conflict. The
Security Council should take that into account, for
10/30

The Swiss Constitution states that the strength of
a people is measured by the well-being of its weakest
members. The rule of law protects us all. It protects
our States, whether they are small or large, and us as
individuals, whether we are weak or strong. In 2010,
Joseph Deiss of Switzerland, the then President of
the General Assembly, said that the Charter must
remain our ultimate guide and that peace and security
are our primary calling. I wholeheartedly endorse
those sentiments.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Human Mobility of Ecuador.

The last time Ecuador held a seat on the Security
Council, we were involved in a border dispute with a
neighbouring country that took the form of a war. The
peace negotiations were successful, and in October
we will mark 25 years since the signing of the peace
agreements between Ecuador and Peru — a peace
in favour of the rule of law between nations — with
which we are moving forward in a relationship based on
respect, friendship, cooperation and the common good.
After the outbreak of the pandemic, the SecretaryGeneral called for a global ceasefire as a first step towards
permanent peace. Ecuador is well aware of the benefits
of peace and the costs of war in terms of human lives
and collateral damage and deplores the fact that armed
conflicts continue to increase rather than diminish. In
addition, we are seeing the proliferation of hate speech,
anti-multilateralism narratives, radicalization, violent
extremism, corruption that destroys the social fabric
and threatens democratic institutions, transnational
organized crime and terrorism, all of which take us
further away from achieving the central objective we
set ourselves in 1945, which was to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, as proclaimed
in the Charter of the United Nations, an instrument
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

for world peace signed by my country as a founding
member of the Organization.
We must coordinate efforts, particularly in the
Security Council, to support States in their attempts
to combat transnational organized crime and arms
trafficking, whose adverse effects undermine security
at all levels, diminishing the scope and effectiveness
of actions aimed at ensuring peace, undermining the
rule of law and democratic institutions and their values,
promoting inequity and, worst of all, discouraging
prosperity and entrepreneurship. The world needs
the Council and its members to be the first to defend
and respect the purposes of the Charter and to refrain
from resorting to the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. I therefore emphasize the urgency of putting
an end to the aggression against Ukraine, which has
caused pain, destruction and death and has exacerbated
the nuclear threat. It is a flagrant violation of the
principles and norms of international law established
in the Charter and an attack on the entire system of
international relations, undermining the foundations of
global stability. I reiterate Ecuador’s belief that nuclear
weapons have no place in a world order based on the
rule of law among nations and its rejection of threats
of their use.
While recognizing the central role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, I reiterate how important it is to strengthen
it with more inclusive, modern and effective working
methods. In the current biennium, as a member of
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, Ecuador will support efforts to achieve greater
accountability, coherence and transparency. We will
continue to support the progressive development of
international law and its codification, as well as the
strengthening of international judicial institutions,
especially the International Court of Justice. As the
President of the Court said today, we need a strong
system of international arbitration. I also reaffirm
our full support for the work of the International
Criminal Court and its mandate to end impunity for
those responsible for international crimes, including
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We will continue to promote the universalization of
the Court and the strengthening of its relationship with
the Council.
As the Secretary-General said, peace is a global
public good that we must protect and manage. Ecuador

S/PV.9241

agrees with that assessment. I want to assure you,
Mr. President, that multilateralism is not on its deathbed.
While some may want to attack and diminish it, those
of us in the Council today have the utmost confidence
that through the rule of law we can prevent the world
from becoming a jungle of conflict. Rest assured, Sir,
that in every decision and opportunity to contribute to
stability and peace, Ecuador will be there to contribute
with enthusiasm and determination.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s urgent open debate on how we can
collectively strengthen the rule of law. We are pleased
that the Government of Japan has chosen to highlight
this important topic during its presidency and at a
critical moment. I thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his very cogent and strong statement on the importance
of the rule of law. I also thank Judge Donoghue, the
President of the International Court of Justice, and
Mr. Akande, for their thoughtful presentations.
We heard from Mr. Akande that the Charter of
the United Nations was forged, as it says, to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law can be maintained. In short, the rule
of law is what brought us together. In those famous
words of former Secretary-General Hammarskjöld, it
is what saves us from hell. No person, prime minister,
president, State or country is above the law.
That is an ironclad commitment for the United
States and a fundamental principle of the United
Nations. We are committed to upholding and acting
strictly in accordance with the United Nations Charter,
which offers legal protections that benefit all States.
Instead of elevating some provisions over others, the
United States embraces its obligations under the United
Nations Charter as a whole. Not least among them is the
Charter’s prohibition on the threat or use of force and the
promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Yet, despite the unparalleled advancements
that we have made towards peace and prosperity since
the founding of the United Nations, today certain States
are flagging or are failing in their commitment to the
principles of the United Nations Charter, or enabling
rule-breakers to carry on without accountability.

23-0135011/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The most glaring example is sitting right here in
this Chamber. There is no international legal basis for
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Russia is in violation of
the United Nations Charter, and members of its forces
have committed war crimes in Ukraine. The General
Assembly resoundingly adopted a resolution that clearly
and unequivocally condemns Russia’s illegal so-called
referendums (resolution ES-11/4). It is no wonder that
many people see a crisis of confidence when it comes
to upholding the Charter and the founding promise and
principles of the United Nations.
We must hold Russia accountable, just as we
must hold accountable all those who do not respect
sovereignty, territorial integrity, human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
In Russia, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Iran, Nicaragua and Syria, horrifying reports
detail how Governments are unjustly detaining,
torturing or killing political opponents, activists,
human rights defenders and journalists. In Burma,
Belarus, Cuba, Iran and the Sudan, we have seen peace
protesters — people demanding their basic human
rights — attacked and abused. Right now the Taliban
are undermining the right to education enshrined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It makes
Afghanistan a pariah and the only country in the world
where half the population is barred from access to
education beyond the sixth grade.
The United States will continue to defend, protect
and advance respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. We continue to fight against discrimination,
inequity and inequality in all its forms. That is why we
worked collectively, through the General Assembly, to
suspend Russia from the Human Rights Council and
why we worked with partners to remove Iran from the
Commission on the Status of Women. It is why we are
calling for the recommendations contained in the report
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights regarding human rights abuses in
China to be implemented, and it is why we are raising
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s human
rights abuses in the Security Council as an unequivocal
issue of international peace and security.
As members of the Security Council, we must
address such issues, and the permanent members in
particular must live up to their special responsibility
to serve, not dominate, the people of the world. That
12/30

12/01/2023

means meeting, at the very least, the basic and most
fundamental standards of international law.
Let us take, for example, non-proliferation and
arms control. Together, many nations of the world
established rules and norms of behaviour regarding
non-proliferation and arms control in order to foster
stability and help to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war.
That work has been enormously successful. We must
continue to strengthen and advance the international
non-proliferation and arms control regimes.
To that end, the United States promotes the highest
possible standards of nuclear safety, security and
safeguards worldwide, and it helps partners to build
capacity to reduce proliferation risks. But last year, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched an
unprecedented 69 ballistic missiles, all of which violated
multiple Security Council resolutions, and earlier this
year, it reaffirmed its intent to mass-produce tactical
nuclear weapons to exponentially increase its nuclear
arsenal this year. Many people have raised the very
real concern that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is prepared to conduct a seventh nuclear test. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is clearly and
grossly disregarding international obligations, but so
are those who protect and abet it.
China and Russia repeatedly stopped the Security
Council from condemning the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s unlawful actions in 2022 by
forcing the Council to stay silent, blocking the rest of
the Council’s attempts to carry out its responsibility to
maintain peace and security. All such violations and
abuses of international law require accountability. If
there is no justice, there will be no peace.
Fortunately, the international system has many
tools at its disposal to enforce international law. In
the light of all the violations of international law that
we see today, we have to ask ourselves if we are using
those tools effectively.
For its part, the United States will continue to
advance the rule of law, both internationally and
domestically, and we are willing to work with anyone
seeking to do the same. We have not always been perfect,
but we are holding ourselves to a higher standard and
are working with our partner nations to contribute to a
stable international system. Together, we are improving
prosecutorial and judicial effectiveness, bolstering
accountability and the transparency of criminal justice
agencies and promoting criminal defence and legal
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

aid. We will continue to do everything in our power to
institutionalize respect for human rights and the rule
of law at all levels. International law can save us from
hell. With any luck, it will bring us closer to peace.
Mr. Al Sayegh (United Arab Emirates): At
the outset, we welcome your presence, Mr. Foreign
Minister, and your country’s decision to highlight
this important topic for the first signature event of
your Security Council presidency. I am grateful to
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his
valuable briefing and to Judge Joan E. Donoghue,
President of the International Court of Justice, for her
detailed briefing and for the critical work of the Court,
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
particularly in the promotion of the rule of law at the
global level. Allow me to also thank Professor Dapo
Akande for his thoughtful briefing.
The rule of law plays a crucial role in the smooth
functioning of an international system that is largely
characterized by deep inequalities in power, influence
and opportunity. The Charter of the United Nations
provides an essential foundation in that regard.
However, it is only by consistently applying the norms
and values enshrined in the Charter, including sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and the prohibition of the
use of force, that the rule of law offers the promise of
stable peace as the alternative to destabilizing conflict.
The rule of law provides the basis for sustainable
development, international trade and investment, which
promotes stability and peaceful relations among States.
Because of its importance, there is a tendency to refer
to the rule of law in lofty terms or appeal to it in the
most urgent circumstances. Its selective application
cannot serve our shared goal of consistent adherence
to the rule of law. That requires constant nurturing and
cultivation. The rule of law is strongest when regularly
defined by our interactions.
In that context, I would like to highlight the
following three points on how we can all work together
to strengthen the rule of law.
The first is the commitment to consistency in
the invocation and application of the rule of law, no
matter the region or interests involved. For the rule of
law to exist at all, it must mean that all are held to the
same standard. Respect for core principles, foremost
among them those enshrined by the Charter of the
United Nations, must not be protected only when they
involve the interests of the strongest among us. Our

S/PV.9241

international system can function only for all States—
large and small, weak and strong — when it binds
everyone to the same rules. In addition to undermining
faith in the rule of law, an uneven approach leads to
its erosion. It incentivizes those that have the means to
pick and choose when to champion the rule of law.
The second is the commitment to the peaceful
resolution of disputes. When there are differences among
States, there is the responsibility to acknowledge such
differences and engage in good-faith efforts to resolve
them peacefully. There is a range of international
dispute resolution mechanisms available for those
purposes, of which the International Court of Justice is
a key example. The United Arab Emirates is, and will
continue to be, steadfast in its dedication to prioritizing
dialogue and the peaceful resolution of disputes. That
is my country’s consistent approach to matters of the
highest significance to our nation. The United Arab
Emirates, for instance, has been constantly calling
for a peaceful resolution of the dispute with Iran over
the three United Arab Emirates islands of the Greater
Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa.
The third is the practical commitment to building
capacity for compliance. We have seen the tendency
of establishing rules or standards without sufficient
consideration of the ability of some States to meet
them. In addition to questions of basic fairness, such
an approach, which inevitably leads to non-compliance,
undermines the functioning of the rule of law. The
international community, including through regional
and international organizations, should work with States
to identify needs and help build capacity — for instance,
by raising awareness and strengthening institutions. We
see, in that regard, the importance of efforts to develop
a new vision for the rule of law as we work towards
realizing Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), set out by
the Secretary-General.
Let me to conclude by reiterating once again the
fundamental importance of the rule of law and respect
for the Charter in the maintenance of international
peace and security. For the United Arab Emirates, those
principles are the pillars of the international system,
and we will continue to uphold and promote them.
Mr. Rutley (United Kingdom): I am grateful to our
briefers for their valuable contributions today.
The United Kingdom has long been an advocate for
the rules-based international order as the foundation
of international peace, development and human

23-0135013/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

advancement, and we remain deeply committed to
it today. At the heart of the order is the Charter of
the United Nations. Since its inception in 1945, 193
countries have ratified the Charter, committing to work
together to save future generations from the scourge of
war, promote human rights and uphold international law.
Within the Charter, Articles 1 and 2 are of particular
importance to today’s Security Council discussion.
They provide the foundations for global peace and
security. They include the express commitment by
Member States not to threaten or use force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. And they oblige Member States to settle disputes
by exclusively peaceful means.
We have all made a commitment to these principles.
For all the tragedies and bloodshed of the past eight
decades, the remarkable truth is that the global
commitment has made a difference, with the number of
deaths in State conflicts as a percentage of the global
population falling by 95 per cent between 1946 and
2020. Yet while many countries — indeed the vast
majority of them — have demonstrated how seriously
they take their commitments under the Charter, a
handful continue to show their disregard for the rulesbased international order and the rule of law.
Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine is a particularly
stark example. Through its unprovoked invasion, sham
referendums and illegal attempted annexations, Russia
has shown clear contempt for its obligations under the
Charter. Russia has clearly violated the prohibition on
the use of force and the principle of non-intervention
in its contravention of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. That is made all the more egregious
by the fact that Russia is a permanent member of the
Council, which brings with it a particular responsibility.
Elsewhere too, we continue to see certain Member
States act in a way that demonstrates a disregard for
the rules-based international order. Iran’s nuclear
programme has never been more advanced than it is
today. It is threatening international peace and security
and undermining the global non-proliferation system.
In North Korea, the unprecedented launching of 70
ballistic missiles in 2022 violates multiple Security
Council resolutions, as well as continues to threaten
international peace and security. And, in Syria, the
targeting of schools, hospitals and emergency first
responders by the regime and Russia constitutes
flagrant violations of international law and indeed
14/30

12/01/2023

basic human decency. Sadly, rape and sexual violence
have also been widely used as a weapon of war.
Today’s discussion is timely. Any breach of the
Charter and its fundamental principles, which underpin
global peace and security, represents a threat to us all.
Therefore, more than ever, the international community
must come together to reiterate our support for the
Charter and the rule of law; commit to work together
to strengthen the rules-based international order and
the rule of law; and send a clear signal that we will
not tolerate efforts to undermine the rules-based
international order. The United Kingdom looks forward
to working with everyone to that end.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence in the Security Council Chamber
today, and the Japanese presidency for convening this
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Court of Justice for their
work in promoting the rule of law, and Mr. Akande for
enriching this discussion with his views and insights.
Seventy-seven years ago, the world pledged
to uphold a rules-based order, which we solemnly
enshrined in the United Nations Charter. By defending
the Charter and the multilateral system, we are
reiterating our commitment to its principles. I would
like to make two points.
First, the Security Council must uphold the rule
of law and make concrete efforts when the Charter’s
principles are violated by wars of aggression, nuclear
threats or attacks on civilians, in particular women and
children. Furthermore, we must strengthen our efforts
against threats to peace and security resulting from
climate change.
I reiterate Malta’s strong support for General
Assembly resolution 76/262, which is a significant step
towards increasing scrutiny of veto use. Malta also
fully supports the political declaration on suspension of
veto powers launched by France and Mexico, as well as
the Code of Conduct promoted by the Accountability,
Coherence And Transparency group. We firmly believe
that the veto should not be used in cases of genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes.
In addition, we must enhance partnerships between
the Council and other bodies within the United
Nations system to ensure full respect of international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law. Restoring our citizens’ trust in institutions at all
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

levels is possible only if the rule of law is guaranteed
and if unhindered access to political and public life
by all is safeguarded and protected. United Nations
peacekeeping must continue to assist conflict-affected
countries in strengthening the rule of law.
My second point focuses on the key role of
international courts and tribunals in ensuring respect
for the rule of law. The cooperation of the Security
Council with the International Court of Justice and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) must be
strengthened. The Security Council should promote the
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice as a
basis for the settlement of disputes.
The Rome Statute empowers the Security Council
to refer situations to the Court to ensure accountability,
and in that regard we must be consistent. The Council
has acted by referring the situation in Libya and Darfur
to the ICC, and by establishing the Tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia. Taking similar decisive
approaches towards current major conflicts would
enhance the Security Council’s legitimacy, credibility
and effectiveness. Moreover, we must also ensure followup when referrals are made, and we call on relevant
States to cooperate with the ICC and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in line
with relevant Security Council resolutions.
Malta recognizes the essential role of international
courts in our efforts towards peace and security.
This is why, in view of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine, we joined States Parties to the Rome Statute
in referring Ukraine’s case to the ICC Prosecutor,
and we recently made a declaration of intervention in
the International Court of Justice proceedings on the
allegations of genocide. As stated by the International
Court of Justice, the international community shares
the obligation to not recognize as lawful a situation
created by a serious breach of the law.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels. In 2012, we recognized that the
rule of law is key for the further development of the
three pillars of the United Nations.
As stated by the Secretary-General in his report
entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), the Charter
is based on enduring values and principles, but it is
also flexible and dynamic, allowing for adjustments
to address new challenges. We must spare no effort

S/PV.9241

to make sure that we live up to those values and
principles. We must endeavour to be remembered not
for the promises we broke, but for all the promises that
we strived to uphold.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting on such an important
topic, and we welcome you as you preside over this
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the International Court of Justice, Judge
Donoghue, and Mr. Akande, for their valuable insights.
As of late, hardly any other subject would be
timelier or a more worthy use of our time in the Security
Council. Strengthening the rule of law at national
and international levels remains a key goal of the
international community to ensure peace and security.
Member States confirm that idea every September in
their statements at the plenary opening of the General
Assembly but also in other high-level meetings,
including in the Security Council Chamber. As we all
know, developing an international order based upon the
international rule of law is also a core objective of the
United Nations Charter and is rightly considered to be
the centrepiece of the modern international order.
The rule of law is not just a wish or a mere political
commitment. It has continuously been codified in
countless important and binding documents, including
Security Council resolutions. Our security and
prosperity depend on having and upholding agreed
rules. The last seven decades have shown that it is a
deliberate and rational choice to be guided by right
rather than might, to live by the rule of law and not
rule by force. We have decided to live by common rules
because they have been adopted and agreed upon by
all and for all. That is the basic and unquestionable
premise of sovereign equality, territorial integrity and
the independence of all States, without exception.
All States, especially those that seek greater
responsibility in world affairs, have a direct interest
in the observance of the rule of law. It goes without
saying that this also applies to permanent members
of the Security Council who enjoy unique privilege
that come with permanent membership, but with that
membership comes the special responsibility to exercise
due diligence. This is why the unprovoked Russian
aggression against Ukraine is a flagrant aberration
that embodies a complete repudiation of our common
rules and the necessity to live by them. Indeed, it
represents what all of us together have committed to

23-0135015/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

leaving behind as a lesson learned from past mistakes;
it cannot be served as a cold meal on the menu of an
imperial appetite in the twenty-first century. That is
why this aggression has been universally denounced
and rejected.
We must continue to stand up collectively to
abuses because it is our duty to cooperate and act in
concert to safeguard international peace and security
through multilateralism, instead of giving in to the faits
accomplis, annexations of territory by force and blatant
crimes. By tolerating transgressive behaviours, we run
the risk of having them become guidelines for others
to follow. We run the risk of empowering strongmen
to overthrow constitutional order, violate international
law, threaten peace and security, and deny their own
citizens their elementary rights. Persistent and flagrant
violators of common rules must not be condoned; they
must only be condemned.
The rule of law and development are strongly
interrelated and mutually reinforcing. The rule of
law supports growth and sustainability through rules
and regulations, institutions that are citizen-centred
and citizen-driven, and which protect and enforce
environmental rights. The rule of law promotes
economic growth and sustainability. It contributes to a
more inclusive and equitable development, and by doing
so it helps fight poverty and inequality by promoting
social advancement.
Equally, when the rule of law is infringed upon,
when rights and equality are not ensured for all, when
laws discriminate against women and deprive them
of their contribution, when corruption, bribery and
segregation distort access to basic services, when the
law is selectively enforced, when poor people are evicted
from their land without the possibility of redress, that
is when poverty deepens, inequality thrives, and
conflicts erupt. This is exactly why the rule of law
is not an option, but a must. By providing certainty
and predictability, the rule of law ensures justice. By
upholding universal principles, the rule of law is key
to promoting and protecting human rights in order to
bridge the gap between human rights aspirations and
human rights realities.
For Albania, human rights and security are
intimately linked. Rights that are not properly observed
remain mere words, worthless paper. While we strive
to strengthen the existing normative framework,
we must work hard and do everything in our power
16/30

12/01/2023

to ensure effective implementation of the law and
accountability for serious breaches of international law,
especially with regard to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Renewed resolve, continued commitment
and concerted cooperation are all necessary for us to
fight impunity, which we must do with all our might,
to restore faith in our solemn commitment to upholding
the United Nations Charter and international law and to
build a world where nations meet in peace and are not
confronted with war and conflict.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Court of Justice and Professor Akande for
their briefings.
As we just celebrated the tenth anniversary of the
declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1),
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate.
On 24 September 2012, our leaders reaffirmed
their commitment to the rule of law. The States
Members of the United Nations then decided to
reaffirm their adherence to the founding principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, namely respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries.
In doing so, all Member States, including the
members of the Security Council, undertook to refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State. Any
breach of those obligations, such as Russia’s continued
aggression against Ukraine, is a serious violation of the
United Nations Charter and a denial of the rule of law.
Strengthening the rule of law also enables action in
the face of the financial, climate and health crises that
have aggravated inequality, injustice and discrimination
around the world. Such cooperation is fundamental to
ending conflicts.
The Security Council clearly has a central role
to play in restoring the rule of law. Following the
2012 declaration, it assumed its responsibilities by
integrating the promotion and restoration of the rule of
law in several of its resolutions, such as in resolution
2631 (2022), concerning Iraq. Support for the rule of
law and judicial institutions and a responsible security
sector are part of the mandates of several peacekeeping
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

operations. Recently, the Security Council, in
resolution 2669 (2022), on Burma, urged all parties to
respect human rights, fundamental freedoms and the
rule of law.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, France
reaffirms its commitment to democratic values and
respect for the rule of law by all States. It defends the
rigorous respect of the principles of international law
relating to friendly relations and cooperation between
States, which are essential to the maintenance of
international peace and security, for which the Security
Council is the guarantor.
The increasing number of attacks and challenges to
the rule of law should encourage us take further action.
First, the Security Council must protect the rule
of law in its resolutions, including by guaranteeing the
participation of all components of society, particularly
women and young people, in peace processes. More
broadly, it must act and live up to its responsibilities.
That is the meaning of our initiative, in partnership
with Mexico, on the use of the veto in cases of mass
atrocities, which already has 106 supporters. I invite
the Member States that have not yet done so to join it.
Secondly, access to justice for all is an imperative.
To that end, we must support and invest in actions to
strengthen national judicial systems. We must also fight
against impunity by bringing to justice the perpetrators
of serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights. Where national jurisdictions cannot
act alone, the Council must reinforce the role of the
International Criminal Court. It is also essential that all
Member States respect the decisions of the International
Court of Justice.
Thirdly, we must also fight against the growing
violations of international humanitarian law and
attacks on civilian populations. That is the meaning of
the call for humanitarian action that France launched
with Germany in 2019 and of the ministerial meeting
organized under our presidency in July 2021 (see
S/PV.8822). I reiterate our unwavering support for the
mechanisms put in place by the Council to prevent
abuses against children and the perpetration of sexual
violence in times of conflict.
Finally, we must firmly support the action of the
United Nations, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, UN-Women and

S/PV.9241

the entire United Nations family, which, under the
authority of the Secretary-General, play a decisive role
in protecting and promoting the rule of law. France
recognizes the central importance of Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) in promoting a multilateral order
based on the rule of law. Let us work together to
implement the Secretary-General’s recommendations
on strengthening and coordinating United Nations
action in this field.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Japanese presidency for the initiative to
hold today’s meeting. I also thank Secretary-General
Guterres, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, President of the
International Court of Justice, and Professor Akande
for their briefings.
Our world is in the grips of interlocking changes
and turbulence. While old issues and tensions remain,
new challenges are rapidly emerging, with a mounting
governance deficit, making it all the more relevant to
bolster the rule of law at the international level. Doing
so is a shared responsibility for all countries.
I would like to share our views and observations in
that regard.
In order to strengthen the rule of law at the
international level, the first order of business is to
uphold the authority of international law. The Charter
of the United Nations establishes the basic norms
governing modern international relations. Its purposes
and principles form the cornerstone of modern
international law.
Regrettably, however, the purposes and principles
of the Charter have not been fully implemented. A scant
few countries have willfully backed out of international
treaties and agreements, applied international law
selectively and pursued double standards and a
utilitarian approach of applying it when it suits their
interests and discarding it when it does not. Such
acts trample upon the authority of international law,
chip away at the foundation of the rule of law at the
international level and undermine the harmony and
stability of international relations. That approach must
be abandoned.
Strengthening the rule of law at the international
level means encouraging dialogue and consultation in
order to settle all disputes. Closer interaction between
States will inevitably lead to occasional hiccups and
friction. The important thing is to find appropriate ways

23-0135017/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

to handle those differences properly. Direct dialogue
and consultation between the parties is customary in
dealing with international disputes. That is in line with
the spirit of international law and has proved to be the
most effective and feasible means of dispute settlement.
Instead of resorting to third-party mechanisms,
we encourage the countries concerned to do more with
negotiation, good offices and mediation and to resolve
their disputes through dialogue and consultation. The
principle of national consent is a fundamental principle
of international law, which should be followed when
resorting to international judicial organs to settle
disputes. The International Court of Justice, as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, should
play an active role in the peaceful settlement of
international disputes, as mandated.
To strengthen the rule of law at the international
level, we should ensure that all countries are engaged in
creating international law. All countries — regardless
of their size, power or wealth — are equal members of
the international community. International rule-making
is not the prerogative or privilege of a few countries
and is by no means a case of obeying the strongest.
International affairs should be addressed jointly,
through consultation, and the future of the world should
be decided by all countries, which ought to participate
equally in international law-making. And international
rules should reflect the concerns of all countries in a
balanced manner. Every effort should be made to seek
consensus in international law-making and rule-making
under the United Nations framework. That is consistent
with the spirit of democratic law-making and is the
essence of multilateralism.
To strengthen the rule of law at the international
level, we must resolutely reject unilateral sanctions. No
country can place its domestic law above international
law. Unilateral sanctions have no basis in international
law. Whatever banner they fly under, it cannot conceal
the illegality of such sanctions. Some countries have
indiscriminately imposed unilateral sanctions that go
beyond the pale of international law, hindering the
economic and social development of other countries and
creating grave humanitarian disasters. In violation of the
principles of fair competition and market economy and
multilateral trade rules, some countries — the United
States in particular — hamstring other countries’ hightech enterprises on all sorts of trumped-up charges and
artificially destabilize the global industrial and supply
chains. Their behaviour not only undermines other
18/30

12/01/2023

countries’ legitimate right to development, as well as
the common interests of the international community,
it also runs completely counter to the spirit of the rule
of law at the international level.
There is a new phrase that we often hear these days,
“the rules-based international order”. It is an ambiguous
formulation that is not found in the Charter of the United
Nations, in any of the leaders’ declarations adopted
by the United Nations or in any Security Council or
General Assembly resolutions. We have been meaning
to ask what kind of rules the so-called rules-based
international order is based on. Who creates those rules,
and how are those rules related to the international
order? We have yet to hear a definitive, unambiguous
answer to those questions. What we have seen instead,
in reality, is how the so-called rules-based approach
pursued by some countries has plunged the world into
immense trouble and chaos. If the rules referred to in
that formulation are the universally recognized norms
of international law and the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, then why not be
upfront about it and call a spade a spade? If there are
other rules that universally recognize international law
and can serve as the basis of the international order,
may I ask what those rules are? Can they be listed, one
by one? Why do those countries chant the rules-based
mantra at every opportunity yet equivocate on the
specifics of those rules?
We therefore have reason to suspect that the true
intention of that handful of countries touting a rulesbased international order is to create an alternative
to the existing system of international law in order to
impose their own standards and will on others, putting
their own narrow interests at the centre of the universe
and opening a back door to double standards and
exceptionalism. The statement by the representative of
the United States earlier today further convinces us that
our suspicion is fully justified. If we let that dangerous
trend continue unchecked, our world will regress into
an age where the law of the jungle and power politics
rule the day. All peace-loving peoples of the world
should and must be very wary of that.
We hope that this meeting provides a pivotal
opportunity for all countries to unequivocally affirm
that there is only one system in the world, which is
the international system with the United Nations at its
core. There is only one order, which is the international
order based on international law, and there is only one
set of rules, made up of the basic norms governing
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

international relations that are anchored in the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and the world’s largest developing country, China will
continue to stand by and behind true multilateralism in
order to safeguard the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We will take the lead
in implementing the rule of law at the international
level, upholding international justice and fairness and
advocating humankind’s shared values. We will work
unremittingly to advance global governance in a more
just and reasonable direction in order to build a shared
future for all countries while maintaining common
security and promoting common development.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Japanese presidency for organizing a debate on such
a pressing topic on the international agenda. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, President of the
International Court of Justice, and Mr. Dapo Akande
for their insightful remarks.
The rule of law among nations is the basis for
the successful pursuit of the goal of maintaining
international peace and security. It is not an accident
that the rule of law underpins the Charter of the United
Nations and is the object of landmark United Nations
documents such as the 1970 Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States, as both Judge Donoghue
and you yourself referred to, Mr. President.
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter is commonly
regarded as one of its most important provisions, as it
states the primacy of international law over force. It
is worth recalling the history behind the fundamental
principle of the prohibition of the threat or use of force,
especially in the face of the unilateralism and unlawful
military interventions that have marked recent decades.
That principle, alongside the juridical equality of States,
emerged after the two Hague Peace Conferences of
1899 and 1907. Latin American States made a decisive
contribution to the outcome of those conferences and
to the wide recognition of those principles. Brazil is
proud of the Latin-American legacy in international
law and in particular of the role played by the Brazilian
internationalist Ruy Barbosa, who firmly promoted the
principle of equality among States.
The prohibition of the use of force is considered
to be a jus cogens norm and therefore leaves no room

S/PV.9241

for derogation, either by treaty or by unilateral acts.
No rights can ever arise from its violation. The only
exception to that prohibition — the right to individual
or collective self-defence enshrined in Article 51 of the
Charter — must be interpreted in a restrictive manner,
as has already been decided by the International Court
of Justice. All acts of aggression against sovereign
States and any individual or collective use of force
without the Council´s approval, as well as the use of
unilateral coercive measures, are all expressions of
disregard for the norms and principles of the Charter.
International
law
alone
cannot
prevent
conflict — that requires the commitment of all
countries. Tragically, we are witnessing the return
of inter-State conflicts. The conflict in Ukraine, for
example, confronts us with the harsh reality that if the
international community does not decisively engage
in good faith with a view to achieving a cessation of
hostilities and peace negotiations, more instability
will follow. Concerns about food security have grown,
especially among developing countries. Only collective
action has been able to avoid crises. In that connection,
I would like to point to paragraph 14 of resolution ES11/1 — the first to be adopted by the General Assembly
after the establishment of the “uniting for peace”
mechanism for the situation in Ukraine — which urges
for an immediate peaceful resolution of the conflict
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine through
political dialogue, negotiations, mediation and other
peaceful means.
The declaration adopted at the 2012 high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at
the national and international levels recognized the rule
of law as
“the foundation of friendly and equitable relations
between States and the basis on which just and fair
societies are built” (General Assembly resolution
67/1).
It acknowledges that the rule of law at the international
level requires not only peaceful coexistence among
subjects of international law, but also their coordination
and cooperation towards a just and fair order based on
international law.
Let us not forget that Sustainable Development Goal
16 is closely related to the idea of the rule of law, not
only domestically but also internationally, as recalled
by the Secretary-General earlier this morning. One of
its targets is to broaden and strengthen the participation

23-0135019/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

of developing countries in the institutions of global
governance. Strengthening the rule of law in the United
Nations largely depends on reforming the Organization
in order to make it fit for purpose.
Despite the overwhelming support of the
membership for the reform of the Security Council, little
progress has been made in the past 57 years. The lack
of representativeness of the Council is becoming more
and more acute, thereby affecting its ability to uphold
the rule of law among nations and, consequently, to
discharge its primary responsibility — the maintenance
of international peace and security. A reform that
encompasses the enlargement of both categories of
seats and the review of its working methods is urgent.
We highlight that there will be no full respect for the
rule of law among nations if developing countries are
not permanently represented in the decision-making
process in the field of peace and security.
International justice also plays a crucial role in
keeping the rule of law among nations. Brazil calls
upon all Member States to fully cooperate with the
International Court of Justice in line with Article 94
of the Charter of the United Nations. In the same vein,
as a founding member of the International Criminal
Court, Brazil supports the work of the Court to promote
accountability at the international level, under the
principle of complementarity. We take this opportunity
to invite those members that are not yet parties to the
Rome Statute to ratify or accede to it and, by doing so,
contribute to the realization of international justice.
Brazil will continue to advocate for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and equality among States,
principles inscribed in our national Constitution. A
genuine and lasting peace can be achieved only through
respect for the international norms and principles that
guide contemporary international relations.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to heartily commend His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Japan, President of the Security Council,
for convening this open debate on a very timely and
important subject. We wish to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
insightful statement. And we thank the President of
the International Court of Justice and Professor Dapo
Akande for their excellent and enlightened briefings.
The concept of the rule of law among nations is
the bedrock on which the Charter of the United Nations
was written. It was later developed and expounded with
20/30

12/01/2023

the adoption by the General Assembly, on 24 October
1970, of the Declaration on Principles of International
Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. In fact, that Declaration was an
important restatement of the provisions of the Charter
itself. In that connection, the rule of law is embedded in
the letter and spirit of the Charter, and it constitutes the
foundation of a rules based international order.
The rule of law in international relations is thus
strongly linked to the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, as prescribed
in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter, respectively. The
Charter outlines and defines four main purposes for the
Organization, which are, in a nutshell: first, to maintain
international peace and security; secondly, to develop
friendly relations among nations; thirdly, to achieve
international cooperation in solving international
problems; and fourthly, to be a centre for harmonizing
the actions of nations in the attainment of common
goals. It is therefore clear that, in a world without
the rule of law, no peace and security are feasible, no
friendly relations can be developed among nations,
no international cooperation is achievable and no
understanding whatsoever can be attainable.
It was, to a large extent, thanks to the Charter,
to international law in general and to the liberation
struggles of peace- and freedom-loving peoples that,
since 1945, humankind has made significant progress
in expanding the realm of the rule of law. We have been
able to define and reach new frontiers of our liberty
and to affirm the right of self-determination of peoples
and countries under foreign yoke with the momentous
adoption of resolution 1514 (XV), entitled “Declaration
on the granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples”, of 14 December 1960. We dared to
overcome colonialism, to defeat apartheid and to
make huge progress in human rights and fundamental
freedoms as never before in human history.
Therefore, the rule of law at the international
level means that all nations, large and small, are
duty bound to uphold the law of the United Nations
embodied in the Charter and, more important, in its
purposes and principles. They contain peremptory
norms of international law accepted and recognized by
the international community of States as a whole and
that serve the interests of peace and security. In that
context, it is our strong belief that, for the rule of law
to be more effective, it needs to benefit from a strong
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

culture of multilateralism and oppose selectivity and
unilateralism in our State actions.
The Charter is a legally binding instrument that
impels nations to live together in peace and to unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security.
That means that peace and security are a common and
global good of humankind. It means that peace and
security are premised on a collective security, and they
require a collective effort to prosper. And it means
that we must unite our efforts to uproot terrorism, the
modern scourge of war that affects the international
community. Terrorism is a grave threat to State and
human security. We believe that more collective
security measures should be taken to improve the fate
of nations around the world and consolidate the rule of
law among nations.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the briefers for their statements. For
today’s meeting, our Japanese colleagues have focused
our attention on issues related to the rule of law, which
is indeed a very relevant and important topic that should
be addressed systematically and impartially. However,
the concept note (S/2023/1, annex) for our meeting
today makes it clear that the organizers have no such
intention. The statements we have heard today confirm
that in addressing the question of the rule of law, our
former Western partners only want to put forward
a narrative about Russia’s alleged responsibility for
emerging threats to international peace and security
while ignoring their own egregious violations.
Of course, such an approach is fully in line with
the Western concept of a rules-based world order
whose rules are formulated by the West itself, and
it is something we cannot agree with. It does not
correspond to the truth or to the norms of international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations. The
West’s latest example of the arbitrary creation of rules
to suit itself is the decision that has been mentioned
today to remove Iran from the Commission on the
Status of Women. Legally speaking, it should not have
been possible, but the United States and its allies were
not deterred. They just went ahead and removed Iran.
Yet they want to teach us about international law?
The main theme of our Western colleagues’
statements lately is that the start of Russia’s special
military operation in Ukraine on 24 February 2022
crossed a kind of Rubicon in international law. That
might give one the impression that nothing illegal

S/PV.9241

had ever happened in the world until then. Needless
to say, that is not the case. International law has been
repeatedly flouted and violated long before that, and
certainly not by Russia. Let me look at a few examples.
The true origins of the Ukraine crisis lie in the
hypocrisy of the West and its utter unwillingness to
consider the interests of others, even when it comes to
issues as important as State security. There is simply
no other explanation as to why the NATO countries,
in violation of basic principles of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, have decided that
it is their absolute right to expand their bloc, even if
that goes against the principle of the indivisibility of
security. The origins of the difficult situation in which
we all find ourselves today also lie in Washington’s
irrepressible desire to play the role of global policeman
that it has single-handedly taken upon itself. According
to a document prepared in 2022 by the Congressional
Research Service, in the years since 1991, when the
United States declared itself the victor in the Cold
War, 251 cases of the use of the United States Armed
Forces abroad have been recorded. According to data
from the United States Census Bureau, as of 2022
there were more than 16 million veterans in the United
States — people who were had been directly engaged
in armed combat — despite the fact that no one has
attacked the United States in two centuries. Think
about that.
International law and the public order based on
its supremacy were grossly flouted by the collective
West when the first NATO bombs were dropped on
Yugoslavia, if not even earlier. The same countries
that today like to refer to the Ukraine crisis as the first
conflict in Europe since the end of the Second World War
and an infringement of the principle of the inviolability
of borders bombed and dismembered a sovereign
country in the 1990s, in violation of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, tearing away a
part of its territory. Their actions, which amounted to
a commonplace aggression through a war of choice,
were conducted under the fig leaf of the concept of socalled humanitarian intervention, which has nothing
to do with international law. The same countries then
sent comments to the International Court of Justice in
support of the legality of the unilateral declaration of
independence of so-called Kosovo. And now they tell
us about the uniqueness of the Kosovo precedent and
the inapplicability of their arguments and position to

23-0135021/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

the referendums in Crimea and the liberated territories
in Ukraine.
Next was the concept of the war on terror, which
led to the destruction and long-term occupation of
Afghanistan, along with numerous unpunished war
crimes committed by NATO soldiers, the deaths of tens
of thousands of civilians and record increases in drug
production and trafficking. Afghanistan is still reeling
from the consequences of those events. Meanwhile, the
United States and its allies have developed a practice
of broadly interpreting of Article 51 of the Charter
as allowing self-defence against non-State actors
on the territory of third countries. In other words, if
Washington and its allies need to invade somewhere
or bomb someone, all they have to do is declare that
terrorists are there. We all remember the NATO
aggression against Iraq launched on the utterly false
pretext of the presence of weapons of mass destruction.
Of course, they never found any. Instead, they invaded
the country, destroyed its economy and industry,
killed its national leader and hundreds of thousands of
civilians and established a multi-year occupation while
appropriating Iraq’s national and natural resources.
That, too, was a perfect example of the rules-based
world order.
Then there was Libya, where the concept of
humanitarian intervention was also applied, but
under a new name — the responsibility to protect.
Resolution 1973 (2011), which authorized a no-fly zone,
was interpreted by the United States and its satellites as
carte blanche to carpet-bomb the country in yet another
commonplace aggression in violation of international
law and the Charter. The result was predictable. The
national wealth was plundered, the leader was killed
without trial or consequences and a once-prosperous
country was plunged into chaos and a civil war that is
now in its second decade.
The International Criminal Court (ICC), an
instrument that is allegedly tasked with upholding
the rule of law, also got involved in the case of Libya.
In a matter of days the Prosecutor at the time, Luis
Moreno Ocampo, fabricated a case against Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, citing as evidence crude fakes about
Viagra being handed out to soldiers for mass rapes
and about hiring Black mercenaries to commit heinous
abuses. Now the ICC, having successfully dehumanized
the Libyan leader and his entourage, has become a fig
leaf for Western aggression. Incidentally, the Court’s
real duties regarding the case of Libya are much
22/30

12/01/2023

more dismal, with years of feverish work producing
zero results. Needless to say, the ICC has failed to
apprehend or punish those responsible for war crimes
and civilian deaths, just as it has failed to punish those
who assassinated Mr. Al-Qadhafi.
Yet another country that has suffered from the
American-style rule of law is Syria. There again we
have seen direct military aggression by the United
States and NATO, with the occupation of significant
parts of the country, which continues to this day, and
with support provided to foreign fighters, who are
essentially terrorists. Finally, since the organizers
of today’s meeting are paying particular attention to
Article 51 of the Charter, we should note that in Syria
the United States has achieved yet another record in
expanding its interpretation of its provisions. It has
notified the Security Council about action in collective
self-defence with Syrian Kurds against the Syrian army.
In other words, it has claimed that it is self-defence to
work with a non-State actor against the armed forces of
the very country in which that actor is located.
One wonders where in that regard the organizers
of today’s meeting see the use of Article 51, and I
quote from the concept note for today’s meeting, “only
against an armed attack and within the requirements
of necessity and proportionality” (S/2023/1, annex) and
not “speciously... as a pretext” (ibid.).
The human-made Ukrainian crisis that I already
mentioned fits very well into the chain of such events,
which are the result of Western colonial thinking and
hegemony. Those who are not biased are well aware
that Russia’s special military operation in Ukraine is a
consequence, not the root cause, of the Ukrainian crisis.
It has actually been going on for at least nine years.
February 2014, when the collective West prepared,
financed and supported a bloody, anti-constitutional
armed coup d’état in the country, hypocritically called
the revolution of dignity, can very roughly be taken as
the starting point.
American politicians do not even hide their
involvement in the event. Ms. Nuland even gave the
amount spent on regime change: $5 billion. She also
shuffled the future Ukrainian leaders like a pack of
cards in her telephone conversations in 2014.
International law was dealt a mortal blow when,
the very next day, the leaders of European countries
trampled on the guarantees that they had given to
incumbent and democratically elected President
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

Yanukovych. The Ukrainian leader himself, who was
still in the country, was declared absent and removed
from office in violation of the Ukrainian Constitution
at the time.
The five judges of the Constitutional Court who
resisted such arbitrariness were simply kicked out
and replaced with the so-called right people — again,
contrary to the basic law of the country, with the claim
that the oath of office of a judge had been violated.
In case anyone did not understand, that violation was
allegiance to the spirit and the letter of the Ukrainian
Constitution at the time.
The blatant violation of every conceivable procedure
under Ukrainian law did not embarrass the United
States or the European Union (EU) in the slightest. They
hastened to recognize as the only legitimate leadership
of Ukraine a clique of nationalists, who had declared
themselves to be in power as a result of the Maidan
coup. Such are the high standards of democracy and
the rule of law. Encouraged by their support, in April
2014 the self-proclaimed Acting President Turchynov,
by ordering the launching of a so-called anti-terrorist
operation, unleashed a full-scale civil war against the
people of Donbas, who refused to put up with such
lawlessness and live under the thumb of radicals. The
culmination of such lawlessness was the setting on fire
of anti-radical protesters in the Trade Union House in
Odesa on 2 May 2014. The West turned a blind eye to
that, making it clear that it was giving the Kyiv regime
carte blanche to commit any crimes. Turchynov’s
undertaking was continued by the oligarch Poroshenko,
who was put in the presidential seat under the guise of
fighting corruption.
The civil war against its own people was to
continue in Ukraine for another eight years, resulting
in a real nightmare for the Donbas and the loss of many
thousands of civilian lives, including children. All of
that took place under the clichéd statements of Western
politicians about the desire for a settlement and there
being no alternative to the Minsk agreements. That was
again a shameless lie. As we learned from the recent
revelations of the direct participants in the events
Ms. Merkel and Mr. Hollande, the West initially did not
intend to settle anything. The Minsk agreements, by
their own admission, were needed only to pump Ukraine
with foreign weapons and mercenaries and to prepare
it for military operations. Mr. Poroshenko also spoke
about that. Against the background of such a systemic
and monstrous deception, no one should be surprised

S/PV.9241

that Zelenskyy, who came to power under the slogan of
achieving peace, continued along the path assigned to
him and plunged his country into a real disaster.
Many people here, including the SecretaryGeneral, who left the Chamber, like to talk about
prevention. If resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed
the Minsk package of measures, had been implemented
in good faith, including by Security Council members
present in the Chamber today, we would not be in
the situation in which we now find ourselves. There
we have compliance with the agreements that you,
Mr. President, spoke about today, and there is a clear
example of prevention.
Right now we are witnessing another brazen
attack by the West on international law in the form of
unprecedented abuse of Article 63 of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice in order to put blatant
pressure on a principal organ of the United Nations.
We are talking about the intention of approximately 50
States, mainly members of the EU and NATO, to side
with Ukraine in the case before the Court regarding
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide of 1948. Many of those
countries freely say that they are doing so for political
reasons — to show support for Kyiv.
However, we firmly believe that international
law and the purposes and principles laid down in the
Charter of the United Nations will still prevail over
quasi-legal concepts, such as the rules-based world
order, and frameworks such as the various so-called
summits of democracies, NATO, Australia, the United
Kingdom and the United States (AUKUS) and other
supposedly purely defensive alliances and systems of
dividing States into right and wrong.
We are counting on a more active role of the world
Organization and its Secretary-General in such matters.
It is disappointing that incomprehensible concepts,
such the new vision for the rule of law advanced by
the Secretariat, are very much along the lines of the
rules-based world order. They do not emphasize the
importance of taking into account the national, cultural
and religious particularities of each State. Rather, they
attempt to impose a pattern of behaviour and guidelines
on the State and the societal structure of States Members
of the United Nations.
Instead of wasting budgetary money on such
dubious speculative concepts, we would recommend
focusing on preserving and protecting the system

23-0135023/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

of international law, framed by the United Nations
Charter. The International Court of Justice should play
a key role in that regard. We hope that that principal
organ of the world Organization will not succumb to the
unprecedented political blackmail that it has had to face.
The sustainability and credibility of the international
system of the administration of justice as a whole
ultimately depend on its strength and consistency.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to congratulate Japan on the initiative of this important
debate on the need to ensure that the rule of law prevails in
relations among nations. I thank the Secretary-General
for having so clearly outlined our debate. I would also
like to thank the President of the International Court of
Justice, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, and Professor Dapo
Akande for their enlightening briefings.
Ensuring the rule of law in society has always been
a haven and a rallying cry of those who are oppressed,
dispossessed and aggrieved. Today we are clearly
fortunate not to live at a time when the African people
were reduced to slavery and placed beyond any legal
order and when African empires, kingdoms and States
were considered not as subjects of international law,
but as territories without a master to be conquered
and occupied at will. That was an era when the laws
and policies of the greatest Powers prevailed in the
international order and when the law was of no avail
in defending the humanity of chained, deported and
enslaved peoples.

12/01/2023

especially at the international level, and that our efforts
to deepen and consolidate it must continue.
The rule of law implies that, within a State, the
exercise of power in the public domain must be carried
out in full compliance with the applicable laws. That
means that everyone, without exception, must act within
the limits set by the law. In international relations, the
rule of law rests on the Charter as its legal foundation.
The Preamble clearly states that the peoples of the
United Nations are determined,
“to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties
and other sources of international law can
be maintained”.
In addition, Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter states
that one of the four purposes of the United Nations is,
“to bring about by peaceful means, and in
conformity with the principles of justice and
international law, adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations which might
lead to a breach of the peace”.

Since 1945, States that emerged from the Second
World War made a fundamental choice in adopting the
Charter of the United Nations. They chose to make
respect for the primacy of international law the rule
governing international relations. Since then, respect
for the rule of law internationally and respect for the
principles of equality of the rights of peoples, the
prohibition on the use of force between States under
the Charter of the United Nations, the prohibition
of genocide and the protection of human rights have
been synonymous with freedom, independence, shared
prosperity and peace among nations.

In that context, it is undoubtedly fair to say that
one of the goals of the United Nations is to contribute
to the establishment of the rule of law in international
relations. That is certainly the reason that States show
their utmost concern when they are alleged to be
violating international law. Consequently, States take
measures to defend themselves in every forum. Being
suspected or accused of a violation of international law
has become a source of disgrace. When it happens, it
often leads to criticism of the Government concerned
at both the domestic and international levels. That
is certainly also the reason that the international
community is making multidimensional efforts to set up
an appropriate legal framework for a new international
society. The United Nations is playing a central role
in the process. The declaration of the United Nations
Decade of International Law for the years 1990 to 1999
in General Assembly resolution 44/23, of 17 November
1989, has contributed significantly to strengthening the
rule of law at the international level.

In his Millennium Report (A/54/2000), former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan emphasized that, from a
long-term perspective, the expansion of the rule of law
had been the foundation for much of the economic, social
and political progress achieved in the past millennium,
while recalling that that vision remained incomplete,

My country is particularly committed to upholding
the rule of law. We are convinced that it is incumbent
upon all of us to maintain and renew our commitment
to upholding international law through a multilateral
system based on respect for the universally established
rules to save humankind from re-experiencing the pain

24/30

23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

of its past. Ensuring the predictability, stability and
legal certainty of the rule of law is impossible without
a streamlined and effective multilateral system. The
shared interests of humankind depend on multilateral
instruments. As long as certain nations remain poised
to take unilateral measures for their own prosperity and
security, our collective security system will remain a
pipe dream.
Let me highlight several fundamental principles
that the Organization has established as a template for
the development of the rule of law among nations.
First, we must make the United Nations more
effective in the peaceful settlement of disputes;
secondly, ensure States’ implementation of arms control
and disarmament treaties; thirdly, take concerted
measures against international terrorism; fourthly,
reduce the adverse effects of economic sanctions on
innocent populations; and, lastly, promote democracy
and respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the right to development.
Humankind has too often suffered from the
adverse effects of the lawless exercise of power. We
must become more committed to international law. We
must do so without double standards, while bearing in
mind that the rule of law is not an à la carte menu by
which we can pick and choose. Each and every segment
of humankind must be protected by international law,
with the knowledge that there is no contradiction
between State sovereignty and international law. The
obligations that States commit to within the framework
of international conventions are not incompatible with
their sovereignty.
History teaches us that the way humankind
applies international law depends on the nature and
the scope of the problems facing it. Confronted by
the cruelty and inhumanity of slavery during the
nineteenth century, States adopted binding legal
instruments in 1890 and 1926 to prohibit it and work
together to eliminate its practice. After witnessing
the loss of 75 million civilian lives during the Second
World War, States adopted in 1949 the Fourth Geneva
Convention, dedicated to the protection of civilians
in times of international armed conflict. When they
saw the peoples of the world rise up against, oppose
and rebel against the practices of colonialism, States
declared the right of peoples to self-determination,
which facilitated the process of decolonization. When
non-international armed conflicts took precedence over

S/PV.9241

others, States adopted the Protocol Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to
the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed
Conflicts, extending the benefits based on the same
fundamental human needs to that type of conflict. And,
in the face of the rising nuclear threat, the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and, more
recently, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
were adopted.
Similarly, we must overcome current challenges,
including climate change, the loss of biodiversity,
international terrorism, the predatory exploitation of
developing countries’ natural resources and healthand cyber-related threats, all of which are becoming
increasingly serious challenges to the aspirations of the
world’s peoples for security, dignity and prosperity.
All calls for strengthening the rule of law must also
take into account the need to build economic capacity
in fragile countries. Unless socioeconomic rights
are promoted, our goal of building an institutional
framework that respects the rule of law at the national
and international levels will be difficult to achieve.
In conclusion, let me underscore an important point.
The rule of law at the international level does not mean
encouraging maintaining the status quo. Like many
other human endeavours, international law and the
international order that it underpins are perfectible and
must constantly be adapted to changing realities over
time. The reliability of the framework of international
rules must be constantly consolidated by constructive
updates and broadening its scope in order to respond
effectively to humankind’s contemporary challenges.
In the light of this continuous reinvention, we must be
ready to act collectively, and the Security Council must
be able to reform itself without further delay. Ensuring
our coexistence and sustainably shaping our common
future are at stake.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I warmly welcome your
leadership of this open debate, Sir, and thank Japan
for focusing the attention of the Security Council
on the rule of law among nations, a subject that has
acquired great significance in recent years. I also thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his statement
and the President of the International Court of Justice,
Judge Joan E. Donoghue, and Professor Dapo Akande
for their enriching contributions.
History is replete with the tragedies that
accompanied the efforts of States to impose their

23-0135025/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

will on others and manage inter-State relations only
on their own terms. In the post-1945 era, however,
the world has settled on an order framed by the rule
of law, based on mutual recognition and respect for
the sovereign equality of States, as well as respect
for the rights of people everywhere. The options we
have chosen in favour of the values and principles that
underpin our rules-based international system have
been fundamental to the maintenance of peace and
security, the enjoyment of human rights and individual
well-being and sustainable development.
Indeed, the application of the rule of law among
nations has come with significant benefits. It has
helped to deliver more than 100 nations from oppressive
colonial rule and foreign domination — although a few
remain — and provided constraints on the use of force,
except in limited circumstances prescribed by the
Charter of the United Nations. It has fostered important
international arrangements for pursuing diplomatic
relations, implementing sustainable development
objectives, addressing environmental, climate and
universal health concerns, and creating reasonable
conditions for progress in all countries.
However, understandably, the rules-based order is
not perfect. For instance, it has not been able to prevent
the dysfunctional aspects of the present global political
and security environment characterized by violent
conflicts, humanitarian crises, systematic human rights
violations, threats of nuclear proliferation and use of
nuclear weapons, and a worsening climate crisis that
threatens our very existence. Developing countries are
also still seeking systemic changes to the international
trade and financial systems and effective arrangements
of development cooperation necessary for building the
resilience critical for international peace and security.
Regrettably, we have also seen examples of powerful
States projecting parochial national interests onto the
global stage and selectively applying or disregarding
the fundamental principles of international law and the
values that underpin the United Nations Charter.
While some have evoked these unacceptable
exceptions to the rule of law among nations or the
existing gaps between principle and practice as
justification for violations of international law, many
more, and rightly so, have chosen to stand up for the
Charter and international law. For Ghana, we have no
doubt that it is precisely because of the authoritative
influence of the rule of law among nations that most
Member States see violations clearly when they occur
26/30

12/01/2023

and remain dissatisfied when rules persist in serving
the interest of a few rather than the aspirations of all.
We therefore support the strengthening of the rule
of law among nations and endorse the continuing focus
of the United Nations in support of the rule of law at
national and international levels. Like many others,
we are resolved in our ambition to achieve a just, fair
and equitable rules-based order that provides a balance
between peace, development and human rights. In
that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s new
vision of a people-centred approach to the rule of law
outlined in his report entitled Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) and remain encouraged by the reaffirmation
of commitments expressed in the landmark 2012
declaration on the rule of law contained in General
Assembly resolution 67/1.
We believe the present period to be an important
moment to go beyond familiar rhetoric and adopt
practical measures that can enhance the chances for
a stable global environment. In that regard, we would
like to highlight the following additional four points.
First, amid weakened bonds of friendship and
peaceful coexistence among States, we must remind
ourselves of the common obligations to respect
international law and uphold the Charter of the United
Nations, which, collectively, support a peaceful and
stable international order. We must remind ourselves
of the benefits that accrue to all when, in their relations
with each other, States constrain their actions within
the limits of international law and the fundamental
principles of self-determination, sovereignty, territorial
integrity, non-aggression of States and the prohibition
of the threat or use of force.
As the ongoing war in Ukraine and elsewhere show,
when the agreed rules are violated, we all suffer, even if
in varying degrees. We must therefore recommit to the
pacific settlement of disputes. We must understand that
while unilateral actions may, in the short term, bring us
closer to our preferred outcomes, in reality, they place
us further from the reach of our desired aspirations, as
our actions can trigger counteractions that make no one
better off.
Secondly, in strengthening the rule of law of
nations, it is important that key global institutions,
organs and processes, including the Security Council,
which is entrusted with the primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security, should
be urgently reformed. We cannot fight new evils with
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

old tools and, undoubtedly, the post-1945 construct of
the Security Council no longer supports the effective
execution of its mandate, leading many to question the
Council’s very relevance.
We believe that the Security Council must be
representative of the international community as a
whole and should reflect present geopolitical realities.
On this matter, Ghana has consistently called for the
acceleration of reforms on the basis of the widely
supported African position espoused in the Ezulwini
Consensus. The reform of the Council is a herculean
task but, nonetheless, it is one that we must embark on
without undue delay. We hope that during the upcoming
intergovernmental negotiations process, real progress
will be made in the scope and depth of the reform of
this important organ.
Thirdly, it is important to recognize that the distinct
mandates of the principal organs of the United Nations
are mutually re-enforcing. Strengthening coordination
and cooperation among the organs and coherence with
other international institutions should therefore form
part of the efforts to strengthen the operation of the
rule of law among nations. While it is true that many of
the successes of the United Nations in ensuring relative
global stability can be credited to the Security Council,
it is equally true that the effectiveness of the work of
the Council is impeded by the lack of convergence of
actions outside the Council, including the absence of
global solidarity for addressing several emerging crises
that require global cooperation to be successful.

S/PV.9241

entrusts upon us and remains committed to doing
the work that is needed to help deliver the promise of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Communities and Defence of the
Republic of Cabo Verde.
Mr. Soares (Cabo Verde) (spoke in French):
Allow me, Mr. President, first of all, to extend to you
warm and cordial greetings from our West African
and Sahelian islands of Cabo Verde. I would like to
express my feelings of honour and pleasure to be in
the Security Council Chamber, at the centre of global
multilateral security diplomacy, at this crucial moment
in contemporary history, where current geopolitical
events and trends are jeopardizing and threatening
the validity and relevance of the global rule-of-law
achievements reached so far.
Allow me also to thank Japan for this very welcome
initiative, as we express our wishes for its success in
its presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the International Court of
Justice and Mr. Akande for their valuable briefings.
It is indeed timely to reflect in depth on the
growing and new challenges to the rule of law that
are emerging before us, on a global scale, in order to
ensure that it prevails, as it is a sine qua non condition
for the consecration of international peace and stability,
sustainable development, human rights and democracy.

Lastly, I wish to focus attention on accountability
as a central tenet of the rule law and on the continuing
need for the Security Council to support effective
international accountability mechanisms in the global
fight against impunity. As it has done in the past in
relation to international crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the Council, through
the instruments available to it, can support efforts to
strengthen the international accountability and justice
system. In addition, we must be mindful of avoiding the
politicization of sanctions, as this tends to weaken their
effectiveness as a behaviour-modification tool. We must
seek to be transparent and consistent in application of
sanctions in all relevant situations.

In my country, Cabo Verde, the primacy of the
rule of law was consolidated by the establishment
of representative democracy in 1991 and the 1992
Constitution, thus placing the rule of law at the centre
of our political system and guaranteeing respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy
and sustainable development. Furthermore, in its
foreign policy, despite our condition as a small island
developing State, we have always firmly and staunchly
supported the rule of law — be it through our conduct
in the United Nations system or by being active in our
continent — for the final triumph of the achievement
of the rule of law in the regional bodies of which we
are members.

In bringing our statement to a close, allow me to
reiterate Ghana’s firm commitment to multilateralism
and the rule of law. Ghana fully embraces the
responsibility that our membership of the Council

In the face of growing trends of polarization and
lack of geopolitical dialogue among the great Powers,
we urgently need transformative solutions in the short
term, without which all the experience and work

23-0135027/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

accumulated within the United Nations over the past 77
years would become useless and invalid.
It is therefore urgent to make every effort to
strengthen the responses necessary to safeguard
and strengthen the rule of law in the world, all while
ensuring legality among nations. We are all called upon
to undertake this immense, but absolutely imperative
task in order to give new content and life to the words,
objectives and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as to the 1970 Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States and the 2012 declaration of
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
rule of law at the national and international levels.
In doing so and looking towards the 2024 Summit
of the Future, we will be sowing the seeds for the lasting
consecration of the rule of law at the global level. This
year, the foundations of multilateralism have been sorely
tested. That is why the rule of law is urgently needed at
the international level. Let us therefore act together and
without delay in order to ensure our common future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Otero (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): The world
is facing a global crisis on a scale not seen since the
Second World War. We must therefore redouble our
efforts to bring about peace and to re-establish the
conditions for its sustainability. Against that backdrop,
Panama is convinced that international peace and
security are based on full respect for human rights,
as well as the promotion of dialogue and cooperation
among States.
Following the pandemic, which has had devastating
impacts on the global market, and, more recently, the
effects of the war in Ukraine, my country has been
able to manage governance and stability only through
dialogue, and that has translated into sustainable
peace and progressive recovery in our nation.
Understandably, the above-mentioned situations have
had a profound impact on a population that had already
been affected by post-pandemic restrictions that dealt
a severe blow to countries’ economy and income.
Today we must urgently take stock and reflect upon
the internal Panamanian dialogue process that led to
the appeasement of the protests, which began with just
demands that were the consequence of a very distant
war, with local repercussions.
28/30

12/01/2023

Those recent events brought about a very
difficult — and, perhaps, the most complex
ever — political situation. In order to address the
situation, the Government, led by President Laurentino
Cortizo Cohen and Vice President José Gabriel Carrizo
Jaén, established a dialogue table where they never
succumbed to the pressure to use violence against their
own population. From those exchanges, which took
place in such a complex context, certain dynamics
of inclusive dialogue were generated. Those can be
replicated for the entire continent and are the best
example of governance in the twenty-first century.
By not succumbing to the pressure of using
violence, our country demonstrated that dialogue is
the only sustainable way of achieving recovery and
development, while maintaining social peace. We
urge the countries of the region to see that process of
negotiation and dialogue as an element of unification in
the face of the polarization that exists in our continent.
Panama reaffirms its attachment to the principles
contained in the Charter of the United Nations, which
gave rise to a world built on dialogue and cooperation. The
rule of law is based on a vast international institutional
order, in which the effectiveness of multilateralism rests
on fair and stable legal frameworks. Strengthening it
requires us to apply new approaches in line with our
times, such as the indispensable participation of women
to achieve lasting peace, based on resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security.
At the United Nations, we are building key
structures to strengthen an international justice
system and a universal system for the protection of
human rights. Dialogues are under way to strengthen
and reform the Security Council, bolster the General
Assembly and consolidate peacekeeping operations in
pursuit of new governance.
Humankind will continue to face challenges, but
only together can we achieve a just, legitimate and
true peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Dzhaparova (Ukraine): Ukraine highly
appreciates the initiative of the presidency of Japan to
hold this important debate.
As is rightly pointed out in the concept note for
this meeting (S/2023/1, annex), “[w]e need to remind
23-01350

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

ourselves that we should pursue the rule of law, instead
of rule by force”.
In his statement at the beginning of today’s debate,
the Secretary-General said that the rule of law is the
very basis of our interactions and culture of interactions.
For my country, it is evident that, if it is a culture, the
rule of law always goes with other notions, such as
responsibility and accountability. In my country, it is
very clear — it is black and white — who is responsible
for the harsh times that we are living through and that
this country, which is responsible for the crimes that we
see, should be held accountable.
The law of force that Russia has been barbarically
practicing today against Ukraine gives a clear signal
to everyone in this Chamber that no one is secure
anymore. If a country that abuses the rights and
privileges of a permanent member of the Security
Council attacks another Member State, it means one
thing only — security has been ruined, international
peace has been called into question and the rule of law
has been brutally abused.
As our open debate is taking place here in New
York, people in Bakhmut, in Soledar, in Mykolaiv, in
Kherson and many other Ukrainian cities are dying
every day. Ukrainians spend days and nights in
basements because of Russian shelling. We have no
basic things — no electricity, no water supply and no
heating in the winter. For example, I packed my suitcase
for New York by candlelight. Instead of the nine hours
that the trip from Kyiv to New York used to take, it now
takes 36 hours to reach United Nations Headquarters.
That is not the worst of what we are suffering. Since
24 February, the occupiers have cut short the lives
of 453 children for nothing. Every day, as I enter my
office in the Ministry, I see photographs of Crimean
Tatar girls and boys whose fathers have been illegally
sentenced by the Russian occupiers in revenge for their
pro-Ukrainian stance, allegedly for being Muslim
extremists. It is my everyday personal reminder that we
must restore justice and security.
It is precisely to that end that President Volodymyr
Zelenskyy of Ukraine has initiated the peace formula.
We believe that its 10 points can restore security and
justice not only to Ukraine but to the entire world. More
than 77 years ago, the founders of this Organization
developed a document that underpins a world order
based on rules. However, we all have to work every day
to make that document operational. That is why all 10

S/PV.9241

points of the peace plan are based on the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, with one of them
specifically about its implementation.
The world needs nuclear safety. We cannot allow
countries to further resort to nuclear blackmail. That
will be possible only once Russia withdraws all its
troops from the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and
completes its demilitarization.
I am sure that no one in this Chamber can deny
the urgency of food security in guaranteeing one of the
fundamental human rights, the right to food. Even while
under unprecedented attack, we launched the “Grain
from Ukraine” initiative, which is a humanitarian effort
to protect those most in need. We invite all nations to
join efforts to contribute to restoring peace and the rule
of law by facilitating and promoting the implementation
of the peace formula plan.
The topic of this debate is the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law, but how can we talk
about the rule of law without justice? Imagine a mother
who has just lost her newborn baby, as happened in the
Zaporizhzhya region in November when Russia attacked
a maternity hospital. She obviously needs justice. She
needs answers to her questions. She needs to know that
those who are responsible for that horrific crime will be
punished. Accountability and the restoration of justice
are a key point of our peace formula. The only way to
achieve that goal is to hold Russia accountable for its
war crimes, just as the Nazi leadership was.
Almost 78 years ago, the United States, the United
Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union signed the
London Agreement and the Charter of the International
Military Tribunal. Those documents paved the way for
the Nuremberg process. That is exactly what we should
be doing today, establishing a special tribunal for the
crime of aggression. We call on Member States to
support a specific draft resolution on the establishment
of a special international mechanism, which we are
calling a special tribunal, a draft resolution that we are
going to submit for the consideration of the General
Assembly later this year.
In conclusion, I believe that standing with Ukraine
today — and with our amazing, incredibly brave
people — is standing on the right side of the history.
It means protecting the most basic, universal things.
That is also a matter of justice and accountability, and
I believe that to be the kind of world in which most of
humankind wants to live.

23-0135029/30

S/PV.9241

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Gerwel (Poland): Poland commends Japan
for facilitating the discussion on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We also express
our appreciation to the briefers for their valuable and
thought-provoking remarks.
For the rule of law to be effective in maintaining
international peace and security, it is crucial to comply
with the old but still legally valid Latin principle of
bona fide. Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter states
that
“All Members, in order to ensure to all of them
the rights and benefits resulting from membership,
shall fulfil in good faith the obligations assumed by
them in accordance with the present Charter.”
The principle of good faith obliges States to meet
their duties under international law in a reasonable
manner that allows the purposes of those laws to
be achieved. It serves as a necessary corrective for
preventing States from abusing contractual rights.
Respecting international legal commitments in good
faith requires States to abstain from acts calculated
to frustrate the object and purpose of those specific
obligations. Invoking legal rules or terms to justify
certain conduct, without any real connection to the facts
on the ground, is therefore an obvious contravention
of good faith. That is precisely what Russia did when
initiating its aggression against Ukraine.
From a Polish perspective, the topic of today’s
debate is of particular importance. One of our
neighbours — the Russian Federation, through its
aggression against Ukraine, also our neighbour — has
been violating the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations openly, flagrantly and persistently.
Russia’s conduct is a clear example of the rule of force,
which stands in radical opposition to the rule of law,
as expressed in the letter and spirit of the Charter of

30/30

12/01/2023

the United Nations and the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States. The Russian aggression,
its scale and the means and methods used could not
be more distant from the notion of friendly relations
and cooperation. It is especially disturbing that the
atrocities are committed by a permanent member of the
Security Council, whose responsibility for maintaining
peace and security is even greater.
For the rule of law to be effective, we also need
accountability. Without accountability, human rights
will be denied, crime will flourish and impunity for
conflict-related crimes will persist, undermining
legitimacy and the prospects for peace. That is
why Poland believes that the perpetrators of all the
international crimes committed on Ukrainian territory
should be prosecuted and tried by a competent court.
That is of fundamental importance. Every day of the
conflict brings us new information about possible war
crimes committed on the territory of Ukraine. In that
regard, Poland not only supports the involvement of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
but has also launched its own criminal investigation,
and is working with its European Union partners and
the ICC Prosecutor as part of a joint investigation
team. Poland is also engaging in other efforts aimed at
ensuring accountability, including with respect to the
crime of aggression.
International peace and security depend on respect
for international law on the part of all States Members
of the United Nations. Poland, as one of the founding
members of the United Nations, is fully committed
to strengthening the rule of law and accountability in
order to improve global security.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

23-01350
