asdf

United Nations

A /66/PV.128

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-sixth session

128th plenary meeting
Thursday, 13 September 2012, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Agenda item 34 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
(a) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, confl ict
prevention and resolution
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/811)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.60)
The President: Members will recall that, under
agenda item 34, the Assembly adopted resolution
66/253 A at its 97th plenary meeting, on 16 February,
and resolution 66/253 B at its 124th plenary meeting, on
3 August. Members will also recall that the Assembly
heard an oral report by the Secretary-General, in
accordance with paragraph 12 of resolution 66/253 A,
at its 99th plenary meeting, on 2 March, and considered
the report of the Secretary-General contained in
document A/66/889 at its 126th plenary meeting, on
4 September.
One year ago, we inaugurated the sixty-sixth session
of the General Assembly. At that time, I proposed
“The role of mediation in the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means” as the theme for the session. Due to
my strong belief in that concept, I expressed my hope
that focusing on the issue would enhance debate and
deepen cooperation on that important topic, which lies
at the heart of the work of the United Nations.

(Qatar)

Today I see with great satisfaction that the past
year has been extraordinary in terms of the role of
mediation. We have hosted a number of meetings here at
the United Nations. Conferences and seminars dealing
with different aspects of that matter have also been
organized outside of New York. All those activities
culminated in the informal high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on 23 May, which was attended by
ministers and other eminent mediators, representing
different regions.
Throughout the session, from the general debate
in September up to now, our aim has been to identify
the challenges we are facing, to find out answers and
solutions and come up with some alternative tools and
mechanisms. Brilliant ideas and proposals have been
put forward by Member States and other actors on how
to render mediation more effective.
I am very pleased to see that those ideas have
already started to be developed and that concrete
deliberations and actions have taken place to
materialize the proposals. Today’s adoption of a followup draft resolution on mediation reflects the interest
of the membership to actively pursue that issue. I am
grateful to Member States for their continued interest
and support, as well as for their active engagement in
that crucial matter.
At this stage, let me express my appreciation to
Finland and Turkey for their leadership, as the two
co-chairs of the Group of Friends of Mediation, and for
their support to me on developing that theme during
my mandate.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-50777 (E)

*1250777*

A/66/PV.128

During all the meetings and other activities, we have
also seen once again the important role in mediation of
regional organizations and civil society, in addition to
that of the United Nations and Member States. Since
every situation is unique, we should benefit as much as
possible from the comparative advantages of different
actors. That requires seamless cooperation among all.
Today is a special day for mediation. First, the
Secretary-General will present his report (A/66/811)
and the Guidance for Effective Mediation. We will
then proceed to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.60, on
mediation. I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate,
on behalf of all representatives, our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his genuine leadership and
personal commitment to the concept of mediation.
I would also like to express my satisfaction with the
acknowledgement of my role as the President of the
General Assembly in his report. His consensus report
before us provides an in-depth and comprehensive
analysis. I believe that the Guidance, which he put
together after extensive consultations with all relevant
actors, will be very useful for mediators at different
levels.
I would like to share with representatives a vision
that I have always believed in. In my view, dialogue
among civilizations offers a complementary approach to
preventing and peacefully resolving conflicts. Therefore,
during the past year, I have placed a special focus on the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations. Today, it is
no secret that some disputes are either emanating from
cultural or religious differences, misperceptions and
misunderstandings, or are exacerbated due to different
methodologies and ideologies. The role of the Alliance
could be particularly crucial in such situations. I see
more room in that sphere for further elaboration.
Parallel to that, the Alliance should be strengthened so
that it can more effectively fulfil its noble mission. I
will continue building useful understanding based on
those facts until the last day of my mandate and beyond.
Some past and current crises have shown that
if mediation and other peaceful means are used in a
timely manner and at an early stage, it is cost-effective.
It leads to saving innocent lives and alleviates the
suffering of civilians, particularly women and children.
It is necessary that we learn from our experiences and
employ mediation in a more effective manner, because
it is the best way out in a crisis situation, if used as a
prevention measure.

2

On our part, at the General Assembly, we should
keep the momentum building on mediation and
continue to focus on the challenges before us. It is no
secret that during this session we exercised the concept
of mediation in particular cases, either here at the
General Assembly or through field trips. In that regard,
I am particularly pleased that the next President of the
General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
proposed “The settlement of disputes by peaceful
means” as the theme for the general debate this year.
I sincerely believe that, building on the achievements
so far within and outside the United Nations, the
energy, vision and commitment of the President-elect
will further the concept of the peaceful resolution of
conflicts for the common good of humankind and for a
more peaceful future for all.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I commend the General
Assembly for promoting mediation as a key means to
realize the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. I am pleased to present to the Assembly
my report (A/66/811) on the subject and the Guidance
for Effective Mediation.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership
and focus on this vital issue. I also thank the Group
of Friends of Mediation, co-chaired by His Excellency
Ambassador Jarmo Viinanen of Finland and His
Excellency Ertuğrul Apakan of Turkey, for their support
and leadership.
I share your vision, Sir, and have made strengthening
preventive diplomacy and mediation a priority. I wish
to see the United Nations and all our partners make
full use of the potential of mediation to prevent,
manage and resolve disputes and conflicts. We need to
have the know-how, the operational dexterity and the
partnerships to undertake mediation professionally and
effectively.
Many lives are at stake when a conflict reaches a
stage that requires the deployment of a mediation team.
The United Nations has been active in mediation efforts
in dozens of disputes and conflicts. Today, the United
Nations is supporting mediation and facilitation efforts
in all regions of the world with a broad array of local,
national and regional partners. That is a signal that more
parties are open to the promise of mediation. Yet with
growing engagement comes growing expectation. We

12-50777

A/66/PV.128

must be up to the task, and I am pleased to report that we
are making real progress. With the support of Member
States, we have worked hard to enhance our readiness
to implement and support mediation processes.
The Department of Political Affairs, which anchors
many United Nations mediation efforts, has been
strengthened. The Department’s Mediation Support
Unit has become a key provider of mediation services
within and outside the United Nations system. Standby
teams of mediation experts have been quickly deployed
to all corners of the world, from Central Africa to
Central Asia, from Europe to the Middle East and to
the Americas. We are also doing more to ensure that
United Nations envoys and special representatives have
the experience, knowledge and support necessary to
provide good offices and mediation. This is the dayto-day work of our political missions in the field. Our
country teams on the ground are also frequently called
upon to help support national efforts to peacefully
resolve tensions.
Our mediation work draws on the experience
and capacities of the entire United Nations system,
including support from the United Nations Environment
Programme for natural resources negotiations,
the expertise of UN-Women to promote women’s
participation, and the work of the United Nations
Development Programme to assist national and civil
society actors in developing their mediation capacity.
However, mediation is not the exclusive domain
of the United Nations. Member States, regional,
subregional and non-governmental organizations
are increasingly involved. This diversity of actors is
an asset. Each can contribute to the search for peace
according to its comparative advantage. In some
settings, however, the competition among different
players has hampered mediation efforts. It is our
common responsibility to work together to support
the effective use of mediation. That is why we are
increasing our engagement with regional organizations,
Member States and non-governmental organizations to
build mediation capacity, cooperation and networks at
the regional, national and local levels.
We must also continue to enhance the participation
of women in peace processes. We are now providing
gender expertise and appointing women in most United
Nations mediation teams, though there is still clearly
room for improvement. More and more of our teams
are making genuine efforts to consult with women’s

12-50777

organizations systematically throughout the mediation
process. There are a growing number of female senior
officials who undertake mediation as part of their duties
in field missions, and, as I state in my report, I remain
committed to appointing a female United Nations envoy
to lead a United Nations mediation effort.
Overall, we have improved our support for inclusive
and effective mediation processes. If we are to sustain
those efforts, mediation efforts must be adequately
resourced.
The General Assembly has also requested the
development of the United Nations Guidance for
Effective Mediation. It is annexed to the report before
the Assembly.
In developing the Guidance, we drew extensively
from our own experience as well as from the insights of
Member States and others. The result is a foundational
document for United Nations mediation efforts and for
all interested in the peaceful resolution of disputes. I
am pleased that the General Assembly is encouraging
all mediation actors to make full use of it.
On 27 September, we will hold a special high-level
launch of the Guidance. The event will feature a panel
discussion with the participation of a number of eminent
mediators. I encourage Member States’ Ministers to
attend this important event.
As I have often said, mediation can succeed only
where there is a commitment to solving a conflict
through dialogue and real leverage to back it up.
Regrettably, some of the tragedies before us make clear
once again the terrible price that is paid for the absence
of international unity or a lack of political will from the
parties.
While not all conflicts may be amenable to
mediation, we must remain engaged and constantly
look for opportunities for dialogue. Our commitment
to resolve disputes and conflicts peacefully is a central
tenet of the Charter of the United Nations, and mediation
is a key tool.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey
to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.60.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I have the honour to introduce
the draft resolution entitled “Strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution” (A/66/L.60), on

3

A/66/PV.128

behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation, chaired by
the representatives of Finland and Turkey. Over a year
ago, we adopted by consensus its first United Nations
resolution on mediation (resolution 65/283).
The draft resolution before the Assembly is a followup to that landmark resolution. The aim of the draft is
to acknowledge the advances that have been made to
further consolidate the role and use of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflict prevention
and resolution, including through the use of the United
Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation.
In line with the efforts under way to revitalize the
General Assembly, the draft resolution does not repeat
major sections of the previous resolution. Rather, it
emphasizes the advances that have been made, but at
the same time reminds us that further work is necessary.
There are three central elements in the draft: first,
taking note of the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of resolution 65/283, including the
United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation asked
for in the same resolution; secondly, promoting the use
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflict prevention and resolution through a call
on the various actors involved in mediation, as well as
through the use of the Guidance; and thirdly — last
but not least — the biennialization of the handling of
the sub-item on the agenda of the General Assembly
in order to make possible a substantive, in-depth
consideration of the issue.
We are delighted to bring this consensual draft
resolution before the General Assembly at this session.
As you, Mr. President, have had mediation as one of
your priorities, we would like to take this opportunity
to thank you for your valuable efforts and engagement
in connection with this issue. We wish also to thank His
Excellency the Secretary-General and the Secretariat
for their useful work. We also thank all Member States
for their constructive and active participation in the
negotiations that led to this draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
co-chaired by the representatives of Finland and Turkey.
The Group currently consists of 32 States Members of
the United Nations and several regional organizations
and other international organizations.

4

As highlighted in the introduction of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/66/811), “Strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution”, the General Assembly,
at its sixty-fifth session, took the landmark step of
adopting by consensus its first resolution on mediation
(resolution 65/283). The aim of the resolution was to
consolidate the normative bases, reinforce support
to mediation activities and enhance Member States’
engagement in mediation efforts. In resolution 65/283,
the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit
a report on the progress made on its implementation
to the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session. The Group
of Friends of Mediation warmly thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report, including its annex on United
Nations guidance for effective mediation.
We find the Secretary-General’s report to be
comprehensive and useful. We appreciate the report’s
detailed account of the implementation of resolution
65/283. The implementation is well under way, and
we believe that mediation has gained more political
attention. Further strengthening the United Nations
mediation capacity and enhancing the mediation efforts
of the United Nations is our common goal.
This is of the utmost importance today, especially
when we take into account that, after nearly two
decades of decline, the number of conflicts is on the
rise again, as noted in the report. Proper resourcing of
United Nations mediation efforts is also vital in order
to solve these new low-intensity conflicts and older
ones. As the Secretary-General’s report points out,
resources for the majority of United Nations mediation
activities and good offices work come from voluntary
contributions. We call on Member States to continue to
provide voluntary contributions to these activities. We
also welcome the efforts of the Department of Political
Affairs to further broaden its donor base. Given that
mediation is a core activity of the United Nations,
providing predictable and stable financing needs to be
discussed further in the near future.
The Group of Friends of Mediation notes with
satisfaction the positive achievements in the field of
partnerships and coordination. Enhanced partnerships
and better coordination remain key objectives for our
future work. Regional and subregional organizations
are important players and partners, and provide
valuable contributions to mediation. Mediation often
means teamwork. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment to strengthening the collaboration of the

12-50777

A/66/PV.128

United Nations with all relevant actors working on
mediation issues. We appreciate the holistic approach
to mediation, which acknowledges the different
actors involved in mediation. Promoting contacts and
links between mediation communities and networks
is essential in order to improve coordination and
cooperation and to address the challenges of the diverse
and crowded field of mediation.
The Group of Friends of Mediation highly
appreciates the Secretary-General’s efforts to increase
women’s involvement in all stages and levels of peace
processes, in line with Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). We endorse the four targets set for the United
Nations. Progress has been made, but a great deal
remains to be done. We encourage efforts to enhance
the participation of women in peace processes.
Annexed to the report is a milestone document
that deserves much attention, “Guidance for Effective
Mediation” (A/66/811, annex I). As the Assembly will
recall, resolution 65/283 also requested the SecretaryGeneral, in consultation with Member States and other
relevant actors, to develop guidance for more effective
mediation, taking into account, inter alia, the lessons
learned from past and ongoing mediation processes.
The Group of Friends of Mediation welcomes the
publication of the Guidance with appreciation. We value
the efforts of the Secretariat to produce the Guidance
through a comprehensive, inclusive and transparent
consultation process. We value the opportunities given
to Member States, regional organizations and civil
society to provide input to the Guidance.
Due to the diversity and complexity of conflicts
requiring mediation, there is no one-size-fits-all
formula to successful mediation. However, there are
certain guiding principles that are common in mediation
processes. In this context, the Group of Friends of
Mediation appreciates the fact that the Guidance
discusses the main issues that every mediator and his
or her team should take into consideration. We find
that the Guidance is a practical reference document for
mediators and those involved in mediation processes.
The Guidance highlights that achieving peace is
a series of complex challenges. One of the challenges
is the multiplicity of actors involved in mediation
processes. As a result, a successful outcome often
requires combined efforts. A multi-stakeholder effort
can work only if the actors involved work together, with
coherence of purpose and some level of coordination.
During the past years, there have been many initiatives
12-50777

to improve cooperation and coordination in mediationrelated issues, such as the Group of Friends of Mediation.
Yet, once again, much more work needs to be done.
The Group of Friends of Mediation is glad to
note that the Guidance underlines the importance of
inclusiveness, including the participation of women
in mediation processes, and of the gender dimension
throughout the Guidance. The United Nations plays
a central role in standard-setting on the participation
of women in peace processes and in best practices in
ensuring that the gender perspective is present in all
phases of mediation. The Group of Friends of Mediation
would like to call on all Member States, regional
and subregional organizations and civil society to
disseminate and use, as widely as possible, the United
Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation in mediation
processes around the world.
The Secretary-General, together with the Group
of Friends of Mediation, will launch the United
Nations Guidance for effective mediation on Thursday,
27 September. A high-level panel will discuss the
Guidance and mediation-related issues in an interactive
manner. All Member States and observers, as well
as accredited representatives of civil society and the
media, are invited to participate, and we will provide
further details in the future.
The Group of Friends of Mediation would like
to encourage all parties to make better use of the
means for the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution, including mediation. The
United Nations, having more experience, expertise and
resources than any other organization in mediation and
the implementation of peace agreements, has a central
role to play. In this context, we view the SecretaryGeneral’s report and the Guidance for effective
mediation as a key document that reflects and aims to
improve this role.
I want to conclude by thanking you personally, Sir,
for your leadership during this session of the General
Assembly in the field of mediation. Your work is highly
appreciated.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization
5

A/66/PV.128

and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European
Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.
The European Union appreciates the strong
emphasis given to the topic of mediation during the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, under your
leadership, Mr. President. We are also grateful for the
work of the Group of Friends of Mediation under the
leadership of its two co-chairs.
Let me thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation of his report and the Guidance for Effective
Mediation (A/66/811 and annex I). We commend the
way the report addresses various aspects of mediation
activities and value the Secretary-General’s efforts
to promote the use of mediation. Based on last year’s
resolution 65/283, the European Union considers the
report and the Guidance to be a positive development
that paves the way for further progress.
The persistence of conflicts worldwide fuels
the need for strengthened mediation capacities. The
value of mediation efforts is more evident in current
circumstances. The complexity of many crisis
situations contributes to the challenge of mediation and
underlines the need for inclusive mediation processes
with skilful mediators.
The European Union appreciates the way in which
the Guidance was prepared. The inclusive process of
consultations enabled relevant actors to contribute to
that important endeavour. The outcome is a useful
tool for mediators and mediation support teams across
the world, which will benefit from its comprehensive
approach. By presenting the fundamentals of mediation,
the Guidance includes essential elements to be addressed
when setting up a mediation process, as well as during
the course of mediation efforts. We encourage the wide
dissemination of the Guidance, which can serve as a
useful reference tool. That will contribute to fulfilling
the aim of having a broad range of mediators with
the right set of skills and the knowledge of the issues
that need to be given due consideration in a mediation
process.
Naturally, it is likely that there will be different views
regarding some of the points included, as the Guidance
in itself is a toolkit, while a particular approach is
always defined case by case. Hence, the Guidance does

6

not offer cookie-cutter solutions to a crisis situation.
We welcome the importance attached to vital issues,
such as the inclusivity of mediation processes; the
coherence, coordination and complementarity of the
mediation effort; and the quality of a peace agreement.
For instance, the recommendation to have a single lead
mediator is very helpful.
Regarding international law, we stress the need for
mediators to act strictly within the established normative
framework. For example, when it comes to inclusivity,
we see that contacts between United Nations mediators
and actors who have been indicted by the International
Criminal Court are to be limited to essential contact
only — for example, to what is required in order to
save lives. When it comes to judicial processes, we
recall previous reports of the Secretary-General that
established that mediators should let justice follow its
course.
We welcome the continued strong focus on
capacity-building for national and local actors. The
report provides many positive examples of national and
local efforts, and we need to continue to build on those.
The strong emphasis given to women’s participation is
appreciated, and we encourage the further steps that the
Secretary-General intends to take in that respect and to
which he also referred in his statement today.
Regional, subregional and other international
organizations,
as
well
as
non-governmental
organizations, are increasingly involved in mediation
activities. The European Union, in its turn, attaches
great importance to mediation and continues to develop
its own mediation capacities. Considering the growing
number of actors involved in mediation, partnerships
and coordination have become essential.
Let me conclude by encouraging once more all
relevant actors to disseminate and utilize the Guidance
for Effective Mediation. We look forward to reviewing
further progress on mediation at the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela reaffirms its commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes to ensure that in no case are
international peace and security and justice endangered,
in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, we reiterate the
need for all States, large and small, regardless of the
extent of their political or military power, to refrain

12-50777

A/66/PV.128

in their international relations from threatening or
using force against the sovereignty and territorial and
political integrity of any State, in contravention of the
principles and purposes of international law, including
the Charter of the United Nations.
In accordance with those principles and purposes,
the Venezuelan Government appreciates the efforts of
the United Nations to improve its mediation capacities
for addressing crisis situations that could have negative
consequences for international peace and stability. It
is essential that conflict prevention efforts be carried
out in strict accordance with the principles of neutrality
and impartiality.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, we have
accumulated laudable experience in the use of mediation
for conflict resolution. The Rio Group made a major
contribution to ending the terrible armed conflicts in
Central America in decades past. Recently, the Union
of South American Nations has contributed to conflict
prevention and solution in some brotherly countries of
our continent.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
experienced Algerian diplomat, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, to reach a peaceful solution
to the situation in Syria. It is important to remember
that this diplomat led the Independent Panel on Safety
and Security of United Nations Personnel and Premises
Worldwide, whose 2008 report asserts that the increasing
attacks against personnel and facilities of the United
Nations are the product of the end of neutrality and
impartiality in the policies of the Organization. That
same report states that the image of the United Nations
as a humanitarian organization has been undermined
and, in its place, the image of a United Nations that
subordinates humanitarian activities to the political
and military concerns of the great Powers has emerged.
The United Nations should avoid any temptation
to promote the indiscriminate, biased and politicized
use of coercive measures, including the use of force. In
that regard, the United Nations must act neutrally and
impartially, and hence in a humanistic way, in order to
enhance its capacities as a mediator in cases voluntarily
and formally requested by parties to international
disputes.
My delegation will join the consensus in adopting
draft resolution A/66/L.60, facilitated with great
stewardship by the delegations of Turkey and Finland.

12-50777

Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, I wish to join
others in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on the very important issue of strengthening
the role of mediation. We thank the Secretary-General
for his useful report, pursuant to resolution 65/283,
and for the United Nations Guidance for Effective
Mediation (A/66/811 and annex I).
Indonesia has actively participated in both the
Group of Friends of Mediation, co-chaired by Turkey
and Finland, and in the open-ended consultations that
led to last year’s resolution 65/283 on mediation, and
draft resolution A/66/L.60 before us today, on which
we hope befitting action will be taken by all countries.
Peace through peaceful means must be approached as
the highest priority by the international community
with the greatest seriousness, resolve and support.
For its part, Indonesia is not only committed to
mediation, but also a passionate advocate of it. We
have reaped the benefits of deft, credible and sustained
mediation in resolving conflict situations within our
borders, and have made use of preventive diplomacy
and dialogue to defuse tensions and conflagrations in
our region. Indonesia appreciates that the inputs that it
has submitted to the Secretariat are reflected in annex
II of the Secretary-General’s report.
I would like to briefly touch upon the report before
us. However, before doing so, allow me say that we
highly appreciate the way in which the report was
developed, in close consultation with Member States
and other relevant stakeholders, both in the United
Nations system and outside, including regional and
subregional organizations and civil society.
The report lays down some very helpful ways
to mainstream the use of mediation globally and to
reinforce mediation capacity-building at the regional,
national and local levels, including through better
partnerships, collaboration, coordination and women’s
participation. Indonesia subscribes to a stakeholder
approach, and fully supports the building of strong
partnerships, including with regional entities. We also
emphasize the need for greater and sustained support
on enhancing mediation and peacemaking capacities
locally, nationally and regionally, in particular where
conflict occurs or is at risk of ensuing.
Indonesia commends the United Nations for
being one of the largest practitioners of mediation.
The work of the various United Nations envoys,
special representatives and political missions has, to

7

A/66/PV.128

a significant degree, been critical in helping to defuse
crises and to broker many negotiated settlements.
However, there is clearly a need for the United Nations
system to do more and for Member States and parties
to conflicts to resolutely commit to finding peace
fairly through political processes and dialogue. While
we are encouraged by and commend the increased use
of United Nations-led or -supported mediation since
2009, we reiterate that credible, properly supported and
sustained political processes with national ownership
are crucial.
Indonesia underscores the essential role of the
General Assembly in supporting mediation. In that
regard, we encourage the Assembly to strengthen its
engagement with relevant actors, particularly regional
and subregional organizations, which have local
knowledge and usually have special historical and
cultural ties with the parties in conflict, increasing
their chances of success at mediation.
With regard to the report’s annexed United Nations
Guidance for Effective Mediation, it, too, contains
many useful ideas. However, each conflict is unique,
and we note the non-binding nature of that tool. Its
use and dissemination by Member States, regional and
subregional organizations and other relevant actors
must be voluntary. In that respect, we support the
reference to that effect in the draft resolution.
We also support the reference in the draft resolution
calling for the Secretary-General to brief Member
States on his mediation activities on a regular basis.
Indeed, it is helpful for the wider States Members of the
United Nations to be consistently informed about the
good efforts on mediation by the Secretary-General.
Such briefings and cross-fertilization will leverage
peacemaking efforts, as well as the oversight role of
Member States in United Nations mediation activities.
As our final point, our experiences have taught us
a very important lesson: mediation works, but it needs
to be nurtured and given space to evolve, with the
concrete translation into reality of a sincere will by the
parties in conflict.
Mr. Kogda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. My delegation also welcomes
the presence of the Secretary-General at this meeting
and takes the opportunity to thank him for presenting
his report (A/66/811), pursuant to resolution 65/283.

8

We also appreciate his tireless efforts to strengthen the
mediation role of the United Nations.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the Ambassadors of Finland and Turkey on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation. My
delegation wishes to make some observations in its
national capacity.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the importance of mediation as a preferred way
to prevent and peacefully settle disputes, in particular
in Africa, where various kinds of crises and conflicts
seriously threaten peace and compromise development
efforts.
We welcome the report that has just been presented
to us. We believe that the Guidance for Effective
Mediation is a useful reference for all actors leading
mediation processes (see A/66/811, annex I). We also
wish to express our appreciation for the significant
views and contributions of Member States, pursuant to
paragraph 11 of resolution 65/283, in order to ensure the
success of mediation activities.
My delegation wishes to underscore the need to
continue and strengthen cooperation and partnerships
between the United Nations and subregional and
regional organizations in the area of mediation. In that
regard, we wish to pay tribute to the work undertaken
in that regard by such African regional and subregional
organizations as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community.
However, it is important to find the best possible
way to forge a strategic relationship between the United
Nations and such organizations in order to rationalize
the use of resources, utilize local capacities and ensure
the success of conflict prevention and settlement
activities. The best way to achieve that objective is
to strengthen the mediation and conflict prevention
capacities of regional organizations, pursuant to
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as to ensure specific and predictable resources for
mediation activities.
We encourage the Secretary-General to continue
support for the 10-year capacity-building programme
for the African Union and we welcome the efforts
undertaken by United Nations departments, on
behalf of the African Union, aimed in particular at
strengthening capacities in the field of mediation and
conflict resolution.
12-50777

A/66/PV.128

We are confident that the implementation of the
recommendations contained in resolution 65/283
will enable us to strengthen the role of mediation in
the prevention and settlement of disputes. For its
part, Burkina Faso reiterates its readiness to lend its
modest contribution to collective efforts to prevent and
settle disputes through its involvement in mediation
processes, in particular in Western Africa.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend the statements of
the Secretary-General and the President concerning
mediation and forgiveness. There is no doubt that the
approach of mediation, and the attendant values of
tolerance, forgiveness and reconciliation in settling
disputes and conflicts, will lead to the optimum
sustainable resolution of conflicts. It is therefore
important for the United Nations to value and uphold
the concept of tolerance and forgiveness in the context
of mediation.
In that regard, the vision of the Security Council
must be consistent with that of the General Assembly. It
is important that the Security Council avoid approaches
that run counter to those of mediation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Those two principal organs
of the United Nations must speak with one voice.
While the General Assembly upholds the approach
of mediation and resorts to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, that approach should not be contradicted by
other solutions endorsed by the Security Council that
promote the culture of war and escalate tensions in
current conflicts.
The delegation of the Sudan, while endorsing
the importance of mediation, recalls the successful
experience of the fraternal State of South Africa after
the heinous era of apartheid. It is important to build
on that experience, which relied on forgiveness and
tolerance to settle the dispute.
For a long time, my country, the Sudan, has enjoyed
success in settling tribal disputes through mediation
mechanisms, which are known as “ajaweed” and are
based on tolerance and forgiveness. They have led to
the settlement and resolution of numerous internal
conflicts. We therefore call upon the United Nations,
represented by the Secretary-General, the President
of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to
continue to uphold the approach of mediation and its
attendant forgiveness and tolerance in order to achieve
reconciliation in Darfur, instead of resorting to an unfair

12-50777

judicial regime, which is politicized in the context of
the International Criminal Court. Modern experience
has proved that the Court’s intervention complicates
conflicts and hinders the approach of mediation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
My Government, in cooperation with the
United Nations and the African Union and under
the sponsorship of fraternal Qatar, has achieved
great success in strengthening the peace process
in Darfur through negotiation and peaceful means,
as indicated in the report of the Secretary-General,
entitled “Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution” (A/66/811), which is before the Assembly
today. In that regard, I appeal to all delegations to
support those efforts and no others.
I conclude by emphasizing our support for draft
resolution A/66/L.60, entitled “Strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution”.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
In view of the desire of Members to dispose of
this item expeditiously, I should like to consult the
Assembly with a view to proceeding immediately to
consider draft resolution A/66/L.60. In this connection,
since the draft resolution has only been circulated this
morning, it would be necessary to waive the relevant
provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure which
reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees with that proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/66/L.60, entitled “Strengthening
the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of
disputes, conflict prevention and resolution”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

9

A/66/PV.128

Mr. Graisse (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/66/L.60, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Estonia, Gabon, Ghana, Hungary,
Indonesia, Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Malta, Mexico,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Paraguay, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Moldova, Samoa,
Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Uganda and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.60?
Draft resolution A/66/L.60 was adopted (resolution
66/291).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The Republic of Argentina joined the consensus on
the draft resolution entitled “Strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution”. In so doing,
Argentina reaffirms once again its commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations as well as its conviction that multilateralism
is a principle fundamental to international peace and
security.
Although all methods for the settlement of disputes
are equally valid in terms of resolving international
disputes, we wish to stress in particular our conviction
that it is only through these methods that we can ensure
that the solutions reached are just and lasting ones. That
requires the use of mediation, which, as stated in the
United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation, has
its own logic and may or may not coexist with other
methods for the peaceful settlement of disputes, such as
facilitation, good offices and efforts at dialogue.
In that context, we would underline the specific
role that the Charter entrusts to the Secretary-General
in the field of good offices and mediation.

10

Argentina stresses that the Guidance refers to the
need for the parties to consent to participating in a
specific process involving the peaceful settlement of
disputes. It is clear, however, that the higher obligation of
all Member States to settle disputes by peaceful means
can never itself be subject to the consent of the parties.
For that reason, it is not acceptable that the validity of
a mandate imposed by the international community
on the Secretary-General be made conditional on the
consent of the parties to a conflict.
In that framework, the Republic of Argentina once
again reiterates that it expects successful results from
the good offices mission entrusted to the SecretaryGeneral by the United Nations in successive resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Special Committee on
Decolonization on the question of the Malvinas Islands.
It also reiterates its expectation that the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland will honour its
commitment to the Charter and the Organization and
resume negotiations with our country with a view to
finding a peaceful solution to that dispute at the earliest
possible date.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives wishing to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
May I remind members that statements in exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Benedict (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to exercise its right of reply to
the previous statement made by the representative of
Argentina.
The United Kingdom has no doubt about its
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas. The British Government
attaches great importance to the principle of selfdetermination, as set out in Article 1, paragraph 2, of
the Charter of the United Nations and in article 1 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
That principle underlies our position on the Falkland
Islands. There can be no negotiations on the sovereignty
of the Falkland Islands unless and until such time as the
islanders themselves so wish.
The democratically elected representatives of the
Falkland Islands once again expressed their own views

12-50777

A/66/PV.128

clearly when they visited the United Nations for the 2012
session of the Special Committee on Decolonization.
They asked the Committee to recognize that they, like
any other people, were entitled to exercise the right of
self-determination. They reiterated the historical facts
that the Falkland Islands had no indigenous people and
that no civilian population had been removed prior to
their people settling on the islands over eight generations
ago. They confirmed that they are and always have been
the only people of the Falkland Islands and that they did
not wish for any change in the status of the islands.
Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Argentina, speaking in exercise
of the right of reply to the statement made by the
representative of the United Kingdom on the Malvinas
Islands, reiterates in all its terms the statement made
by the President of Argentina to the Decolonization
Committee on 14 June 2012.
The Government of Argentina recalls that the
Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands, and the surrounding maritime areas
are an integral part of the national territory of Argentina,
and that owing to their illegal occupation by the United
Kingdom, they are the object of a sovereignty dispute
between both countries that has been recognized by
various international organizations.
That illegal occupation by the United Kingdom led
the General Assembly to adopt a number of resolutions,
including resolutions 2065 (XX), 3160 (XXVIII), 31/49,
37/9, 38/12, 39/6, 40/21, 41/40, 42/19 and 43/25, all of
which acknowledge the existence of the sovereignty
dispute connected to the question of the Malvinas and
urge the Governments of Argentina and of the United
Kingdom to resume negotiations in order to find, as
soon as possible, a peaceful and lasting solution to the
dispute. Statements to that effect were made by the
Special Committee on Decolonization on 14 June 2012,
as well as by the General Assembly of the Organization
of American States, among other bodies.
Argentina deems it regrettable that the British
Government is attempting to distort historical facts with
the obvious goal of covering up the act of usurpation
committed in 1833, which, since the inception of the
British invasion, has been the object of continued,
repeated protests by Argentina. That distortion also
makes clear the obvious lack of certainty on the part of
the United Kingdom with regard to what it considers its
rights in connection with the question of the Malvinas.

12-50777

Argentina would remind the United Kingdom
of its commitment, expressed unequivocally by both
countries, to undertake efforts aimed at achieving
an amicable solution to their sovereignty dispute,
as mandated by the General Assembly. Instead of
attempting to refute accepted historical facts whose
consequences are well known, the United Kingdom
should honour that commitment and immediately
resume negotiations with our country on the sovereignty
of the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and
South Sandwich Islands, and the surrounding maritime
areas, to arrive at the just and lasting solution to the
dispute that the international community is calling for.
Argentina reiterates that the principle of the selfdetermination of peoples, which is the only element
on which the United Kingdom is attempting to base
its argument in this case and which is used exclusively
in the case of the Malvinas Islands, is clearly totally
inappropriate and not applicable to this dispute. In the
same vein, Argentina regrets that the United Kingdom
continues irresponsibly to generate expectations
among the inhabitants of the islands based on the illicit
exploitation of Argentinian natural resources, in open
violation of international law.
Argentina reaffirms its legitimate sovereignty
rights over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands
and South Sandwich Islands, and the surrounding
maritime areas, since they are an integral part of the
national territory of Argentina.
Mr. Benedict (United Kingdom): I will be brief.
The United Kingdom does not consider that a conflict
exists over the Falkland Islands, and I reiterate what I
previously stated, that we have no doubts whatsoever
about the United Kingdom’s sovereignty over those
islands.
Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I will be very brief. With regard to the statement just
made by the representative of the United Kingdom,
Argentina fully reiterates the statement made by the
President of our nation to the Special Committee on
Decolonization on 14 June, and recalls that the Malvinas
Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich
Islands, and the surrounding maritime areas are an
integral part of our national territory. Being illegally
occupied by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, they are the object of a sovereignty
dispute between both countries recognized by the
General Assembly, which has called for its resolution.

11

A/66/PV.128

In conclusion, Argentina once again reaffirms
its legitimate sovereign rights over the the Malvinas
Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich
Islands, and the surrounding maritime areas.

12

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 34 and of agenda item 34 as a whole.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

12-50777
