General Aaaembly-Twenty-tbird Session

40

2378 (XXffl). Aasistance to lran in connexion with
the earthquake of August 1968
The GeneraJ Asscmbly,
N oting with d¡ep regret the tragic consequences of
the severe earthquake in Iran, which caused the death
of some 10,000 persons and de.vastation over an area of
more than 5,000 squaré kilometres, including the complete destruction of ten towns and 170 villages,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 2034 (XX)
of 7 Decembe.r 1965,
N otinq the energetic and urgent me.asures taken by
the GoYernment of Iran to provide relief for the victims
of the earthquake and to restare normal living conditions in the devastated areas,
N oting a/so the plans prepared by the Government
of lran for the reconstruction of the. devastated areas,
Aware of the very high cost of the realization of
these plans,
F11.rthcr noting witlz appreciation the assistance _rende.red to the victims of this disaster by many nations,
the United Nations family of organizations, non-governmental organizations and individuals,
l. Expresses its deep sympathy to the people and
Government of Iran regarding this catastrophe;
2. Invites Member States and 11011-governmental organizations to consider ways and means _of rende_r\ng
whateYer further assistance they may be m a pos1tton
to offer to the Government of Iran;
3. Req11ests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the heads of the specialized agencies, the
Executive Directors of the World Food Programme and
the United Nations Children's Fund, and the Administrator of the U nited N ations Development Programme, in the light of the funds available, to bear. in
mind the needs of the Government of Iran in connex1on
with its plans for the reconstruction of the devastated
areas when deciding on the services to be provided
to Member States.
1705th plenary 111eeti11_r¡.
23 October 1968.

2391 (XXIII). Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to W ar
Crimes and Crimes against Humanity
The General Assembly,
Having considereJ the draft Convention on the NonApplicability of Statutory Limitations to W ar Crimes
and Crimes against Humanity,
Adopts and opens for signature, ratification and
accession the Convention on the Non-Applicability of
Statutorv Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes
against Humanity, the text of which is annexed to
the present resolution.
1727th plenary meeting.
26 No·vcmbrr 1968.
ANNEX
Conventlon on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes againsl Humanity
PREAMBLE

The Sta/es Parties fo the prescnt Conrention,
Rccal/ing resolutions of the General Assembly of the United
Nations 3 (1) of 13 Febrnary 1946 and 170 (II) of 31 October

1947 on the extradition and punishment of war criminals,
resolution 95 (I) of 11 December 1946 affirming the principies
of international law recognized by the Charter of the International Military Tribunal, Nürnberg, and the judgement of
the Tribunal, and resolutions 2184 (XXI) of 12 December
1966 and 2202 (XXI) of 16 December 1966 which expressly
condemned as crimes against humanity the violation of the
economic and political rights of the indigenous population on
the one hand and the policies of apartheid on the other,
Rccalling resolutions of the Economic and Social Council of
the United Nations 1074 D (XXXIX) of 28 July 1965 and
1158 ( XLI) of 5 August 1966 on thc punishment of war
criminals and of persons who have committed crimes against
humanity,
N oting that none oí the solemn declarations, inslruments or
conventions relating to the prosecution and punishment of war
crimes and crimes against humanity made provision for a
period of limitation,
Considcring that war crimes and crimes against humanity
are among the gravest crimes in international law,
Com•i11ced that the effective punishment of war crimes and
crimes against humanity is an importan! element in the prevention of such crimes, the protection of hurnan rights and fundamental frcedoms, the encouragement of confidence, Ú,c
furtherance oí co-operation among peoples and the promotion
of international peace and security,
N oting that the application to war crimes and crimes against
humanity of the rules of municipal law relating to the period
of limitation for ordinary crimes is a matter of serious concern
to world public opinion, since it prevents the prosecution and
punishment of persons responsible for those crimes,
Recogni:;ing that it is necessary and timely to affirm in international law, through this Convention, the principie that there
is no period of limitation for war crimes and crimes against
humanity, and to secure its universal application,
H a1•c agrccd as follows :
ARTICLE

I

No statutory limitation shall apply to the following crimes,
irrespcctive oí the date of their commission:
(a) War crimes as they are defined in the Charter of tite
International Military Tribunal, Nürnberg, of 8 August 1945
and confirmed by resolutions 3 (I) of 13 February 1946 and
95 (I) of 11 December 1946 of the General Assembly of the
United Nations, particularly the "grave breaches" enumerated in
the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 for the protection
of war victims ;
( b) Crimes against humanity whether committed in time
of war or in ti me of pea ce as they are defined in the Charter of
the International Military Tribunal, Nürnberg, of 8 August
1945 and confirmed by resolutions 3 (I) of 13 February 1946
and 95 (I) of 11 Dccember 1946 of the General Assembly of
the United Nations, eviction by armed attack or occupation
and inhuman acts resulting from the policy of apartheid, and
the crime of genocide as defined in the 1948 Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, even
if such acts do not constitute a violation of the domestic law
of the country in which they were committed.
ARTICLE

II

If any of the crimes mcntioned in article I is committed, the
provisions of this Convention shall apply to representatives of
the State authority and prívate individuals who, as principals
or accomplices, participate in or who directly incite others to
the commission of any of those crimes, or who conspire to commit them, irrespective of the degree of completion, and to
representatives of the State authority who tolerate their commission.
ARTICLE

III

The States Parties to thc present Convention undertake to
adopt ali necessary domestic measures, !egislative or otherwisc,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

with a view to making possible the extradition, in accorda11ce with international law, of thc persons referred to in
article II of this Convention.
IV

ARTICI.E

Thc States Parties to the present Convention undertake to
adopt, in accordance with their respective constitutional processes, any legislative or other measures necessary to ensure
that statutory or other limitations shall not apply to the prosecution ami punishm~nt of the crimes referred to in articles I
and II of this Co11vention and that, where they exist, such
limitatio11s shall be abolished.
ARTICLE

V

This Convcntion shall, until 31 December 1969, be open for
signature by any State Member of the United Nations or
member of any of its specialized agencies ar of thc International Atomic Energy Agency, by any Statc Party to the
Statute of the International Court of J ustice, ami by any other
State which has been invited by the General Assembly of the
United N ations to become a Party to this Convention.
VI

ARTICLE

This Convention is subject to ratification. Instruments of
ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
A,mcLE VII

This Co11ventio11 shall be open to accession by any State
referred to in article V. Instruments of accession shall be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the Unitecl N ations.
ARTIL"LE

VIII

l. This Convention shall enter into force 011 the ninetieth
day after the date of the dcposit with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations of the tenth instrument of ratification
or accession.
2. For each State ratifying this Convention or accecling to
it after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification or
accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth
day after the date of ~he deposit oí its own instrument of
ratificatio11 or accession.
ARTICLE

IX

l. After the expiry of a period of ten years from tbe date
011 which this Convention enters into force, a request for the
revision of the Convention may be made at any time by any
Contracting Party by means of a notification in writing addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. The General Assemhly of the United Nations shall decide
upon the steps, if any, to be taken in respect of such a request.
ARTICLE

X

l. This Convention shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of this Convention to all States referred
to in article V.
3. The Secretary-Gencral of the United Nations shall inform
ali States referred to in article V of the following particulars:
(a) Signatures of this Convention, and instruments of ratification and accession deposited under articles V, VI and VII ;
( b) The date of entry into force of this Convention in
accordance with article VIII ;
(e) Communications received under article IX.
ARTICLE

XI

This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall bear
the date of 26 November 1968.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized
for that purpose, have signed this Convention.

41

2392 (XXIII). Question of the puniahment of
war criminals and of persone who have
committed crimes against humanity
Thc General Assembly,
Considering the fact that a draft optional protocol1
to the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory
Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity2 has bee.n submitted,
N oting that the Convention on the N on-Applicability
of Statutory Limitations to W ar Crimes and Crimes
against Humanity does not preclude the study of principies that may be affirmed in the future in determining
the nature of tribunals constituted for the tria! of
persons accused of having committed war crimes and
crimes against humanity,
Believing that this draft optional protocol raises issues
that are close.ly related to the general question of international criminal jurisdiction,
Recalling its previous consideration of the question of
international criminal jurisdiction,
Recailing further its decision at the 1676th plenary
meeting not to include the item entitled "International
criminal jurisdiction" in the agenda of its twenty-third
session but to defer the item to a later session,
Decides to take up this draft optional protocol at
such time as it resumes consideration of the question
of international criminal jurisdiction, or at such other
time as it deems appropriate.
1727th plenar31 meeting,
26 November 1968.

2393 (XXIII). Capital punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling that article 3 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights provides that everyone has the right
to life, Jiberty and security of person,
Recalling further that article 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights provides that no one
shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Having considered the report entitled Capital Punishment3 in the light of the comments• thereon of the
Ad Hoc Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,5 and
the report entitled Capital Punishment-Developmcnts
1961 to 1965, 6
Taking note of the conclusion drawn by the Advisory
Committee from the report entitled Capital Punishment
that, if one looked at the whole problem of capital
punishment in a historical perspective, it became clear
that there was a world-wide tendency towards a considerable reduction in the number and categories of
offences for which capital punishment might be imposed,
1 A/C.3/L.1570/Rev.2.

~ General

Assembly resolution 2391 (XXIII), annex.
Nations publication, Sales No.: E.67.IV.15, part I.
4 O /ficial Records of the Economic and S acial C 011ncil,
Thi,·ty-fifth Scssion, Anne.rcs, agenda item 11, document
E/J724, sectio11 III.
5 In accorda11ce with Economic and Social Council resolution 1086 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, the Ad Hoc Committee
was established 011 a permanent basis as the Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders.
0 United Nations publication, Sales No.: F.67.IV.15, part II.
~ Unitecl
