170
- - - - - - -------- ·----

General Assembly - Thirty-ninth Session

bodies and organizations, in particular the World Health
Organization;
4. Notes with satisfaction the important efforts made
by the Executive Director of the Fund to respond to the
present critical emergency situation of children and
mothers in Africa and urges him to continue his efforts in
this respect, as well as to continue to implement child survival and child development activities generally in Africa
in accordance with the decisions of the Executive Board of
the Fund;
5. Reaffirms the goals of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade with reference to children, in particular the goals
of ensuring children's immunization against major diseases by 1990 and of reducing the infant mortality rate to less
than SO per 1,000 live births in all countries by the year
2000, 185 and notes the crucial role of the child survival and
child development revolution in meeting those goals;
6. Reaffirms the role of the Fund as the lead agency in
the United Nations system responsible for co-ordinating
the follow-up activities of the International Year of the
Child related to the goals and objectives concerning children set forth in the International Development Strategy; 186
7. Commends the Executive Director of the Fund for
his continuing efforts to enlarge the resources of the Fund
so that it can respond effectively to the needs of the developing countries, in continued pursuance of its mandate:
8. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that
have responded to the needs of the Fund and expresses the
hope that more States will come forward with positive
responses;
9. Appeals to all Governments to increase their contributions so that, in the light of the current economic situation, the Fund may be able to strengthen its co-operation
with developing countries and respond to the urgent needs
of children in those countries.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/223.

Economic development projects in the occupied Palestinian territories

The General Assembly,
Aware of the Israeli restrictions imposed on the foreign
trade of the occupied Palestinian territories,
Aware also of the imposed domination of the Palestinian
market by Israel,
Taking into account the need to give Palestinian firms
and products direct access to external markets without
Israeli interference,
I. Calls for the urgent lifting of the Israeli restrictions
imposed on the economy of the occupied Palestinian territories;
2. Recognizes the Palestinian interest in establishing a
seaport in the occupied Gaza Strip to give Palestinian
firms and products direct access to external markets;
3. Calls upon all concerned to facilitate the establishment of a seaport in the occupied Gaza Strip;
4. Also calls upon all concerned to facilitate the establishment ofa cement plant in the occupied West Bank and
a citrus plant in the occupied Gaza Strip;
I 85 Resolution 35/56. annex. para. 48.
186 Ibid., para. 50.
l8 7 Report of the International Conjerence on the (}uestwn or Palemne.
Geneva, 29 August-7 September 1981 (United Nations publication. Sales No
E.83.1.21 ), chap I. sect B

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assemby at its fortieth session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/224.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/145 of 19 December 1983,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/56 of 25 July 1984,
Recalling further the Programme of Action for the
Achievement of Palestinian Rights, adopted by the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, 187
Noting the need to provide economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the Palestinian people; 188
2. Takes note also of the report of the Secretary-General 189 concerning the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian people which was held at Geneva on S and 6 July 1984
in response to General Assembly resolution 381145;
3. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
convening the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people;
4. Regards such a meeting as a valuable opportunity to
assess progress in economic and social assistance to the
Palestinian people and to explore ways and means of
enhancing such assistance;
5. Draws the attention of the international community,
the United Nations system and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to the need to disburse
their aid to the occupied Palestinian territories only for the
benefit of the Palestinian people and to ensure that it is not
used in any manner to serve the interests of the Israeli
occupation authorities;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To expedite the finalizing, through existing interagency mechanisms, of the co-ordinated programme of
economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people
requested in General Assembly resolution 38/145;
(b) To convene in 1985 a meeting of the relevant programmes, organizations, agencies, funds and organs of the
United Nations system to consider the co-ordinated programme of economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people;
(c) To provide for the participation in the meeting of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Arab host
countries and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
7. Requests the relevant programmes, organizations,
agencies, funds and organs of the United Nations system
to intensify their- efforts, in co-operation with the Palestine
Liberation Organization, to provide economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people;
8. Also .requests that United Nations assistance to the
Palestinians in the Arab host countries should be rendered
in co-operation with the Palestine Liberation Organization
and with the consent of the Arab host Government concerned;
188 N39/265-E/ 1984 77 and Add'. I
189 A/39/474 and Corr. I

\.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committe,· _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
17_1

9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
!(J4th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/225.

World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the recent developments in the law of
the sea have created new opportunities and responsibilities
for States and that national and international objectives
and policies for fisheries management and development
are being re-examined and adjusted,
Recognizing also the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 190
Bearing in mind the importance of the need to promote
improvements in the production and distribution of all
food and agricultural products, including those from fisheries, and to raise levels of nutrition and standards of livmg,
Noting with appreciation the convening of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations World
Conference on Fisheries Management and Development at
Rome from 27 June to 6 July 1984, with a view to promoting the optimum utilization of world fishery resources
from the economic, social and nutritional points of view,
increasing the contribution of fisheries to national self-reliance in food production and towards food security,
enhancing the capacity of developing countries in the management and development of fisheries and fostering international co-operation in fisheries between developed and
developing countries and among developing countries
themselves,

I. Endorses the Strategy for Fisheries Management
and Development and the associated programmes of
action adopted by the World Conference on Fisheries
Management and Development 191
2. Invites States and international organizations concerned to take into account the principles and guidelines
contained in the Strategy when planning the management
and development of fisheries;
3. Urges all bilateral and multilateral donor agencies
and financing institutions to provide the support required
for the effective implementation of the programmes of
action;
4. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, in collaboration with the organs, organizations and bodies concerned within the United Nations
system, to continue to play its important role in assisting
States in their efforts towards the improved management
and development of fishery resources.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
190 See Official Records of the Third United lVauons Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84 V.3). document A/CONF.62/122.
l9l See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report
of the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development,
Rome, 27 June- 6 July 1984 (Rome. 1984), pp. 12-30 and 36-52; transmitted
to the members of the General Assembly hv a note bv the Secretariat (A/C2
39/6)

39/226.

Confidence-building in international economic relations

The (ieneral Assembly,
raking note of the report of the Secrekiry-General 19 '
prepared in response to its resolution 38/ l 96 of 20
December 1983 on confidence-building in international
economic relations.
Recalling that the spirit of mutual confidence made possible the founding of the United Nations nearly forty years
ago,
Connnced that the state of, and trends prevailing in, the
world economy, as well as the deteriorating international
climate, call for new efforts aimed at enhancing confidence
in international economic relations,
Convinced also that there can be no sustained global
development unless there is an improvement in the economic situation of the developing countries, which depends,
inter alia, on structural adjustments in the international
fmancial and trading system and on the reinforcement of
confidence among all States in their economic relations,
Reiterating its concern over the impact of political tensions on international economic co-operation and over the
increasing departure from the multilateral platform of economic exchanges and negotiations on key development
issues,
I. ln\'lles all States and the United Nations bodies and
organizations concerned to continue the exchange of views
on confidence-building in international economic relations
and on ways and means of enhancing such confidence;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his consultations with Governments and the United Nations
bodies and organizations concerned on the scope of possible confidence-building measures in international economic relations and on the role of the United Nations in that
endeavour, and to present his analysis and conclusions
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session,
through the Economic and Social Council.
104th plenary meeting
/8 December 1984

39/227.

Transport and Communications Decade for
Asia and the Pacific

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant paragraphs of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, annexed to General Assembly resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1983/69 of 29 July 1983 and 1984/78 of 27 July 1984,
Taking note of resolution 236 (XL) of 27 April 1984 of
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific, 191 concerning a transport and communications
decade for Asia and the Pacific during the period I 9851994.
Recalling the section of the Substantial New Programme
of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries
relevant to the improvement of transport and communications infrastructure, 194
192 A 39 312-E/1984/106 and Corr. I and Add. I and 2.
19 -1 See Official Records o(the F-.'conomic and Social Council, 1984. Supplement No. 14 (E/1984/24). chap IV.
194 See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Devl'ioped
Countnc.1, Paris. 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82 1.8), part one, sect. A.
