General Auembl7 - Ninth Seaaion

12

838 (IX). Draft International Cotle of Ethics for
the me of information personnel
The Genet'al Assembly,
Recalli1,1g its previous decisions, in its resolutions

635 (Vil) of 16 December 1952 and 736 B (VIII) of
28 November 1953, concerning the draft International
Code 8 of Ethics for the use of information personnel,
Noting the Secretary-General's report' on the question of organizing an international professional conference to prepare the final text Qf such a Code,
Noting furthe,- that the information enterprises and
national and international associations which favour the
organization of a conference do not appear to constitute
a sufficiently representative group,
Reaffit'ming its interest in the improvement of standards of conduct and performance for information personnel, through measures ·adopted by professional
action,
Decides:
(a) To take no further action at the present time
in regard to the organization of such a conference ;
(b) To request the Secretary-General to transmit
the text of the draft International Code of Ethics for
the use of information personnel, together with his
report1° to the enterprises and associations with which
he has been in communication regarding this matter,
for their information and for such action as they may
deem proper.
514th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.

839 (IX). T~hnical assistance in freedom of
information
The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 522 J
(XVII) of 29 April 1954 concerning technical assistance in freedom of information,
Autho,-izes the Secretary-General to render, at the
request of Member States, services which do not fall
within the scope and objectives of existing technical
assistance programmes, in order to assist these States
in promoting freedom of information.
514th pleoory meeting,
17 December 1954.

840 (IX). Draft Convention on Freedom of Information
The General Assembly,
Considering that it has not studied the draft Convention11 on Freedom of Information during its sixth,
seventh, eighth and ninth sessions,
Recalling its decision, in resolution 631 (VII) of 16
December 1952, that it would consider, inter alia, the
draft Convention on Freedom of Information in the
8
Ibid., Fourtunth SesS1°on, Supplement No. 4 A.
• Sec Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, documents A/2691 and Add. 1
and 2.
10 Ibid.
11 /bid., Seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, document A/AC.42/7 and Corr.1, annex.

light of the report 11 of the Rapporteur on Freedom of
Information to the Economic and Social Council and
after the Council had had an opportunity to examine
that report,
Noting that the Rapporteur on Freedom of Information has made recommendations for further consideration of the draft Convention,
Conside,-ing the reasons why the Convention has been
delayed, as pointed out by the Rapporteur,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council has
not made any recommendations for further action on
the draft Convention,
Considering the importance of freedom of information as a fundamental human right and the necessity
for giving the conclusion of a convention on this right
high priority in the work of the United Nations,
Noting that the draft International Covenants on
Human :Rights are to be discussed during the tenth
session of the General Assembly,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue its efforts on the technical level to promote
freedom of information ;
2. Further t'equests the Economic and Social Council
to discuss, at its nineteenth session, the draft Convention on Freedom of Information and to formulate
recommendations for the consideration of the General
Assembly, taking into account the views expressed and
the proposals made on this subject at the ninth and
previous sessions of the General Assembly;
3. Decides to discuss the draft Convention on Freedom of Information not later than at its eleventh
session, including such recommendations as the Economic and Social Council may make.
514th plenary meeting,
17 Decembet' 1954.

841 (IX). International Convention concerning
the Use of Broadcasting in the Cause of
Peace ( Geneva, 1936)
The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Convention concerning the Use of Broadcasting in the Cause of Peace
( Geneva, 1936) 13 constitutes an important element in
the field of freedom of information,
Considering that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 24 (I) of 12 February 1946, the
custodial functions mentioned in the Convention have
already been assumed by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and that the Convention is still in
force,
Considering furthe,- that by taking over, by agreement between the Parties to the Convention, the powers
and functions established by certain provisions of the
Convention, the United Nations can give full effect to
all the provisions of the Convention in question,
Decides:
1. To request States which are Parties to the International Convention concerning the Use of Broadcasting in the Cause of Peace (Geneva, 1936) to state
whether they wish to transfer to the United Nations
12 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 12.
13 See League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. CLXXXVI,
1938, p. 301.
