UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/35
19 July 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3406th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 July 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Mozambique", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council notes with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General of 7 July 1994 (S/1994/803) on the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ). It commends the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the personnel of ONUMOZ for their efforts in
support of the implementation of the general peace agreement for
Mozambique. They continue to have the full backing of the Council.
"The Security Council welcomes the significant progress made in the
implementation of the general peace agreement, in particular in the
electoral sphere, but remains concerned at continuing delays in the
implementation of some major aspects of the agreement. The Council is
especially concerned at the delays which continue to occur in the
demobilization of forces and in the formation of the new Mozambican Defence
Force (FADM). In this context, the Council reiterates its call in
resolution 916 (1994) of 5 May 1994 to the parties to comply fully with all
the provisions of the agreement.
"It is essential that the demobilization of all forces is completed by
15 August 1994, as agreed by the parties, and that the difficulties of
forming, before the elections, FADM at the strength agreed in the general
peace agreement are addressed quickly and with flexibility.
"The Council is encouraged by the recent announcement of the
Mozambican Government’s decision to turn over the assets, including
equipment and facilities, of the Mozambique Armed Forces (FAM) to FADM by
15 August 1994 and reiterates the importance of the Government providing
all necessary support to the establishment of FADM.
"The Council underlines the importance to the peace process of the
rehabilitation of areas with a large returning population, including
through an effective mine-clearance programme. In this regard, it urges

94-29400 (E)

190794

/...

S/PRST/1994/35
English
Page 2

that high priority be given to mine-clearance activities and related
training.
"The Council, in its resolution 916 (1994), decided to renew the
mandate of ONUMOZ for a final period until 15 November 1994 and welcomed
the announcement by the President of the Republic of Mozambique that
elections would take place on 27 and 28 October 1994. It reaffirms the
importance it attaches to the elections taking place on these dates and
stresses the need for additional decisive steps to that end. In this
context, the Council stresses that there is no margin for further delay in
demobilization and in the formation of FADM. The Council expects the
parties to continue to cooperate with ONUMOZ and with each other to ensure
full and timely implementation of the agreement.
"The Council reiterates the importance of the extension of civil
administration throughout Mozambique, which is essential for the holding of
free and fair elections. In this context, it reaffirms its call to all
parties, especially the Resistência Nacional Moçambicana (RENAMO), to allow
unimpeded access to the areas under their control to all political forces
in the country, in order to ensure free political activity throughout
Mozambique.
"The Council expresses its intention to endorse the results of the
elections provided the United Nations reports them as free and fair and
reminds all the Mozambican parties of their obligation under the general
peace agreement fully to respect the results.
"The Council will consider sending a mission, at an appropriate time,
to Mozambique to discuss with the parties how best to ensure full and
timely implementation of the general peace agreement and that the elections
take place on the dates agreed and under the conditions set out in the
agreement.
"The Council will continue to monitor developments in Mozambique
closely and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that it is kept
informed on a regular basis."

-----
