TlllRTY-SEC

OND

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

24 NOVEMBER

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
. , , , . . , . , . . . . . . . . .~. . . . , . . . , . .

Puge
1

. , . .. , ,. ., .,. .. . .,.. . .,., .. . . . ., . . , . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2049)

Adoption

of the agenda

Complaint by Benin:
Lcttcr dated 4 November 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Benin to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12437)

1

.,..,....,..,...,......,..,...............,..

SIPV.2049

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions rind Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that date.

2049~~I

MEETING

eld in New York on Thursday,
f’rcsidcrlt: Mr. Mnnsur R. KIKI-IIA
( L.ibyan Arab Jarnahiriya).
f’~~~.~c/lf: The rcprcsentatives of the following States:
~‘~Ill~tLh.
China, I:rancc, C;onnany,
Federal
Republic
of, India. Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
I’arlama, l~omania, IJnion of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Unitd
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
[United States of America and Venezuela,

24 November

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

those States to participate in the discussion,without the
right to vote, in conformity with the relevantprovisionsof
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

kllin,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2049)

4. In view of the limited numberof placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite the representativesof Angola,
Equatorial Guinea and .Mozambique to take the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber,on
the usualunderstandingthat they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they wish to addressthe
Council.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Benin:
Letter dated 4 November 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Benin to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12437)
The rnccting wus culled to order at 11.20 n.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Aseco Eyang (Equatorial Guinea) and
Mr. Lobe (Mozambique)took the placesreservedj& them
ut the sideoj’thc Councilchamber.
5. The PRESIDENT: Membersof the Councilhavebefore
them the revised draft resolution, which is containedin
document S/l 2454jRev.1, sponsoredby Benin,the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriyaand Mauritius.

Adoption of the agenda
6. The first speakeris the representativeof Mozambique.I
invite him to take a placeat the Counciltable andto make
hisstatement.
Complaint by Benin:
Letter dated 4 November 1977 from the Permanent
Repre,sentativeof Benin to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12437)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings,I invite the
representativesof Algeria, the Congo, Cuba,Guinea,Madagascar,Mali and Viet Nam to take the placesreservedfor
them at the sideof the Council chamber.
At the invitatiorz of the President, Mr. Bounyad-Agha
(Algeria), Mr. Morzdj~~ (Corzgo), Mr. Alarcdrz (Cuba),
Mr. kimdti
(Giiineu), Mr. i-?abetajika (Maduguscar),
Mr. Katrtr; (Mali) IIJ~ Mr. Dinh Ba 3%’/ Vift Nnm)took the
pluce~s
rc.s~~.~vd
jbr them at the sideof the Councilchamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform the members
of the Council that letters have been received from the
representativesof Angola, Equatorial Guinea and Mozambiquein which they requestthat they shouldbe invited
to participatein the discussion.
3. In accordancewith the usual practice, 1 propose,with
the COIW.W
of the Council, to invite the representativesof

7. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique):Mr. President,my delegation
has the honour to take this opportunity to congratulate
you on the wise and efficient way in which you havebeen
conducting the debatesof the Security Council during the
presentmonth. WCare certain that underyour enlightened
guidanceand with the contribution of all the membersof
the Council this seriesof meetingswill be able to take
adequatemeasure; regardingthe barbarousarmed aggression committed at Cotonou on 16 January 1977 by
mercenariesagainstthe People’sRepublicof Benin.
8. The Government of Mozambique views with great
satisfaction the successes
being achieved by the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya in the economic developmentand social
advancementof the Libyan people. The friendly relations
of co-operation existing between our two countrieswere
further consolidatedduringthe meetingbetweenPresident
Qadhafi and PresidentMachelthat took placein Libya IaSt
May. We consider this meetingan important landmarkin
the relationsbetweenour two countries.
9. At this point, my delegationwould like to paya tribute
to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his
consistentcommitment to the principlesof the Organization. My Governmentis very grateful to him for the rightfU1

stand he has always taken in favour of justice and world
peace. 111 this particular case of the barbarous armed
aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin, the
People’s Republic of Mozambique once more pays a trihulc
to the Secretary-General for providing the Government of
Benin with all the needed assistance to determine and ~SSCSS
the damage reported in document S/l 2415.

province of Manica, using a large number of aeroplanes,
namely, Mirage bombers and helicopters.
“This attack was prepared in the last few days, during
which the enemy concentrated a large number of military
contingents along the borders of our country.
“The People’s Force for the Liberation of Mozambique
(FPLM), with the active collaboration of the people in
general, has been repelling the Rhodesian attacks, forcing
the racist forces to retreat.

10. The concern reflected in that document is not only of
the People’s Republic of Benin but also of all the peoples
and countries fighting against colonialism and imperialism
to guarantee their independence and territorial integrity.
The case of Benin is the concern of all Governments
fighting against neo-colonialism and for a meaningful
independence in the political, economic, social and cultural
domains.

“From the beginning of November this year, the rebel
r6gime of the British colony of Southern Rhodesia has
launched at least two large-scale aggressions in the
provinces of Manica and Gaza, on 3 and 13 November
respectively, and its forces were repelled by the armed
forces of the People’s Force for the Liberation of
Mozambique.

11. The treacherous and criminal aggression unleashed on
16 Jarmar] 1977 against the citizens of the capital city of
Cotonou was not an isolated act directed only against the
Benin revolution but part of an over-all phn organized by
the enemies of Africa who intend to dcstabilize the
progressive States in the continent. The events that followed it confirm that there is an imperialist strategy that
aims at promoting confusion in our continent tither by
overthrowing the progressive and revolutionary Governments or by creating pockets of tension in various regions
of Africa.

“In the second attack, the enemy lost two fighterbombers and a helicopter which were shot down by our
forces in the region of Mapai.
“However, the biggest aggression that has been known
until today took place precisely in Mapai where the town
was completely destroyed some months ago.”
16. In that context, we see sophisticated military weapons
supplied to South Africa and Rhodesia. Imperialism did not
hesitate to provide South Africa with the know-how that
will soon enable it to produce nuclear weapons to be used
against neighbouring countries. The constant aggression
against Mozambique, Zambia, Botswana and Angola show
that the imperialist forces are engaged in attempts to
overthrow the progressive Governments which are building
an economy to serve their own peoples. In that criminal
action, imperialism employs mercenaries recruited in the
big imperialist capitals, whose authorities do nothing to
prevent that operation.

12. It was within that sinister strategy that imperialism
plotted the cowardly assassination of President Marien
Ngouabi, a great African leader and a consistent fighter for
the establishment of socialism in the People’s Republic of
the Congo.
13. To pursue its objectives, imperiaiism provides some
neo-colonialist Governments with large amounts of arms
and it concentrates the bulk of those arms for aggression in
southern Africa. It was within that macabre plan that, in
May, dozens of militants of the Popular Movement for the
Liberation of Angola (MPLA) were savagely murdered. as
the despicable objective of the imperialist lackeys failed to
materialize.

17. The People’s Republic of Mozambique takes this
opportunity once again to pay a tribute to the revolutionary people and Government of Benin li)r the courage
and determination with which they annihilated the reactionary armed aggression perpetrated by mercenaries
against the Government of Benin on 16 January 1977.

14. Unfortunately, the system of mercenaries continues to
provide the Rhodesian rebel forces with a large number of
these so-called soldiers of fortune, encouraging Ian Smith to
continue in his murderous adventures in defiance of world
pnblic opinion and the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations. It is with the help of a force made up of
mercenaries that Smith is launching a very ferocious
aggression a~~einstmy country even now as I am addressing
the Council.

18. The spirit of calm in which the Government of Benin
unmasked the imperialist alliance that engendered the
aggression against the Beninese people further increased the
respect that the internatianal community had for that
progressive repubhc.

15. With regard to Rhodesian aggression against MOzambique, this morning I received the following communication from my country:

19. The People’s Republic of Mozambique had the privilege of being part of the commission set up by the meeting
of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at Lomt! at the beginning of this year, a few days
after the aggression, to investigate on the spot the material
damage caused by the aggressors. Until then, the Government of Benin had abstained from levelling any accusation.
At no time did it accuse the countries that were involved.
What revealed the odious plot to overthrow the revolutionary Government of President KCrbkou was the evi-

“Our country has once again been invaded in the last 24
hours by the troops of Ian Smith’s racist army, in a raid
that constitutes the biggest aggression ever perpetrated by
the racist forces against Mozambique,
“The enemy has launched a large-scale attack 20
kilometres from the town of Chimoio, capital of the
2

27. The next speakeris the representativeof
him
to take
a place
at the Counciltable
d
a statement.

invik

20.

We

SW’lIrity
by

2Jly

kilt

SW2

t]lrlt

C0LIlKi]

t]lC

~lltCll~~lm

tl)

by

requestiilg

(.kWCrmllcllt
:lttlYlCt

t]lC

this
(lf

cOuIlci]‘s

hIlit

meetiilg

Of

the

~3s

l1Ot

moved

atteIlti0Il

to

&IliIl

but by the responsibility it shoulders for the fight waged by
the oppressed pcoplc still under colonial domination.
21, Justice demands that resolution 405 ( ] 977) should be
applied in its entirety, especially as regards those peoples
whO
NC Victil?lS
Of aggressions
launched by mercenaries. It
iS ilnpOrt:lllt

that

l]lC

countries

W]IOSL’

citizens

ale

il]VO]vcd

the criminal system of mercenaries should co-operate
with the countries that have been attacked, with a view to
the elimination of this scourge
that puts at risk internatioll~l]
pCaCC
n11d scciirity.
The evaluation of material and
Ilumrrl losses alone
is not enough. It is necessary that a]]
Gnvcrnlnellts sllould endeavour to eliminate the causes. All
of us know them, thcrcfore it is up to all Governments to
in

Angola.

I

to mak*

28. Mr. DE FIGUEIKEI~O(Angola): Mr. President,on
behalfof my delegation.allow mc to expressour plcasure
and honour at your assumptionof the presidencyof the
Security Council for this month. Wealsosalutethe Libyan
Arab Jamahiriyawhich, under the dynamic guidanceof
ColonelMuantmarAl-Qadhafihascmergcdasone of the
leadersof a new, militant, progressive
Africa. Further, on
the occasionof the forthcoming first cungressof the
Popular Movement for the L,iberationof Angola, plcnse
acceptour sentimentsof revolutionarysolidarity towards
our comrudesin your country.

29. The Foreign Minister of the f+oplc’s Republic of
Angola was one of a group of African militants, which
includedreprcsentativcs
of Angola,Mozambique,the Niger,
Nigeriaand Zambia,whichvisitedCotonouon 24 February
1977, a few weeksaft.erthe infamousand barbaricact of
aggressioncommitted againsta sovereign,independent
pr~~ellt
a]] acts
that
Inny
Icud
tu subversion
altd
qggessiOI1
African State, the People’sRepublicof Benin. The facts
agtiiiist
the peoples fighting for justice, ecluality and
that emergedfrom that mission,togetherwith the resultsof
harmony between nations.
the inquiry carriedout by the SpecialMissioncomposed
of
22. In that conncxion, WC should like to pay a tribute to
yourself, Mr. President,andtherepresentatives
of India and
Panama,las well asthe evaluationreport of the GovernMr. Marcel Khcir and Mr. Aly Assem for their work in
ment of Benin /S/I2318/Add. I/, including its revised
assessing tho losses caused by the criminal aggression against
version/S/IHI5/,
togetherwith the report of the Interthe heroic pcoplc 01‘ Henin and their revolutionary Covcrntlali0~1
Commissionof Inquiry composedof Benin,
mcnt, under the leadership of l’rcsident KCrt-kou.
Guineaand Nigeria,all leadto sonteprofoundly disturbing
us,for after centuriesof
23. My delegation strongly condemnsthe Governments conchlsions.Thesedo not surprise
having been victimised by a most brutal system of
involved in the aggression0T I6 January 1977, which not
only
reI‘~rse
to co-operate with the Governmentof Benin imperialism,WCare well awareof the underlyingassumptionsof colonialventures.
but try to strangleits already weak economy,imposingon
it the I~covy burden of reconstructingwhat wasdestroyed
30. However, becauseAfrica has t’or so long borne the
during the aggressionwhile strengtheningits defensive brunt of the West’s insatiabledemand for materials,
capability.
markets,manpowerandlebe~7st~~~~1,
and havingbeenpart
and parcel of a COkJki]iSt
infrastructl!re and otu’sehes
the integral application of resolution fought one of the bloodiestand longestwarsof liberation
405 ( 1977), requesting that all Member States should in Africa, my delegationfeelswe have the right to know
about factors that influence our destiny, the right to
co-operatewith the Benhteseauthorities in divulging a]]
information about the details of the January aggression, protest when oi:r securityis threatenedand a duty to our
revolutionary martyrsand to the cominggenerationsto act
that technical assistanceshould be increasedfor the
decisivelyagainstany threat whatsoeverto our territorial
assessment
of all material and human lossesand their
integrity andsovereignstatehood.
COl1sCqLlellCes,
and
that
more
financial support shouldbe
given to onable the BenincseGovernment lo fxe the
economic and social dirficulties, as well as the security 31. When 1 say “we” I refer not only to my uWl1 country,
the f’eople’sRepublicof Angola,but to thosecountriesand
expenses
necessaryfor the missions
of inquiry.
force; in a militant Africa and Loall progressive
forcesall
over
the
world.
That
is
wily
the
aggresfion
committed
25. The peopleand (;overnment of the People’sRepublic
;gailyjt f3eninin .lanuary1977isviewedby my Government
of Mozambiquercitcrate their militant solidarity with the
Of
revolutionary people and C;overnmentof Benin and de- and people asa threat not only againstthe SoVerei@lty
Benin
but
against
the
safety
of
all
progressive
countries
and
mandthat the rerlucstsmadeby the Govcrrimentof Benin
societies.We are aware that the imperialist, colonialist
shouldbe met.
&ngcr is Ilot entirely over, Our colonjalpastis not entirely
26. TIE PI~ESIDlXr: I am gr;iiel‘ul to the represcntatiVe deadand buried.
of Mozambiquefor his kind wordsaddressed
to me ad h
my country. I should like to assurehim, on behalfof *nY 32. We are witnessingattempts at a recolonisationOf
and our largepopulationsare
people and my country, of our friendship and solidarity Africa. our naturalresources
with his people and to pay a tribute to the courageand viewedwit]1 greedyeyesby the Wentto feed its societies
determinationof the people of Mozambique,asoneof the
front.]ine countries in our fight againstthe racistr&me in
South Africa.
24. My dclcgation further calls up011LlicScctrriry Council

lo

rcc011~11c1icI

choking on over-consumption. No wonder that in the past
30 years the West has used more mineral resources than
since the first century A.D.

their national agencies is equivalent to the entire national
budget of many 01‘ the developing countries in the third
world.

33. One ol‘ the most shocking aspects of the aggression
against Benin was the use of mercenaries. The People’s
Republic of Angola is no stranger in this respect. We have
long been acquainted with the institution of mercenaries,
that despicable genre to which Shakespeare rererred as “the
dogs of war”. The blood of countless martyrs is on their
hands, as well as on the hands of the foreign Governments
that recruit mercenaries, train them, support them and
finance them. It is remarkabte that the West, which
considers itself the law-giver to the world, dots not appear
to have adequate laws to prevent thy recruitment and
enlistment of mercenaries. The various General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions that deal with the matter
directly or indirectly, such as resolutions 2465 (XXIII),
2548 (XXIV) and 239 (1967) go unheeded. In fact, by its
resolution 239 (1967), the Security Council

37. Then, surely, the sum of $28 million [ISan evaluation
of the direct and indirect losses incurred as a result of the
attack on 16 January 1977 is not too large a sum; yet it
would mean so much in terlns of assistance to Benin. The
United Nations is debating the revision of the (‘barter and
the strengthening of’ the role of the Orgalli&ion. II might
be well to start with a practical demonstration of the
United Nations fulfilling one of its OWII obligations under
the Charter.
38. We wish to deliver a warning to those imperialists who
once again cast covetous eyes at Africa and its wealth. Do
not make a mockery of oltr institutions, onr sovereignty,
the poverty into which we have bedimthrust after centuries
of imperialist rape. We are men of integrity, tiicii of’ peace.
pcoplc with a vision of the future and a memory of Lhc
past. But the dove of’ pcacc must have wings of steel ii it is
to survive. It is well known that the connexion between the
West and its colonial empires is inipcrialisn~‘s weakest link.
And it is at that point that we stand ready to defend out
freedom and LO extend full support when our comrades,
whether in Benin or elsewhere. arc threatened hy II
resurgence of imperialist colonialist desires and designs.

“Cu/zdenzr?s any Stale which persists in permitting or
tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries. and the provision of facilities t.o them, with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations”.
34. These resolutions are conveniently ignored by various
Governments, as witness the events in the recent past in
Guinea, Angola and Benin. We wonder whether eveu a
minor hint of this sort of episode would have been
tolerated against a Western country. And yet when this
heinous crime is committed against a black African nation,
the representative of a country whose citizens arc known to
have been the key mercenaries involved, declared here on
22 November that his Government had undertaken an
investigation on its OWII and the investigation had produced
notlzing.

39. The struggle coutinucs. Victory is ccrlain.
40. The PRl!SIDENT:
I thank Lhc representative ot
Angola for his kind words addressed to me and to my
country. 1 should like on this occasion tc.) express to him,
on behalf of my people, our admiration lor his country and
for the struggle of its progressive and militant revolution
against the racist rdgimc of South Africa and against
international mercenaries.
41. The next speaker is the rcprcscntativc of Equarorial
(Guinea. I invite him to take a place at the Council table :III~
Lo make his statement.

35. The entire episode could not have beon a case of
collective hallucination, a figment of mass imagination, a
myth concocted to no conceivable purpose. My delegation
finds it odd that certain countries have chosen to refute and
repudiate the findings of the various reports I have referred
to, and to question the validity of the consideration of this
issue in the Security Council. It is lamentable that the
international community has not been more vocal in its
outrage. But to expect that the victim should suffer in
silence smacks of conspiracy.

42. Mr. ASECO EYANG (I+unlorial
(Guinea) (irlrcr=
p~turior~ ji-orn S’pmish): Mr. Prcsidcnt, allow mu to .ioin
the previous speakersin congratulating you upon youl
assumptjun of the presidency of the Security Council
during the month of November. We arc convinced that,
given the strong ideals of social, economic and cultural
progressso worthily upldd and representedby Libya in
this United Nations organ. added to the vast store of
political mid diplomatic experienceof which you havegiven
ample proof, the outcome of the debatein progresswill IX
the adoption of’ just decisionsreiterating the itnpcrative
lieed to give praciical effect to the purposesand principles
enshrinedin the Charter of the United Nations. And this is
true. too. becauseyou represent a Covcrnlnent rind a
people that maintain in the African continent a policy of
participating in the efforts of all tl~ose who fight fol
frccdorn from slavery. This haswon for the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. its Government and its rcprcsentativcs. the
highestesteemof all the justice-lovingpeoplesof the world.
amongthem the Republicof EquatorialGuinea.

36. The people of Benin can never be fully compensated
for the material, physical, economic, social and political
damage it has suffered. To add insult to injury, no effort
has so far been made to mobilize resources to aid in the
recovery of the losses suffered by Benin. Although it will
not be possible to calculate the total losses incurred as a
result of the attack, this is being compounded by certain
countries which have generated a vast propaganda campaign
against Benin, damaging its commercial relations with many
of its partners by means of tactics such as the freezing of
suppliers’ credits, the insistence on cash payments and
international financial institutions waiting on the sidelines
to see how the situation evolves. Some Western countries
are fond of boasting that the budget allocated for some 01

43. Permit me also to expressthe profound gratitude of
my delegationto the membersof the C’ouncilfor allowing
4

me to Lake part in this debate on thC barbarous aggression
comntittcd against the sister Republic of Benin.

demandshave been expressedvery eloquently by most Of
the previousspeakers.

44.. Independctttly of ~rur duty to express our solidarity
with and mili tan1 support t’or the pcoplc of Benin, which
was the target of the continued diabolic;il manil’estatiotis Of
c&niaiism and imperialism, the documents before us on
Ihc subject warrant our p;irticipation in Lhis debate.
Consequently, the Republic of f;quatorial Guinea and ils
Single National Workers Party cannot but strongly condemn this cowardly act [JCrpCtratCd against the people of
Benin On Sunday, 16 January of this year, by the Fascists
and their hirelings.

49. For Ihis reason,and in the light Of the staiementswe
have hcard here, we carp arrive at the conclusion that
nobody is in favour Of XlJled
aggmsion
01’ of the systetnof
mercenaries.Therefore they should bC condemned. As
Mr. Boya of Benin saidin hisstatementof 6 April last:

45. f:or more rcasotis than one, my delegation wishes once
again to congratulate the team of expert consultants
comprised of Mr. .Aly Assctn 01’ Egypt and Mr. Marcel Kheit
of l,ek;mo~i for their excellent work : they complied
responsibly and satisfactorily with the instructions given to
them by the Security C’ouncil. Moreover, the on-the-spot
evaluations cnalrlc
IIS to
;1ppxiate
the extent of tlte
dnmagc sustained by [hat courageous people as a restill 01‘
the totally uttjustificd aggression perpetrated not only
against the Govcrritncnt but also against the Heninesc
citizensof Colonou andelsewhere,who were the victims of
that cowardly aggression
without precedent.

SD. f-icttce we sincerely believe that the people and
Government of the People’sRepublic of Benin deservethe
support and assistance
of the international community to
offset ilt part lhe d;l!Jl;t&S
alld
IOSXS
they sustaineda.S3
result of the cowardly aJ’JJled aggressionof 16 January

“These different reports confirm that those responsible
for the abominablecritnc of 16 January 1977 did not
come from Mars-they are not imaginary creatures.”
/2000th

46. I‘hc figure of‘ about !&LXmillion mentioned the day
before yesterday /Xlrl7th meeting/ by Mr. Boya, the
represcntativoof the People’sReptthlic of Benin, is far from
rcflccting the true magnitudeof the direct or indirect losses
sustainedby Benin on 16 January 1977, in termsof eithet
Iho sul’fcring resulting lioni the loss of life and bodily
irtjury caused
by that
Ircachcrcntsattack, or the sacrifices
and efforts which Bcnirt has madeand will have fit go on
making 10 sal‘eguardits indepcndcncc and territorial
integrity.
47. It hasbeenshownyet againthat the Westernpress,fat

from servingas:I mxtm of colnnluliicatioil and information
of the masses
on contemporary realities. is no more than a
tool at the serviceof nco-colonialism,intperialistn, racism
andother I’orcesof evil, inasmuchaseven at presentdoubts
arc still being bruited about as to whether the People’s
Republicof Benin wasactually the object of outsidc armed
aggression
for the purposeof hampering its revolutionary
process.
48. The cxistcnce and USCof another imperialisttool that
hasbecomefnshionahlc,namely, the merccnarics,which is
no more, no lessthan the application Of the law Of the
jungle to present-dayinternational relations, are in con.
trudiction with the Charter of the United Nations, and
specificallywith Article 2. which stales,irller elk
“All Mcmbcrs slut11refrain in their inlcrnational relations from the threat or useof force againstthe territorial
integrity or political independenceof any State, or in any
other mannor inconsistent with the purposesof the
UnitedNations.”

meeting, puru. 58.J

1977.

51. Before concluding,allow meto expressonceagainour
full support for and solidarity with the courageouspeople
of the People’sRepublic of Benin and to reiterate our
decisionto cuntinue tc?live by the revolutionary principles
we share,in the certain knowledgethat underthe guidance
of its Government the Party and the people of Benin will
safely overcomeall obstacles.
and achievethe objectivesof
its people’srevolutionary rdginie.
52. The PRESIDENT: 1 thank the representative of
Equatorial Guineafor his kind words addressedto me and
to my country. I shouldlike to assurehim of the solidarity
of our two peoples in our common struggtc against
itttperialism, aggressionand injustice in Africa and in the
world.
53. Mr. CHEN Chu (rhina) (zhlerpretutionfiorn ~hirJC?S’C).’
The Chinese delegation has listened attentively Lo the
statement made by the representativeof Benin /2047rh
meeting/, in which he gave us an account of the losses
suffered by the People’sRepublicof Benill in the incident
that took place at CTotortouon I6 January 1977 and the
result of the investigationinto the incident.
54. The Chinesedelegation once again condemnsitnperialisrnand its mercenaries
for their encroachrt~enttipOn the
independence.sovereignty and territorial integrity Of the
People’sRepublicof Benin.We supportthe just position of
the Government of Benin in condetnning the use of
tnercenariesto threatenandoverthrow sovereignStates.We
cxtcnd warm congratulations to Ihe Government and
people of Benin who, under the leadershipof President
Kt%kott, won a major victory in the struggleto crush the
invasion by mcrccnaries,and we expressprofound sympathy for the lossessuffered by the people of Benin in the
incident.
In order to carry out aggression,interference,control
and subversion against the African States, itnperialism,
particularly the super-Powers,has in recent years resorted
to all despicablemeans, including the organization of
mercenariesfor armedinvasion.With the intensification of
the contention and rivalry between the super-Powersin
55.

Hence,the membersof the Council are in the position to
declarethat the use of this satanic instrument threatens
international peace and security. The reasonsfor our
5

not have the resources to build or maintain military
capability of any significance. It is therefore regrettable
that they should be subjected to ~lJlprOvO~Cd
aggression,
which affects not only their political and social fabric but
also puts in serious jeopardy their economic future.

Africa, the organization and use of mercenaries have
assumed greater importance in their acts of aggression and
expansion, That super-Power which styles itself the “natural ally” of the African people has been carrying out these
criminal acts even more frequently and unscrupulously. Not
long ago, with the support of other African countries and
people, the Government and people of Zaire scored the
major victory of defeating the mercenary invasion engineered by this super-Power. Last July, at its fourteenth
session, held at Libreville, capital of Gabon, the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity adopted a significant resolution against
interference in the internal affairs of African States and
approved a convention on the prevention and suppression
of mercenaries submitted by the OAU Council of Ministers.
These victories and voices of justice give expression to the
unity of the numerous African countries and people against
the common enemy and their firm determination lo
combat super-l’ower hegemonism and its use of mercenaries
for aggression and expansion.

60.

My

&legatioIl

f~11ly

supp’ts

the

W~Llcsl

of

the

Government of Benin, as reflected in the dr:lft resolution
submjtted by Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
MaLlrjtjus in document s/12454/IiCv.1,
that
the interrlational community should concern itself with the question
of mercenaries to end their USC against the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence of small and
practically defenceless States. ‘The Security Council in that
regard has a special responsibility by virtue of the fact that
it is, under the Charter, entrusted with the task of acting on
cases which pertain to threats to the security and political
independence of Member States. It is therefore important
for the Council to t‘ake cognizance of the request. of Benin
to condemn the aggression of 16 January and rccommcnd
measures which would help to alleviate the sufferings of the
people of Benin resulting from it.

56. The Chinese delegation is deeply convinced that the
Government and people of Benin will further increase their
vigilance and continue to defend their national independence and state sovereignty. We are also convinced that the
numerous African countries and people will further
strengthen their unity, make concerted efforts to frustrate
the conspiratorial schemes of imperialism, colonialism and
hegemonism and win new victories in their just struggle to
consolidate and defend their state sovereignty and national
independence.

61. We sincerely jwpe that al! States Will LX>-OpClXte
with
the Government of Benin in the task of repairing the
damages suffered as a result of that aggression and ;I!SO take
measures to guard all Member States against the dangers of
such adventurist action in the future. My delegation
therefore supports the draft resolution tllat is before LIS and
feels that its adoption by the Council, though not likely to
compensate Benin fully for what it has suffcrcd, will at
least help it to overcome sonic of the difficulties and, it is
to be hoped, prevent the recurrcncc of similar incidents.

57. The Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolutioncontained in document S/12454/Rev.l sponsored
by Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius.

62. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (inteipret~ztic,,r jkm
Spanish): By way of explanation of our vote before the
vote, we would say that we cannot but categorically
repudiate the activity of mercenaries against the stability of
States, wherever it may occur, and in particular when it is
carried out against those whose fragility makes them the
best targets for such attacks, In that connexion, we wish to
express our solidarity with the cause of peoples affected by
the mercenary phenomenon and support measures designed
to combat it.

58. Mrs. HYDER (Pakistan): The Security Council, in
pursuance of the terms of resolution 405 (1977), is
considering again the question brought before it by Benin
regarding the armed aggression to which the Republic 01
Benin was subjected on 16 January 1977. It will be recalled
that when the Council first took up the complaint of Benin
in February of this year, it adopted resolution 404 (1977),
under the terms of which it was decided to send a Special
Mission composed of three members of the Council to
investigate the events and submit a report. The Special
Mission, under the able chairmanship of the representative
of Panama, prepared a very comprehensive report] on the
subject. In accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution
40.5 (1977)? the Secretary-General provided two consultants to the Government of Benin to evaluate the losses
suffered as a consequence of the aforementioned incident.
According to that evaluation, contained in the report
published in document S/12415, the loss suffered by Benin
is estimated to be around $28 million.

63. We regret that a friendly country like Benin, with
which we share in the struggle for the claims of the third
world, should now be the object of aggression and that its
sovereignty should have been attacked. For that reason, we
shall support the draft resolution contained in document
S/l 2454/Rev. 1. However, we hope that appropriate ways
and means will bc sought to examine and study this type of
aggression and that WC shall consider solutions that are in
keeping with the gravity of the problem,
64. The PRESIDENT: Before l call 011 the representative
of India, 1 should like, on the Council’s behalf, to express
to the people and Government of India our deepest
condolences over the tragic loss of several thousands of lives
as a result of the natural disaster which occurred in India
this week. I am sure that I speak on behalf of all members
of the Council in requesting the representative of India, our
colleague Ambassador Jaipal, to convey to his Government
and to his people the deepest sympathy of the members of
the Council.

59. My delegation has always maintained, as it stated
earlier /1987th meeting] when this question was being
considered, that a large number of countries in Africa, both
large and small, are engaged in the task of economic
development, relying mostly on indigenous effort and
resources, to better the lot of their people and ensure for
them a more prosperous future. These countries are
peace-loving States and have no political designs. They do
6

”
.----.

65. Mr. JAJJ’AL (India): Mr. President, may 1 express to
YOU alId, t~~r~~&h YOU, to the Council our gratitude for the
eXprCSSiOnof condolence which you have expressed
an the
occasion of certain natural disasters that have visited parts
of my country and which J shall convey to my
Government.

of aggression
and threats of aggression
by mercenaries
hired
for unlawful purposes.The international community categorically condemnsand repudiatesthose actsandthreats as
stated so eloquently today by the representativesof
Pakistan and Venezuela who honour and bring great
prestigeto the work of the Council.

66. My delegation has placed on record its views on a
man-made disaster that visited Benin in January
of this
year. Our views have been placed on record on two previous
occasions lIY87th
and 2003rd meetings]. We joill with.
others in condemningthis andother SLICII acts of aggression
by so-calledinternational mercenaries.

72. The fact that I should havehad the signalhonour of
acting asChairmanof the Security Council SpecialMission,
composedof India, Libya and Panama,which investigated
the acts of armedaggressionperpetratedagainstthe capital
of the People’s Republic of Benin by a contingent of
mercenarieson 16 January 1977, enablesme to reiterate
here today with a full knowledge of the facts that the
danger that international mercenariesrepresent for all
States and in particular for smallStates is a real, constant,
seriousand disruptive dangerfor good international relations. There is, therefore, full justification for the condemnation of the aggressionagainstBenin by the Council in
resolution 405 (1977), compliancewith whichis absolutely
necessary.By reasonof thesefacts and eventsthe Council
must use its authority to prevent the continuation of any
form of foreign interference in the internal affairs of
Member States. Similarly, seriousmeasures
must be taken
againstthe useof international mercenariesto destroy the
stability of States and to violate their territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence,or for any other unlawful
purpose. The case of Benin is an eloquent example that
shouldserveasa good platform for strong actionwhich wiI1
eliminate the scourgeof international mercenaryaction in
all latitudes but more particularly in the African continent.

67. However, it doesseemodd for the SecurityCouncil to
bc condemningacts of aggressionwilhout being able to
identify the aggressors.
Who aretheseunknownpersonsand
where are they now’? Should they not be apprehended?
And should there not be lawsunder which they could be
tried andpunishedwhereverthey might be? How can these
phantom forces operate without somekind of clandestine
assistance
from others’?

68. There is no doubt that these ghost armies pose
potential threats to many MemberStates--threatsof attack,
threats of destabilization, and sometimeseven threats of
overthrow of establishedGovernments. It makes one
wonder which Governmentsare safe from external interferenceby international mercenaries,mercenaries
who by
definition have no political coloration. Are democratic
rdgimeswhich respecthumanrightsany saferthan dictatorships’? Apparently, immunity from mercenary attack
cannot be assuredin purely political terms.
69. The United Nations 1x1s now become largely an
orgarlization of small Stales.So it is only through international co-operationthat the threat,posedby mercenaries
can
bc neutralised.To that end, there hasto be an agreed
code of conduct amongMemberStates,a codethat setsout
the areasand methodsof co-operation.

73. For this reason the delegationof Panamasupports
fully the draft resolution submittedjointly by the African
members of the Council and contained in document
S/12454/Rev.l. We believe that the measures
provided fol
in that draft resolution are appropriate, necessaryand
urgent. In particular, Panamaadvocatesthat, asis suggested
in the draft resolution, all States and competent international organizations,includingthe United Nationsand its
specialisedagencies,should provide economicassistance
to
Benin which needs such assistanceso badly, particularly
after the barbarousact of aggression
perpetratedagainstit.
That would be but an act of justice that would help
international peaceand solidarity.

70. Benin has become a symbol of the VulnerabiIity of
small States to mercenary action. Although, fortunately,
there were only sevendeathsand 51 wounded,the damage
causedby the attack has been estimatedat $28 million
which is indeeda heavy burdenfor Benin.It isindicative of
74. My delegation would not wish to conclude this
the scale of destruction that can be caused‘by such
statement without first acknowledgingthe positive efforts
mercenaryattacks. It isnecessary,therefore,for the United
made by you, Mr. President, with tact, knowledge and
Nationsto take collective stepsto deter mercenaryattacks.
understandingto maintain a conciliatory climate in the
The draft resolution before us, in our view, doesnot go far
enoughin the direction of preventive or punitive measures. debateand to achieve throughyour unremittingefforts the
adoption of a draft resolution which will, as we hope,
However, it doesheightenthe dilemmafacingthe internaexpressfully the will of the Council.
tional community without providing any satisfactory soIutions. Assistanceto Benin is, of course,essentialand we
75. The PRESIDENT: As there are no further speakersat
hope that it will be forthcoming in adequatemeasure.But
this stage,J shallnow make a statementin my Capacityas
financial assistanceis not the final answerto the hidden
representativeof the LlBYAN ARAB JAMAJ-JlRlYA.
mercenary menaceto the presentsystemof international
peaceandsecurity.
76. MY country, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,hasplaced
its views on record on previousoccasions.Wealsohad the
71. Mr. ]LLUECA (Panama) (intel’/~/‘efati(1r~./fclifl
honour to be entrusted by the Council with the task of
S~rz,zi.~/~):
The delegation or Panamahas followed very
serving on the Special Mission to Benin under the able
carefully the statementsmadeby the representativeof the
People's
Republic
of Benin, by other African delegations chairmanshipof Mr. Itlueca of Panama.Today, I shouldjust
like to complementthe statementsmadeby mY delegation
and bY membersor the Council in counexionwith the acts

81 At the presentjunclurc, thcrcforc. the Councilcannot
proceed to fix responsibility for this matter or take the
measureswhich might help to prevent such occurrencesin
Ihe future. The situation thus reflects ;I seriousweakness
in
the position of the Council itsell‘. Chargedwith rcsponsibility for the maintenanceof international ~C;JCC
;III~
security, the Council once againfinds itsclt‘ unableto carry
out its obligations under the Charter. Having taken note ui
an act of aggression,and having condemnedit, it hasso f;lr
not found any meansof proceedingfurther.

to the Council in the past by trying to indicate the infernal
and global machinery which is behind this kind
of aggression in our present world and give a reason for
what happened in Benin.
77. The Security Council,
in resolution 405 { 1977).
strongly condemnedthe act of armed aggressionperpetrated againstthe People’sRepublic of Benin on 16 Janunry
1977. In paragraph10 of that resolution. the Council
“Cfflls upon all States to provide the Security Council
with any information they might have in conncxion with
the events at Cotonou on 16 January 1977 likely to
throw further light on thoseevents”.

82. This is a seriousmatter. It is a seriousmatter, first,
becausethe kind of aggression
that was committed against
Benin is occurring with ever grcatcr frequency. It is a
seriousmatter also becausethe Council should,and indeed
must, find the means to prevent the use of‘ armed
mercenary forces to carry out acts of‘ aggression
against
Member States, It is clear that if the Council doesnot find
the necessary means we shall be faced with greatly
intensified mercenary activity everywhere, and particularly
againstthe smallStates.

78. The Security Council Special Mission was able to
establish certain facts. It was clear that the I’co~~c’s
Republic of Beninhad beenthe victim of aggression.
On 16
January 1977 an unmarkedaircraft made an unauthorizcd
landing at Cotonou airport. Approximately 100 men
emergedfrom it, both white and black. They were very
heavily armed.They proceededto carry out assaultson the
presidential palaceand the military camp at Guezo. They
clearly intended to capture or assassinate
President I{&kou. They clearly intended to overthrow the People’s
Republic. The assaultgroup was well organized. Its members spoke French among themselves, many without a
foreign accent.

83. I should like to put this matter into perspectivein
order to underline the gravity of the problem which
confronts us. We must look at the aggressioncarried out
against the People’s Republic of Benin againstthe background of certain basic facts of international relations
today.

79. The attempt to overthrow the i’coplc’s Republic
failed, That doesnot meanthat investigation of the matte1
is any lessimportant, for there is much cvidencc that points
to organized foreign involvement and support for Ihis
armed aggression.The Special Mission was not able to
verify or authenticate that evidence becauseits work was
only to investigate the events of I6 January 1977 at
Cotonou. An attempt should be made to investigate the
matter further in order not just to seek to establishthat
certain thingshappenedbut to determine who wasrcsponsible for what happened. If the Security Council should
chooseto turn its back on the matter, it would in effect be
issuingan open invitation lo various Powersto continue
using tactics which are already wreaking devastatioo in
many countriesof the third world.

84. First of alk, the fact is that, dcspitc the long periodof
political dccolonization, many countries of the third world
today find themselvesenmeshedin :I new colonial system.
It is a system which all acknowledgebut which somecall
the intcrdcpendcnt world economy. Those who usethis
bland terminology ignore the fact that within that systen~
there are rich nations and poor nations. More important.
they ignore the fact of the cxploilation of the poor by the
rich. In the third world WCknow that the growing gap
between the rich and the poor is Ihe co~~scqucncc
of this
new system. That is why there are growing demandsfor :I
reorganization of the world economy.

8.5. Secondly, it is alsoa fact that many countriesof the
80. 11 may bc that the operiition carried out on 1h
third world have come to seethat they may alsobreakfree
January at Cotonou was the work of adventurers. but it is 01’ this system and seek to find their own paths tu
highly likely that it wasnot. My delegationbelievesthat we independenceand justice. Many ni\tioIls have rcalizedtb;lt
must investigatethis matter and fix responsibility for the
there is little prospect of an escapefrom poverty for the
aggression
againstthe People’sRepublic of Benin if we are poor as long as the presentglobal economy is organizcd:Is
to have even a hope of preventing such things from
it is. They llave thcrcforc chosento break the ties which
happening in the future. Thcrc is a growing assault, bind them to the former colonialist countries, the Lies
which ensure that they provide the cheap labour and the
especially through the use of covert operations. on the
raw materials for the wealthy at the expenseOKtheir own
sovereignty and integrity of nations in every part of the
childrcns’ future. Many nationsof the third world havethlls
third world. lt is the duty of the Security Council to do
somethingabout it. We can take a first and important step chosen lo break free of the colonialis sphereof inflUellce
to bring the growingproblem of mercenary activity into the
and to reach out for a new economicway, one which will
public limelight by pressingthe investigation of the events be more beneficial for their people, in each casecreatiilg
which ocurred at Cotonou on I6 .lan~~:try1977. IIowever,
the forms appropriate to their own history and possibilities.
the Council now finds itself in an awkward situation for,
Every nation hasthe right tc>makesuchchoices.Thilt right
having condemnedthe aggression,it remainsunable to do
is the essenceof the exerciseof sovereignty.it is enshrined
anything more. It has not been able ta establishwho was in the Charter of the United Nations.
responsiblefor this aggression.It hasrcceivcd no assistance
or information that would shed light on the events of 16
86. The third fact, which we all acknowledge,is lllal
January ~~OIJIstates which are in il posiIion to help it with
exercise of this right is feared by the colonialistcountries
its inquiries.
which dominate the global economy. They scc every
8

movement in the direction of real independence in the third
world as a threat to their global interests. They fear the loss
of sources of raw materials, of increases in the prices of
minerals. They fear the loss of free access to investments in
the third world, investments which often arrest the development of the typical poor economy. They fear the loss of
access to cheap labour, whether it is used in the third world
or imported Tram the third world. In short, colonialist
powers fear the dissolution of the global economy, a system
which functions very well for them but very badly for the
poor nations of the periphery.
87. Finally, those nations which now dominate the new
colonial system seek by many means to prevent the gradual
disintegration of the system. They seek above all to ensure
political stability in the periphery of the global economy.
They want to ensure that the nations of the periphery
remain friendly. If they should become unfriendly, they try
to change that. Many means are employed in pursuit of
these ends. The imperialist countries employ persuasion and
propaganda. They employ, as we all know, pressure and
political subversion. And, in many instances, they employ
open aggression.
88. WC are therefore living in a period of tremendous
stress in international relations. There is a growing awareness around the world of a clear conflict of interests
between the poor nations of the third world and the
wealthy capitalist countries. This conflict is sharpening.
Efforts to break free of the constricting relationships of the
global economy are intensifying and the response of those
who dominate this moribund system is increasingly savage.
89. All this is well known. The facts, however, point to an
important conclusion for the Council, for the facts set out
above explain why the kind of aggression perpetrated
against the People’s Republic of Benin is encountered so
frequently today. To protect what they see as their
interests, the neo-colonial Powers often conclude that it is
necessary to use armed force. However, there is no
domestic consensus in the liberal democracies to support
open, arbitrary aggression, especially when there is a danger
that it can lead LO deeper involvement in war. Consequently, aggression must increasingly be carried out covertly, away from the scrutiny of parliaments and the media.
That is why mercenary activity is rapidly becoming one of
the principal instruments used by the colonialist countries
to seek or maintain so-called order in the third world.

imperialism. Its people saw that there was little hope for
them as long as they allowed themselves to be exploited. In
1972-on 30 November-the
nation proclaimed a new
policy of national independence. Two years later-on 30
November-Benin
proclaimed to the world that it had
chosen the socialist road to development and that it was
determined “to escape forever from the capitalist ghetto”.
On 30 November 1975, the Party of the People’s Revolution was established and the People’s Republic of Benin was
founded.
93. These events shook the colonialist world, for the
decision of one more country to begin the break with the
capitalist bloc in Africa was seen as a dangerous example to
others. And we know that it was discussed in various circles
as a problem.
94. We must be clear that we do not at this stage know
whether the People’s Republic of Benin was the victim on
16 January of aggression organized by the neo-colonial
Powers. However, it would be foolish to dismiss t,his
possibility, for everything that is happening in the third
world today argues that it is a possibilty. If it is a
possibility, WC must ask ourselves whether we have an
obligation to pursue the investigation which began with the
Security Council Mission to Benin earlier this year.
95. I now resume my function
Council.

as PRESIDENT

of the

96. It is my understanding that the Council is prepared to
take a decision on the draft resolution before it. In the
absence of any objection, 1 shall declare the revised draft
resolution sponsored by Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and Mauritius and contained in document S/12454/Rev.l
adopted.
The a’mft resolution was adopted. 2
97. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (inrerpretarion from French):
Mr. President. I merely wish to tell you and the other
members of the Council how happy my delegation is at the
way in which this debate took place. We are also happy at
the active participation 01” our friends in this debate and
this is why we consider the concIusion that we have reached
a positive one. Benin is satisfied, despite the inadequacies of
the resolution that has just been adopted.
98. We thank you personally for the efforts which have
Icd to this unanimous conclusion. I thank the members of
the Council for their co-operation and solidarity. My
delegation also wishes to thank all the Members of the
Organization that are rriends of Benin which have taken an
active part in this debate. The echo of their militant
solidarity is already being heard in the People’s Republic of
Renin.
99. My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
all his efforts. We are convinced of the important role that
the Secretary-General will be called upon to play in the
implementation of this resolution. The Beninese Govemmerit considers the co-operation of the Secretary-General as
essential for future action. We are certain that he will
certainly not fail in this duty and we thank him in advance.

90. We must be aware that the use of mercenary forces to
carry out acts of armed aggression is far from casual. It is
becoming a systematic part of the covert foreign policy of
the neo-colonial Powers. As such, it is part of an effort to
deprive nations of their sovereignty by arbitrary force.
91. This is the question which the Council must now
consider in deciding how to proceed. Can the Council
couatcnance the spreading use of armed force by this
means? Can it allow small nations increasingly to be
threatened by covert action?
92. It is clear that the armed aggression against the
People’s Republic of Benin tnay be an example of the kind
of aggression I am talking about. The nation of Benin was
part of the neo-colonial system. It was a small, vigorous but
Poor nation of West Africa, systematically exploited by

The meetkg rose at 12.50 p.m.
2 Seeresolution 419 (1977).
9

--

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
