UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2622d

MEETING:

11 OCTOBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. .. .. ... .. .... .. ... ... ... ... .. .... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent Represetltative of
India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17507) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2622)

:I
.

WPV.2622

NOTE
:,
Symbols’of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
+ocument.: : ::’

: .

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarter!y Supplements of the Officiai Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

..

2622nd
Held

MEETING

in New York on Friday,

11 October

President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS
(United States of America).

Mr. Abulhassan Kuwait), Mr. Aiaoui (Morocco), Mr.
Yaqub-Khan (Pakistan), A&. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab -Rep&Iic) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Cuba and Jordan in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2622)
1. Adoption
2.

1985, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17507)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Oramus OZiva
(Cuba) and Mr. SaIah (Jordan) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, Mr. Humayun Rasheed
Choudhury. I welcome him and invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

4. Mr. CHOUDHURY
(Bangladesh): Mr. President, it is
a privilege for me and the members of my delegation to
take part in this important debate and I wish to thank you
and the other members of the Council for giving us this
opportunity.

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 7507)

5. My delegation has already had the privilege of congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of October. During the past few days, we have
seen ample evidence. of your leadership and diplomatic
skill, which reinforces our firm conviction that, under your
able guidance, the Council will achieve fruitful and constructive results.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [2619th to
262Zsr meetings], I invite the observer for the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the
Council table; I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Bangladesh, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen,
the German Democratic Republic, Indonesia, Israel,
Kuwait, Morocco, Pakistan, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

6. It is most befitting that the Council should, during this
historic month of October, which marks the observance of
the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, be deliberating upon an important issue like the Middle East problem including the Palestinian question. No other issue in
contemporary history has been discussed and deliberated
upon so extensively, and yet the problem remains unresolved and continues to threaten international peace and
security.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Qaddoumi (Paiestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council
table; Mr. Zartf (Afghanistan), Mr. Djoudi (Algeria), Mr.
Choudhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Cesar (Czechoslovakia), Mr.
Al-AI& (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Republic), Mr. Sastradidjaya (Indonesia), Mr. Bein (Israel),

7. The current Council deliberations on this important
issue are taking place in pursuance of the decision taken at
I

the recently concluded Conference of Foreign Ministers of
‘Non-Aligned Countries held at Luanda. The representative of India, in his capacity as the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, has called for the
convening of this meeting, and we fully support that initiative. The Council has shown exemplary determination during the past week in dealing with the two latest acts of
aggression by Israel and South Africa against Tunisia and
Angola, respectively. It is our sincere hope and expectation
that the Council will demonstrate the same determination
and political will in dealing with the important question
currently on its agenda.

of the self-conceived notion of its defence considerations.We must firmly oppose the propagation of such a new
doctrine of State terrorism, the only purpose of which is to
continue to acquire new territories through acts of
aggression.
12. In my statement in the General Assembly I said that
the international community, and particularly the United
Nations, has been concerned with the problem of intemational terrorism for some time now: However, no concrete
and effective action has yet been taken by us to put a stop
to these criminal acts which take a heavy toll of innocent
human lives, at the same time threatening international
peace and security. Recent terroristic acts have again reaffirmed the need for concerted action by the international
community. Bangladesh condemns terrorism in all its
forms, whenever and by whomsoever committed. Terrorism begets terrorism. No noble and purposeful objective
can be achieved through terroristic acts. We therefore very
strongly urge that some initiative be taken in that regard at
the current session of the General Assembly.

8. The present explosive situation in the Middle East is a
direct consequence of a historic injustice, perpetrated when
the Palestinian people were forcibly uprooted from their
hearths and homes and an alien people were virtually
imposed upon the Arab world through the creation of
Israel. That newly created State from the outset adopted
an aggressive and hostile policy against the Palestinian
people and its Arab neighbours. In violation of all canons
of international
law and the Charter of the United
Nations, Israel, on the pretext of waging so-called defensive wars, has carried out a series of acts of aggression and
has occupied huge Arab territories. Despite repeated calls
by the General Assembly and the Security Council, Israel
has refused to vacate the occupied Arab and Palestinian
lands.

13. It is now universally recognized that the question of
Palestine is at the core of the problem of the Middle East
and that consequently it is not possible to envisage a settiement of the problems in the Middle East unless the legitimate inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people
are fully restored. Bangladesh, in the past, has reiterated its
firm conviction that the complex and interrelated problems in the Middle East call for a comprehensive solution
which must be based on a total and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Palestinian and Arab territories, including the Holy City of Jerusalem, and the
restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people under the leadership of the PLO,- their sole legitimate representative.

9. All the efforts of the United Nations to bring justice to
the suffering Palestinian and Arab people have been arrogantly and blatantly rejected by Israel, which has openly
llouted the will of the international community. At the
same time, Israel has further intensified its policy of relentless expansion and occupation directed against its Arab
neighbours with a view to changing the Arab and Palestinian character of the occupied territories. In clear contravention of the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949,’
the Palestinian and Arab people living in the occupied
territories have been persecuted, terrorized and denied
their basic fundamental rights.
10. Israeli attempts to annex the Holy City of Jerusalem
and the Syrian Golan Heights and change their status have
been unequivocally condemned by the international community and have been declared null and void. Israel committed an act of aggression against Iraq in 1981, and
invaded Lebanon in 1982. At the beginning of the current
month, Israel, in violation of ail norms of international law
and of the principles and purposes of the Charter,
unleashed yet another act of aggression against the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Tunisia, a
country which is more than 2400 kilometres from its
borders. Israel’s latest aggression is yet another manifestation of its relentless drive to eliminate the Palestinian
people and their sole legitimate representative, the PLO.

14. The developments in the Middle East have also demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt that the problems
in the region can be solved only through a concerted international effort under the auspices of the United Nations.
My delegation, therefore, attaches particular importance
to the early convening of the proposed international peace
conference on the Middle East, and we fully appreciate the
Secretary-General’s current initiative to that end. The
Arab peace plan, which my delegation fully supports as a
sound basis for a comprehensive solution of the problem,
as well as other plans which have been submitted recently,
are already before the international community. What is
needed now to initiate the peace process is the generation
of the necessary political will, particularly on the part of
the major Powers which are in a position to influence
developments in the region. The most-recent developments
in the Middle East have once again reminded us of the
grave and explosive situation which prevails in that region.
Any further delay in starting the peace process might
trigger a totally unmanageable crisis, making it more difficult, if not impossible, to restore peace in the Middle East.

II. The acts of aggression committed by Israel against its
Arab neighbours cannot be justified on any moral or legal
basis. Nor can we accept the Israeli argument that Israel
has the right to attack any State at any time on the pretext

15. It is unfortunate that while the international community is making a determined effort to restore peace in the
region, Israel has undertaken a systematic effort to thwart
the peace process. In the face of a growing intema2

tional consensus in favour of the Arab and Palestinian
cause, Israel has once again resorted to the use of force to
heighten tension in the region with a view to frustrating the
current international effort to resolve peacefully the problems in the Middle East. We commend all those who in the
face of such unprovoked aggression and relentless expansion have demonstrated the utmost restraint, and have
made every possible effort to try and bring about a durable
peace in the Middle East.

tion, by exclusively peaceful means. That is especially true
of the settlement of the Middle East problem, at the core of
which is the question of Palestine.
23. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic shares the view that it is high time to end the permanent state of tension in the region and to bring about a
just and lasting peace. Accordingly, it welcomes the
timely initiative taken by the non-aligned countries at
the Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Luanda in
September, concerning the convening of these meetings
of the Council.

16. The Security Council-particularly
its permanent
members-has a special responsibility to bring peace in the
Middle East. The failure of the Council in the past to
ensure implementation
of its own decisions and resolutions has only encouraged Israel to intensify its policies of
aggression against the Palestinian people and its Arab
neighbours, thereby threatening international peace and
security. It is our sincere hope that the Council, during the
present deliberations, will show foresight and wisdom in
dealing with one of the most explosive issues of our times.

24. The debates over the past few days and weeks in
various United Nations bodies have underlined the deep
concern of the overwhelming majority of representatives
over the explosive situation in the Middle East and its
adverse consequences for world peace and international
security. This is only natural, since the international
community has witnessed the escalation of the policy of
State terrorism pursued by those in the ruling Israeli
circles against the people of Palestine and the Arab
States.

17. At the historic commemorative meeting of the Council, held on 26 September [2608th meeting], all members
agreed that there was an urgent need to enhance the effectiveness of the Council in carrying out its principal role in
the maintenance of international peace and security and
also resolved to continue to examine the possibilities of
further improvement of its functioning. My delegation
believes that that spirit should guide the current Council
deliberations on the adoption of effective, concrete measures for the initiation of the peace process in the Middle
East.

25. That policy of disregarding all the norms of interna-,
tional law and the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations is made manifest in the outrages of
the Israeli aggressors in the occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories and by the acts of aggression perpetrated against
Lebanon and Tunisia, acts which are resolutely condemned by the German Democratic Republic.
26. Therefore, it has been pointed out time and again in
the Council that it is Israel’s policy of aggression which
forms the main obstacle to a comprehensive, just and durable settlement of the Middle East problem and the Palestinian question. It is the Israeli rulers who, in defiance of
numerous United Nations resolutions, deny the Palestinian people the exercise of their inalienable rights, especially the right to estabiish a State of their own. And it is
also they who obstruct the convening of the international
peace conference on the Middle East called for by the
overwhelming majority of Member States in General
Assembly resolution 38/58 C of 13 December 1983.

18. The observance of the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations will be over in a matter of weeks. The
occasion is indeed historic and we are confident that the
Council will not fail history.
19. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
20. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): I have
already had the opportunity to extend to you, Sir, the
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of October. I
should like to thank you, and through you the members of
the Council, for giving me the opportunity to explain the
position of the German Democratic Republic on the subject under consideration today.

27. There can also be no doubt that in its actions Israel
enjoys the unqualified support of the main imperialist
Power. United in the so-called strategic alliance, the
United States and Israel seek to involve the Arab region to
an ever greater extent in imperialism’s global confrontation course to expand its military presence and to extend
the range of North Atlantic Treaty Organization operations to that part of the world.

21. We noted with deep satisfaction that at its meeting at
Minister for Foreign Affairs level, held a few weeks ago to
commemorate
the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations [ibid], the Council reaffirmed the urgent need to
do everything possible to enhance its effectiveness in preserving world peace and international security.

28. A constituent part of the imperialist attempt to gain
domination in the Middle‘Fast region, which is so sensitive
for world peace, is the policy of separate deals. Its aim is to
remove the Middle Fast problem and the Palestinian question from the agenda and to perpetuate the occupation of
Arab territories, in violation of international law. It is but
a futile attempt to deceive the Palestinian people and to
deprive it for ever of its national rights.

22. Particularly in our nuclear and space age, it is
imperative to settle international conflicts through negotia3

29. Such plans and practices must be halted. Joint, resolute action by all peace forces becomes ever more imperative. Therefore, the German Democratic
Republic
welcomes the efforts to enhance the joint, cohesive action
of all patriotic Arab forces, on the basis of the Fez peace
plan [see S/15.510, annex].

responsibility to ensure that the situation in the region
does not eventually get out of control. We are seeking and
shall continue to seek a political approach to a general and
just settlement of the situation in the Middle East.
37. Why is there a constant, general threat not only to
the peace and security of the peoples that inhabit that part
of the world but to peace in general? And what essentially
needs to be done in order to break the present deadlock
concerning a Middle East settlement? Obviously, it is precisely to get answers to those questions that the Security
Council is now meeting.

30. The German Democratic Republic is acting in line
with the overwhelming majority of States when, in accordante with United Nations resolutions, it strongly advocates
the convening of an international peace conference on’the
Middle East, with the participation of all interested parties,
including the PLO as the sole, legitimate representative of
the Palestinian people. For the conference to be successful,
the first requirement is a constructive approach by all the
permanent members of theSecurity Council. Israel and the
United States are again called upon no longer to block the
early convening of the conference.

38. The reasons for the persistence of the hotbed of tension in the Middle East seem to us to be abundantly clear.
They can be seen to be rooted in the aggressive and expansionist policy of the Israeli leadership. In less than 40 years,
the Middle East has experienced five destructive and
bloody wars. Today, the Syrian Golan Heights, the West
Bank of the Jordan, the Gaza Strip, East Jerusalem and
southern Lebanon are still under occupation.

3 1. The German Democratic Republic expresses its hope
that the Council will take the measures required for the
early convening of the international peace conference on
the Middle East.

39. The main victim of Israeli expansionism has been the
Arab people of Palestine. The ruling circles in Tel Aviv are
trying to thwart any decision of the United Nations to
create two, States in Palestine and are attempting forcibly
to remove the question of Palestine from the agenda. It is
appropriate to remind people again and again that Israel
owes its very existence to a decision taken by the United
Nations, and that that self-same decision also envisaged
the formation of an Arab State in Palestine.

32. A comprehensive, just and durable settlement of the
:Middle East conflict requires recognition of the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people, including their
right to establish an independent State of their own. Israel
must withdraw unconditionally from all Arab territories
occupied since 1967. Only then can peace and security be
guaranteed for all States and peoples in the Middle East.

40. The practices of the Israeli leadership unquestionably
indicate one thing: that flouting the rightsof other peoples,
terror and violence have been deliberately raised to the
level of State policy. Such a policy is in blatant contradiction of the Charter of the United Nations, the fundamental
norms of international law and inter-State relations and
numerous resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Soviet Union .said at the current session ,of the General
Assembly:

33. Proceeding from this position, the German Democratic Republic supports the Soviet Union’s proposals of
July 1984 [S/26685, annex], which coincide with the Fez
Peace Plan, as the way to a comprehensive, just and durable solution to the Palestinian problem.
34. It reaffirms in this forum that it will continue consistently to support the struggle of the Palestinian people led
by the PLO for the implementation of their national rights.
35. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): It would be diflicult to find a representative international forum that has
not in recent times given close attention to’the problem of
the Middle East. The Conference of Ministers of Foreign
Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Luanda in September, was no exception. It is precisely at the request of
the parties to that Conference that the Security Council is
once again taking up the problem of the Middle East.

“It is hard to imagine that any delegation would venture to assert here that the monstrous crimes of the
Israeli aggressors on the ravaged soil of Lebanon and in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip are consistent with
the principles of the Charter . . .
“Only chauvinistic arrogance could lead anyone to
deny the Palestinian people their right to independent
statehood while recognizing that right for the people of
Israel. All peoples and nations have equal rights..“’

36. The concern of the non-aligned countries and many
other countries at the turn of events in the Middle East is
well founded. For many years now, the Middle East
wound has been bleeding, expanding and affecting wider
areas. In the period since the Second World War the Middle East has become one of the most ‘dangerous spots on
earth. Naturally, the Soviet Union very closely monitors
the course of events in that part of the world, which is in
direct proximity to our boundaries. We are not only monitoring those events, but are acting with a’great sense of

41. But to get a complete picture we must add something
else. The situation in the Middle East indicates that Israel
can pursue its present policies only because of the comprehensive support it receives from Washington. Furthermore, the American-Israeli
alliance has perhaps never’
been characterized by such a high degree of concerted
activity as in recent times. I think that the partners in that
alliance would not seek to deny that.
4

42: However, it is perfectly obvious that the struggle of
the Arabs for their freedom, independence and honour
cannot be overcome by intimidation, blackmail or military
adventures. The results of the Israeli adventure in Lebanon
have shown the ability of the Arab peoples successfully to
defend their legitimate rights.

the principle of the inadmissibility of seizing foreign lands
by aggression should be observed. Consequently, the
Arabs should have all the territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 returned to them. It is essential that the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, whose sole legitimate
representative is the PLO, be guaranteed in practice; their
right to self-determination and to create their own State in
the lands which are freed from Israeli occupation. All
States in the area, including, of course, Israel, should be
guaranteed the right to a secure and independent existence
and development, while observing full mutuality. An end
should be put to the state of war, and peace should be
established between the Arab States and Israel. Finally, it
is proposed that international safeguards be provided for
settling the Middle Fast problem. The Soviet Union is
prepared to be involved in those guarantees.

43. The struggle that the Arabs have had to wage has not
been an easy one. Again and again it has shown the importance of the close interaction of the Arab countries and
their solidarity. The strength of the Arabs lies in their
unity, and their weakness in their being divided. Past and
present experience indicates that.
44. Experience, including the unfortunate lessons learned
from Camp David, also indicates that the complex and
multifaceted problems of the Middle East cannot be
tackled on the basis of separate deals. Although even
today we see attempts to prompt the Arabs to’undertake
separate agreements with the aggressor, this is a myopic
policy and is fraught with the danger of possibly further
complicating the situation in the area.

48. Those are the funamental principles on which, in the
opinion of the Soviet Union, a just Middle East settlement
should be based. As a ‘means of bringing this about, it is
proposed that an international conference be convened
with the participation of the Arab countries which border
on Israel, namely Syria, Jordan, Egypt, Lebanon, the PLO
and also Israel itself. Naturally, the Soviet Union and the
United States should also be participants
in the
conference-two
States, which by dint of the situation
which ‘has arisen, play an important part in Middle-East
affairs-and certain ‘other .States as well.

45. Only the collective method of untying the Gordian
knot of contradictions in the Middle East will provide
genuine prospects of establishing lasting peace throughout
that vast area in which, -in the last few decades, there has
been so much hostility, mistrust and suspicion. There is a
growing conviction in the world that the best way of reaching a comprehensive, just settlement in the Middle East is
through the’convening ‘of an international conference, with
the participation of all the parties concerned, including the
PLO and, among other States, the Soviet Union and the
United States. It can be said that a State’s attitude to the
idea of the convening of such a conference has become
more or less a criterion of the seriousness of its approach
to a peaceful settlement in the Middle East. This is indicated, in particular, by the resolutions adopted by an overwhelming majority in the General Assembly, which show
that there is broad international agreement that the only
effective way to ensure a radical solution of the Middle
East problem is through talks at an international conference on the Middle East.

49. As the General Secretarv of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Gorbachev, said:
“Everything that is happening in the Middle East
alarms us. And we have never remained outside
attempts to seek a settlement of the situation in the
Middle East on a just basis.”
50. The Soviet Union has frequently indicated its readiness to co-operate constructively with all those who are
sincerely concerned in bringing about a just and durable
peace in the Middle East. We should like to reiterate this
readiness here today in the Security Council.

46. Unfortunately, an obstructionist position regarding
the convening of an international conference continues to
be taken by both the United States and Israel. They are
thus obviously creating the impression that they are not
anxious to improve the situation in the Middle East, not
anxious that its peoples should return to normal, peaceful
life.

51. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis
Maksoud, Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to whom the Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure-at
its 2,620th meeting. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
52. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Mr. President, I should like to
express the appreciation of the League of Arab States for
the kind invitation you have extended to me, and through
you, to the members of the ‘Council.

47. In opposition to this policy, the Soviet Union holds
the firm position that the Middle East cannot be brought
to peace by means of a policy of force or by imposing on
the conflicting parties something which is alien to their
will. We have to try and seek a political solution to this
problem. It has to be a comprehensive solution which
takes account of the interests of all countries in the area. It
is this sort of large-scale programme for a comprehensive
Middle East settlement which we find in the Soviet proposals [ibid] which are primarily based on the premise that

53. The meeting of the Council has as its objective to try
and bring about an input into the thinking of how best to
exhaust the political and diplomatic option which the
mechanism of the United Nations can provide in order
that we can minimize violence, terrorism, occupation and
5

the drain on the credibility of the United Nations, the
credibility of the prospects for peace and the hemorrhaging of the blood of the peoples of Palestine, Lebanon,
Syria, Egypt, and all the peoples in the Middle East.

League of Arab States. Israel thereby wishes to make the
lives and institutions of all Palestinians everywhere in the
Arab world more vulnerable.
60. Thus, the systematic television and radio propaganda
campaign by Israeli officials during the past few days is a
deliberate attempt to picture the aberration that took place
on the ship in the Mediterranean as part of a pattern characteristic of the mainstream PLO. This deliberate, systematic, intensive campaign of distortion, innuendos and
half-truths is designed to provide the pretext for a repetition of what Israel did to Tunisia last week, to provide the
pretext for what it intends to do to other Arab countries
any time in the future.

54. I come here today before this Council somewhat saddened by the events of the recent few days, which was
made more poignant this morning with the murder of a
very distinguished American of Palestinian origin, Mr.
Alex Odeh, at Santa Ana, California. He was the Director
of the American Anti-Arab Discrimination Committee in
the region of California. I feel deeply hurt not only as a
citizen of the world or as an Arab or somebody who has
been very helpful in the struggle against discrimination. I
feel that the rhetoric of vengeance that has been prevalent
an.d the recklessness of the utterances that have been made
in recent days, and more particularly by the Israeli representatives here and in Israel, have generated an atmosphere of permissiveness towards violence that must cause
us to focus again on the root issues in the Middle East.

61. We are trying to preempt
this escalation of
violence-whether by fringe groups or by States like Israel
that are on the fringes of the international community.
For, when Israel was condemned last week for its action
against Tunisia, [rc&&~~ 573 (2985)] it stated that in no
circumstances would it abide by the Council’s resolution.
It therefore was announcing and signalling to the world
that it is a pariah in the community of nations. If Israel
gets away with this, other pariah groups-whether Palestinians or others-may be infected and feel that they can
conduct the same kind of reckless terrorism.

55. Basically, we believe in non-violence because we feel
that violence as a plan of coercion is a negation of nonviolence as a practice of persuasion. If there has been justified agitation and anger at the demise of Mr. Klinghoffer,
whose circumstances of death are abominable, unspeakable and condemnable, I hope that equally the murder
today of Alex Odeh at Santa Ana will evoke similar sympathy and concern.

62. Therefore it is important that we refocus on the need
and the priority of again providing the political, diplomatic option-the
peaceful option. We must reestablish
credibility and the chance for the achievement of a peaceful solution. We feel that at this moment there is the
proper climate for the convening of an international conference to settle the various outstanding issues in the Middle East conflict.

56. Having said this, I think that the main purpose of the
deliberations in the Council is to bring the mechanism of
the United Nations to bear and see whether it is possible to
resolve the crisis in the Middle East.
57. We believe in negotiations, whether direct or indirect.
Yet we do not believe in negotiations that tend, because of
the occupation, to be transformed into a way of dictating
the terms and the outcome. Hence, our option for the
political diplomatic settlement through the United Nations
mechanism is clear, categorical and deliberate. It has the
approval of all the Arab States, as that approval has been
articulated in the resolutions of the Twelfth Arab Summit
Conference, held at Fez in 1982.

63. We are looking forward to the forthcoming meeting,
at Geneva on 19 November, between the leader of the
United States and the leader of the Soviet Union. We think
that in itself the decision to have the meeting has generated
an atmosphere of hope-limited
hope perhaps, but still
hope. Of course, we know that the two super-Powers,
entrusted with global responsibilities, have their own priorities in terms of disarmament. We are very hopeful that
they will be successful in that regard. But we feel, too, that
regional conflicts, including the Middle East conflict, can
benefit from the defusion of tension and. confrontation
between the two super-Powers. Hence, in the present climate there is an incentive for the United States and the
Soviet Union to work with other members of the Council
and the interested parties in the Middle East in order to
shoulder, within the framework of the United Nations, a
shared responsibility in connection with a problem that
was caused by a shared United Nations resolution: the
resolution adopted in 1947 [General Assembly resolution

58. Hence, our commitment is obvious. We want the
Security Council to be utilized for the achievement of a
peaceful political and diplomatic solution to the issues arising from the Arab-Israeli conflict. We are committed to
that.
59. Furthermore, our region is now. at the boiling point,
and so every incident and every accident in any part of the
Arab world is harnessed and used by Israel to gloss over
the central issue: the denial to the Palestinians of their right
to self-determination. Israel now uses every incident as a
prior pretext for subsequent violations and acts of aggression. For instance, we have in recent days seen Israel trying
to pinpdint a fringe group which uses reckless tactics and
making allegations about the relationship of, that fringe
group to the PLO, which is recognized by the United
Nations, has observer status and is a full member of the

181 (ZZJI].

64. Thus, we in the Arab League view the forthcoming
meeting of the two super-Powers as an occasion to create a
climate that will be conducive-particularly
for the United
States-to taking up the suggestion for an international
6

conference, removed from the tensions of the cold war and
super-Power competition and confrontation in our region.
65. Moreover, we have consistently stated in the Council
and in various resolutions of the League of Arab States
that we do not wish to see efforts to settle the Arab-Israeli
conflict encourage or exploit Soviet-American tension,
competition or confrontation. We want our region to be
an arena for the strengthening of detente. We do not want
our regional issues to be examined from the viewpoint of
Soviet-American or super-Power relations. Rather, we
want them to be examined on the basis of the merits of
those issues arising in the Middle East.
66. The international
conference proposed by the
Secretary-General and supported in General Assembly
resolutions is not a partisan effort. It is not intended to
confirm partisanship. Rather, it is intended to bring
about-so far as possible within today’s world-an objective framework for dealing with these issues objectively.
67. Unilateral crisis-management in the past-and examples are the early phases of the Camp David agreements
and the negotiations on the so-called Lebanese-Israeli
agreement-has
proved to be counterproductive for the
purposes and prospects for peace in the region. We do not
want unilateral crisis-management-from
any side. We
want this crisis in the Middle East to be resolved not only
because that would be a contribution to peace in the
world, but also because we have an ethical commitment to
peace and, in addition, a pragmatic need for peace in order
to ensure the development of our region.
68. Therefore, the climate being generated, however
reluctantly and grudgingly, and the possibilities of dcfusing tension and of achieving some success on the global
priorities of the two super-Powers means that if regional
conflicts, in general, and our regional conflict, in particular, are resolved within the framework of the United
Nations, then our regional conflict will no longer feed on
and extend to an undermining of relations between the two
super-Powers but might, on the contrary, facilitate their
priorities in terms of disarmament.
69. I am saying this after the Arab League’s careful study
of this issue, because we know that in many instances
people have felt that the call for an international conference was made by one super-Power and that therefore it
has to be opposed by the other. We are saying that our
issues, whether it be the Golan Heights, Palestinian selfdetermination, Israel’s attempt at hegemony in southern
Lebanon from whence it has not withdrawn until now or
other outstanding issues, impact on each other. They are
not separate issues; they are not isolated from each other;
they must ultimately be related to each other, and hence
their resolution must follow the pattern of a simuitaneous
addressing of the problems.
70. This is why we feel very strongly that the convening
of the Security Council and the initiative undertaken by
the members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
to bring about more active commitment to convene an

international conference is overdue, and the sooner the
prospects for such a conference are translated into action
the better for us and the sooner the causes of violence in
the Middle East will be removed.
71. I do not want today to undertake any polemics or to
make any attempt at rebuttal. We are well aware that
Israel seeks to blackmail the international community by
forewarning it that what takes place at an international
conference is a form of ganging up. Unfortunately, Israel
has persuaded our friends in the United States that the
United States has to shield Israel’s intransigence lest such a
ganging up occurs. The Organization belongs to the international community, in which the United States plays a
pivotal role, and, therefore, our expectation is that it wilt
display a pivotal responsibility corresponding to that role.
We are eager that the United States examine the issues on
their merits, independent from the Israeli attempt to determine or colour the course of events.
72. That is why the League of Arab States and the Arab
nation as a whole, in its eagerness to convey and promote
dialogue with the United States-inasmuch
as we believe,
because of the tradition of the United States, that it is a
persuadable constituency-express
the hope that the
United States not, ab initio, declare that because Israel
rejects the concept of a United Nations international conference, then we all in the international community have to
be realistic and in turn abandon the idea. It is crucial that
at this moment of agony and hope Israel not practise a
vicarious veto on the Council.
73. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, Secretary-General of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, to whom the Council has extended
an invitation at its 2627th meeting under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure. I invite him’to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
74. Mr. PIRZADA: I am thankful to you, Mr. President,
and to the members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to participate in my capacity as the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in
the debate on the Middle East problem, including the question of Palestine.
75. The Council is meeting to discuss this problem,
which is of major concern to the international community
and particularly to the Islamic world, in pursuance of the
decision taken at the Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Angola in September
1985. The decision to request the convening of this series
of meetings was motivated by the desire of the members of
the Movement to hold, at the fortieth session of the General Assembly, an in-depth discussion of the problem in all
its aspects, to analyse the obstacles in the way of a comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the problem and to
find ways and means of removing those obstacles.
76. The current series of meetings is being held against
the backdrop of two recent events which have overshadowed the debate. The first was the unprovoked aggression

by Israel against the soiereignty and territorial integrity of
Tunisia on 1 October, when Israeli aircraft bombed a residential area of Tunis were some offices of the PLO were
also housed. The air raid resulted in the loss of more than
60 innocent lives and injury to many others, apart from
major damage to property. That was an act of State terrorism which the international
community
rightly condemned. The second event was the hijacking of a sea-going
Italian vessel by four Palestinians, which resulted in the
death of an elderly passenger and which was unanimously
condemned by the Council in a statement read out by the
President at the 2618th meeting on 9 October. This was an
act of terrorism by individuals, which we cannot and do
not condone. Since then the plane carrying the four
hijackers out of Egypt has been intercepted by the United
States Air Force and forced to land at a United States
military base in Italy, and we understand that the hijackers
are now in Italian custody. The United States action in
forcing a civilian airliner to land in Italy is a matter which
has legal implications which I do not intend to address in
my statement, since it would detract from the main focus
of the debate.

80. The history of the past 40 years is replete with examples of Israeli aggression, expansion and annexation.
Whenever the olive branch of peace has been extended to
Israel, it has reacted by striking down the hand that holds
the branch. Israel has violated the Charter of the United
Nations, principles of international law and morality and
the norms of inter-State conduct. It has committed aggression against its neighbours as well as against those not in
its vicinity.
81. It is occupying Arab and Palestinian lands and is
establishing settlements in the West Bank, Gaza and the
Golan Heights. It is occupying parts of Lebanon. It defies
the will of the international community. It reje’cts all peace
proposals. The Security Council, which under the Charter
has the primary responsibility for preserving international
peace and security, is helpless because Israel enjoys the
backing of a veto-wielding member of the Security Council. We call upon the United States to review its position
and its policies and to join the international community in
eradicating the injustice that has been done to the people
of Palestine.
82. The elements of a comprehensive, just and ,lasting
peace in the Middle East are well known. They have been
enunciated in a number of peace proposals. The Arab
peace plan of Fez [see S/15520, annex] sets them out in a
comprehensive manner. The United Nations has identified
them. They have been reiterated on countless occasions.
Speakers participating in the present debate have recalled
them. The PLO has accepted them.

77. One cannot fail, however, to note that an effort is
being made to becloud the basic issue by some participants
in the debate who have made this latest act of hijacking by
four Palestinians the centre-piece of their statements, without placing it in its proper perspective, namely, that it is
one in a series of violent acts, acts of terrorism, in a vicious
circle in which individual ‘acts of terrorism are counterposed to acts of State terrorism by Israel..

83. The elements of peace are simple. They include the
following: first, the restoration of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, including their right to return, to
exercise self-determination and to have a sovereign homeland in Palestine; secondly, the withdrawal of Israel from
all occupied Arab and Palestinian territories, including the
Holy City of Jerusalem; and thirdly, the recognition of the
right of all States in the region to exist within secure and
internationally
recognized boundaries, with justice and
security for all peoples. These elements remain unimplemented because of the intransigence of Israel.

78. This cycle of violence is a symptom, however, rather
than the cause of the conflict in the Middle East. We cannot hope to remove the symptoms without addressing ourselves to the basic cause, which is the denial of the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people,
including ,.th+r right to return, their right to selfdetermination and their right to an indzpendent State in
their homeland, Palestine. The people of Palestine have
been dispossessed-they have been forced from their
homes, their land. and their country. They have been
denied their fundamental human rights. They have been
suppressed inside the occupied tkrritories and attacked outside them. Their national identity and their existence as a
people are at stake. They are denied all means of redress
because Israel refuses, and has for decades refused, to heed
the calls. of the international community to restore the
rights of the people of Palestine. It refuses to acknowledge
their existende and publicly vows to destroy them. It denies
them the legitimacy that it.seeks to acquire for itself. It
denies them the security and peace that it demands for
itself.

84. I believe it is the duty of the Council to ensure the
recognition and acceptance of those elements by all parties
concerned. The best means to do so has already been
approved by the General Assembly [resohtion 3808 C of
13 December 1983)-namely, .the holding of an intemational peace conference on the Middle East, under the
auspices of the United Nations, with the participation of
all parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the PLO,
as well as the United States, the Soviet Union and other
concerned States, on an equal footing.
85. The need to hold such a conference has never been
greater or more.urgent. The Council must act. It must not
be paralyzed. It must be prepared to exercise its @imary
functions and it must be ready to apply sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter against those who refuse to
implement its decisions. Delays in seeking a comprehensive, just and lasting solution will only exacerbate tension
.and perpetuate injustice.

79. A nation-i
people-is being destroyed. It is futile to
expect, to hope or to demand that their desperate acts will
cease while the: are being tr,.mpled beneath the heel .of
aggression. We must demonstrate to therii, show them and
make them believe that their rights will be restored to them.
and that the injustice to which they have been subjected
will be undone.
8

86. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the observer
for the Palestine Liberation Organization. I invite him to
make his statement.

authorities and of the PLO to save the lives of 400 human
beings, thus damaging its relations with Egypt; and then it
hijacked an Egyptian civilian aeroplane.

87. Mr. QADDOUMI
(Palestine Liberation Organization) (interpretation from Arabic): Yesterday, we explained
how we tried to co-operate with the Egyptian and Italian
authorities so as to save the lives of 400 passengers and
crew members who were on the Italian vessel Achiile
Laura. That vessel was hijacked by a number of
Palestinians.

94. It is worth recalling that “the road to Hell is paved
with good intentions**.
95. I wonder whether the arrest of four Palestinians will
put an end to violence and terrorism in the Middle East.
No, it will not, because Israel is the primary source of
aggression and terrorism. It persists in its policy with the
support of the United States. Everyone knows that every
action results in a like reaction.

88. Those joint endeavours have put an end to the operation and have saved the vessel and those on board it from
dire consequences.

96. Occupation, genocide, aggression and the denial of a
people’s right to self-determination are the cause of all the
tragic and painful events taking p!ace in the Middle East,
and the source of all of this is Israel and its practices both
within and outside the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories.

89. Unfortunately, we learned with surprise yesterday
that the United .States President, Mr. Reagan, had given
instructions to the American air base in Sicily to hijack a
civilian Egyptian plane en route from Cairo to one of the
countries of North Africa. American military jets therefore
carried out an operation of air piracy, thus forcing the
Egyptian plane to change its route and to land at the
American base in Sicily. Is this not a most official act of
terrorism? It .is terrorism by a super-Power that claims to
maintain peace and to resist terrorism while it itself
indulges in such terrorism and such acts ‘of piracy.

97. I do not wish here to reply to the statement made
yesterday by the representative of Israel, when he emptied
his sack of hatred against the Arabs and the Palestinians.
Over and over again, we have heard his lame logic,. which
convinces no one. But I want to address all Israelis. I am a
Palestinian citizen who lived in the city of Jaffa on the
Mediterranean coast 50 years ago-before the creation of,
Israel and probably before the representative of Israel so
much as set eyes on the land of Palestine. We ask how long
Israel will continue to rely on terrorism and aggression in
its attempt to remain a small island in the midst of a
turbulent ocean of Arabs. Does Israel believe that its technological advancement and its dependence on the United
States and on the increasing support .provided by that
country will bring it peace and security? Does Israel believe
it can ever achieve peace, security and good-neighbourly
relations with its ‘Arab neighbours? Can Israel annihilate
the Palestinian people and eliminate the Palestinian question once and for all? Can Israel convince the world that
Israel is Palestine, the homeland of the Palestinians? Does
Israel not believe that current Arab incapability will inevitably change into a force capable of protecting Arab rights
and of denying Israel a life in peace so long as it denies
Palestinian rights, persecutes the Palestinians and hurls
threats at the Arab’ ocean that surrounds it?

90. Those who hijacked the Italian vessel were on their
way to a Palestinian court. Our brother Yasser Arafat,
Chairman of the Executive Committee, had declared in
response to a question in an American television interview
that the PLO would interrogate them in co-ordination
with the Egyptian and Italian authorities. The Chairman
of the PLO had already expressed our organization’s condemnation of the operation.
91. We must note here that the American military base
in Sicily was able to track a single Egyptian aeroplane, but
had failed. to observe eight Israeli military jets bearing
destruction towards a peaceful Arab capital and the PLO
offices there.
92. All information and evidence show that the American base was used by the Israeli jets as a springboard for
their raid against Tunisia; it must have been used also to
fuel those maurauding jets. The United States is feeling the
ecstasy of victory, having succeeded in an act of piracy
against a civilian aircraft, just as it felt the same ecstasy
when American troops invaded the peaceful little Caribbean island of Grenada.

98. Does Israel have gold mines and oil wells on which to
depend indefinitely,.so that it can afford to continue to
antagonize its A,rab neighbours, continue its acts of aggression against them and persist in its occupation of Palestinian territory?

93. I admit that the United Nations is a super-Power
capable of taking action beyond what it has already taken,
but I cannot understand why such action is not called
terrorism and aggression. The United States has arrogated
unto itself the right to carry out such acts. It is strange that
the United States appeals to the world to save hostages and
fight against international terrorism while itself perpetrating such terrorism. What is more, the- United States
rejected the efforts and good offices of the Egyptian

99. The Palestinians now total 5 million and possess
great skills that are no less than those of the Israelis. The
Palestinian. revolution will ‘continue until the Palestinian
people return to their’homeland ,and live peacefully there.
Despite all the efforts of Israel and the United States, the
Palestinian people ,will continue to be an impenetrable wail
around Israel. that will not allow it to engulf the Arab
region so that it may coexist in accordance with its logic,
the logic of force, arrogance and terrorism. That is the
9

march of history, and that is the ultimate destiny of the
Arab region. The Palestinian State will be established..
However long we have to wait, we are confident that justice will prevail despite the arrogance of power and
terrorism.

has participated in the formulation of a number of peace
initiatives and has welcomed all international efforts in
that regard.
108. In its search for the best path to peace, Jordan, in
co-operation with its Arab brothers and in particular the
Palestinian people, has advocated the political option to
solve the Arab-Israeli conflict on the basisof the principle
that has become the foundation of international
unanimity-that-of
territoryin
retu.rn for peace. That
approach was also manifested in the Arab context in the
resolutions of the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held
at Fez in 1982, in which the Arabs accepted a political
solution on the basisof trading land for peace. Nevertheless,such international unanimity has not led to the establishment of peace in the Middle East. The situation
remains unchanged. Yet there is one glaring reality that
cannot be denied-the need to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, in the formulation of which the Palestinianswould participate from the
beginning. They would also take part guaranteeing it
through their legitimate leadership, the PLO, which has
declared its commitment to the principle of peace and
coexistence, based on a guarantee of the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people. With sucha commitment the PLO gives expression to the hopes of the
Palestinian people, languishing under the yoke of occupation, and responds to its wish to rid itself of that
occupation.

100. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
101. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation
from Ambic):
When considering the Arab-Israeli conflict, and in particular the question of Palestine, which is at its core, the Council must recall the basic facts of the conflict and searchfor
its roots, which nourish the state of violence, instability
and extremism in the Middle East. Only by such an
approach can we reach a clear understanding and adopt an
effective position with regard to the couflict.
102. The past four decadesand the five Arab-Israeli wars
in those decades have created basic facts that cannot be
denied if any consideration of the question is to be fruitful.
103. First, the basic problem in the Middle East is the
continued Israeli occupation of the Arab territories since
1967and the persistentdenial of the legitimate rights of the
Arab Palestinian people.
104. Secondly, the current circumstances in which the
Council is meeting, in particular the increase in acts of
terrorism on the one hand and of legitimate resistanceon
the other, reaffirm the seriousnessof the absenceof a comprehensive, just peace. They call for prompt action to
achieve such a peace.

109. The ‘Palestinian people’s call for freedom and its
wish for self-determination in a just and lasting peace, in
the formulation and guaranteeingof which that people will
participate, has been expressed on various occasions
through its legitimate leadership, the PLO. The Palestinian
people has declared categorically and clearly its commitment to the distinct specialrelationship that links it to the
Jordanian people. It has called for the translation of that
relationship into a positive political reality-the development and consolidation of joint Palestinian-Jordanian
action. We in Jordan have welcomed it asan expressionof
our national approach and our awarenessthat that joint
action strengthens the hopes of our people languishing
under the yoke of occupation to be free and to rid themselvesof that occupation.

105. Thirdly, the continuation of a state of no war, no
peace might seembeneficial to some, with the tension and
instability it entails, but in fact the continuation of such a
state is the cause of the terrorism and violence in the
region. It is also the cause of the continued resistanceto
the occupiers.
106. Fourthly, the experience of the past four decades
has proved that the time factor is not working in anybody’s favour. Those who believe that time works in their
favour and against the other party are wrong, becausein
the absence of justice, the continuation of war and the
countless causesof violence have made time a critical factor, pouring salt on the wounds, while consolidating rejection and extremism. Experience has taught us that time
can either run against the interests of all if it is used to
strengthen the tendency to aggressionand expansion, or be
in the interests of all if it is used properly through the
adoption of flexibility and moderation.

110. Consistent with all I have mentioned, as an expression of the true desire for peace and recognition of its
importance by both Jordan and the PLO, and on the basis
of our commitment to the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people, in particular their right to selfdetermination, Jordan and the PLO jointly formulated the
Palestinian-Jordanian accord of 11 February 1985. That
accord is an expression of reality and the historical relationship between the Palestinian and the Jordanian peoples. It also constitutes an appropriate mechanism’for fulfilment of the Arab aspirations to peaceexpressedin resolutions adopted at Fez in 1982. It proceeds from the
principles and the spirit of those resolutions and affirms.
the wish of the Palestinian people to achieve selfdetermination while maintaining the relations of unity and
the national bonds dear to the hearts of all Arabs.

107. On the basis of those fundamental facts, Jordan
has worked sincerely and consistently to reach a comprehensive, just and lasting political solution which
would end the state of no war, no peace, with all the
extremism, terrorism and violence it entails. That has
been Jordan’s approach since the very beginning, for it
10

111. The accord takes into consideration the realities of
the Arab and regional situation from a serious and objective perspective. It also deals with the way in which the
major Powers and the international community would participate in the achievement of peace. Thus the accord takes
into account the need to convene an international conference in which peace negotiationk between the interested
parties would take place.

115. That was affirmed by King Husseinin his statement
before the General Assembly on 27 September last, when
he said:
“A rare, historic opportunity now lies before the
United Nations, an opportunity for a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. This opportunity
should not be missed,as has been the casewith many
previous ones. Without your efforts and support, I am
afraid that the budding promise of peace will wither
before it has had the chance to grow. Let us marshal
our resourcesin the cause of peace. Let us make our
concern for the future the only constraint in our calculations. Faith in peace is the cornerstone of the United
Nations, just as the United Nations isthe cornerstone of
peace, which is itself the basis of all progress and
prosperity.“3

112. The Palestinian-Jordanian
accord calls for the convening of an international conference to be attended by all
parties concerned in addition to the permanent members
of the Security Council. Invitations to such a conference
would be dispatched by the Secretary-Genera1
of the
United Nations. The accord states that such a conference
would be an appropriate framework
for achievement of
the desired comprehensive settlement. I need not recall
here that that formula is not a new one. But it is the best
we have found; it is an applicable, appropriate method of
facilitating the peace process. In recalling the positions of
the parties concerned, we find they have all supported the
convening of such a conference at one stage or another; in
turn, they have called on the Security Council and the
United Nations to achieve that end. In this regard I should
like to point out that political arrangements have been
made previously in this context, following the October war
of 1973. The call of Jordan and the PLO, as the parties
most immediately concerned, for the convening of such a
conference is justified politically and morally. We believe
the convening of that conference would enhance the possibilities of international &tente, in addition to being the
optimum way to achieve peace in the Middle East-peace,
which is the most important goal for all of us. We do not
believe that the convening of that conference would strengthen the negotiating position of one party at the expense of
the other party. Furthermore, we believe the conference
would be practical and useful, not a rostrum for polemics
and the making of statements.

116. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel
wishesto speak in exerciseof the right of reply. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
117. Mr. BEIN (Israel): I should like to begin by conveying to the representativesa statement issuedtoday by my
country’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, which expresses
satisfaction and appreciation for the resolute action of the
United States in intercepting the aircraft carrying the four
PLF [Palestine Liberation Front] terrorists responsiblefor
the despicableact of piracy against the Achille Law-o. This
courageous American act directed against Palestinian
international terrorism representsan essentialsteptowards
the eradication of global terrorism.
!18. From the vantage-point of the gallery, where my
delegation has chosento sit, we have for the past two days
listened to a debate that borders on the absurd and acts to
degrade the Council which insulting the intelligence of
most of its members.

113. Proceeding from that, we conceive the importance
of our joint political movement with the PLO as being
embodied in the Palestinian-Jordanian accord signed on
11 February 1985 at Amman. Any Palestinian-Jordanian
accord cannot fail to malie a positive contribution to peace
and stability. It has been an Arab demand as well as an
international one. It has enjoyed international and Arab
support. Here we should like to place on record our thanks
to all those who have welcomed the accord, whether inside
this Council or outside it. We hope it will be similarly
supported by all, becauseit is in fact a sincereand serious
effort on our part.

119. We all know the truth. None of the representatives
sitting around this table is that na’ive or ignorant. We have
witnesseda processionof speakersclaiming to addressthe
situation in the Middle East. Yet with the exception of the
representative of Israel, none of the speakersdirected their
attention to the many conflicts that are consuming the
Middle East, as we speak.
120. I shall not repeat the list of inter-Arab conflicts
which are raging throughout the Middle East and spilling
over into the continents of Africa and Asia. As everyone
here knows those conflicts have been exported through
PLO terrorism to the continent of Europe as well.

114. Finally I should like to affirm that if the current
events in our region prove anything it is the importance of
rapid movement towards peace. It is essentialto achieve
peace, and we believe it is possible to do so through an
international conference and on the basis of the
Palestinian-Jordanian accord. Therefore we expect and
urge the parties concerned to adopt more positive and
flexible positions in order to enhance the possibility of
peace.

121. Instead, we have listened to speechesthat would
lead one to believe that the whole Middle East is confined
to the small area that comprises the State of Israel. This
barrage of anti-Israeli propaganda only serves to deflect
the Council’s attention from the real issue:PLO terrorism
and the danger it poses to world security.
I1

122. The international community is still suffering from
the most recent act of PLO terror. The murder of Mr.
Klinghoffer-may
his soul rest in peace-wil not go away.
The attempts made by representatives to divert the Council’s attention away from this heinous crime will not
succeed.

128. The world must never condone such flagrant jies.
Yesterday in this very chamber we heard one representative imply that Mr. Klinghoffer-may
his soul rest in
peace-was not killed, that perhaps he had died of natural
causes. How dare he continue this charge? How dare you
continue this charade?

123. Yasser Arafat once again is trying to transform his
crime into a personal victory. By now everyone here
knows that this terrorist act was perpetrated by the Abu
Abbas faction of the PLO, with full prior knowledge and
approval of Arafat himself. Yet, Arafat continues to deny
any complicity whatsoever. This is the usual well-known
pattern, and the world is not so foolish as to believe those
lies. I want to bring out some of the most recent examples
of this pattern of PLO lies.

129. At the same time that the PLO has been disavowing
any responsibility for those terrorist acts, it has been issuing statements all along that boast of its intentions to
increase this kind of terrorist acts. On 15 May 1985, in a
broadcast from Baghdad the Voice of Palestine said: ‘Seaborne action will continue no matter what the losses.” And
again in June 1985, in a broadcast from Sana’a, the Voice
of Palestine repeated the threat by saying: “Attacks from
the sea will continue.”

124. Lie number one. When the Israeli Air Force on 1
October bombed the PLO headquarters and facilities in
Tunisia, Arafat declared-and we heard this lie here again,
just now-that United States Armed Forces had participated in the operation. The fact: The United States not
only had had no part in the operation, but had no knowledge of it until the American Ambassador had been
informed of it after the raid had been completed.

130. On the one hand, we see the PLO committing itself
to terror and murder of innocent civilians and, on the
other, denying any responsibility. This is truly a farce.
However, there remains a central truth, that the victims of
Arafat’s lethal game are innocent people everywhere. The
countries of the free world must unite and combine their
efforts to ensure that the PLO’s reign of terror is brought
to an end.

125. Lie number two. When Jerusalem city bus No. 18
was exploded by Fatah terrorists on 6 December 1983,
killing 4 persons and injuring 46, all of them civilians,
many of them women and children, Arafat said that the
blown-up vehicle had been an army bus. The fact: If that
city bus in Arafat’s lexicon was an army bus, then apparently the PLO cannot distinguish between women or children and soldiers, between brightly coloured city buses and
army transport vehicles.

131. Israel has repeatedly called upon all countries in the
Middle East to negotiate a peace agreement. To date, only
one such agreement has been concluded. We again call
upon our neighbours-all
our neighbour countries-to
follow the model provided by Camp David: direct negotiations without preconditions. That is the only way to
proceed.
132. We fervently hope that reason will prevail and peace
will come to our region of the world.

126. Lie number three. When an organization calling
itself “Black September*’ committed outrageous murderous terrorist acts in 1972, blowing up planes in Jordan and
murdering the Israeli athletes in the Olympiad of Munich,
Arafat at first disclaimed any connection with or knowledge of the group. The fact: Later it was revealed that
Black September was a code name for Arafat’s own Fatah.

133. We look forward to the time when the Security
Council will be the scene of co-operation and constructive
diplomacy instead of wasting the time of the representatives with futile declarations.
The meeting rose qt 6.10 p.m.

127. Lie number four. Arafat denied all connection with
the seizure of the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Khartoum, in
March 1973, and the murder of the United States Ambassador, the United States Charge d’Affaires and the Belgian
Charge d’Affaires. The fact: It turned out that the crime
had been perpetrated by the Black September faction of
the PLO and that the order to kill the diplomats had been
telephoned to the terrorists personally by Yasser Arafat.

NOTES
I’ United
Nations,
Treuty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
t Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session
Meetings,
6th meeting.
paras. 195 and 196.
3 Ibid., 12th meeting.
para. 44.

12

Plenary

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNDZ
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous 21: Nations Unies,
Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
ICAIC IIoJIYaTrb

H3m
oPrAHH3ALDDi
0F%E&HHEHHb1x
HALDiH
06xa.VfIiHeRHblx Hausm MOXCHO K)lIHTb B KHH)KHbIX
Mara3UHaX
H~eHTCTBaXBOBCeXpaftOHaX~K.HaBOAHTCcnp~Eu
06 H3AilHHRXE
B~~MKHliXCROM
Mara%itie mm nnmnre uo anpecy: Opramisamix 06aenmiemibxx Harm& Cexnun no
rtponaxce a3m~siii,
HbdiopK
EJIA EeHeBa.
ti3AtWiSl

opElHH3i3UHH

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas est&n en venta en libretfas y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o G&bra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

90-61439-March

1995-1925
