TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

2 DECEMBER

197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

1604)

. . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . a. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

Adoption

of the agenda

and statement

by the President

. . .

1

. . . .. . .. . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
faj Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/10396);
Cb) Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/ 10229 and Add. 1 and 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

S/PV.1604

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FOURTH

Held in New York on Thursday, 2 December
Rvsident:

Mr. I. TAYLOR-KAMARA

(Sierra Leone),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l604)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rho.
desia:
(al Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10396);
@/ Fourth report of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253
(1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
and statement by the President

MEETING
1971, at 10.30 a.m.

with relief that he has now been discharged from hospital
and we all wish him further improvement in his health. I
shall crave members’ indulgence to defer to a more
appropriate occasion further comments about this international peace-making and peace-keeping officer and to pay a
tribute to him.
4. In the circumstances I would request that members give
to me the usual co-operation and support which they so
kindly and so willingly gave to my predecessor, Ambassador
Kulaga of Poland. In this connexion may I venture to pay a
deserving tribute to this out-going President for the most
able, tactful and experiencedmanner in which he chaired
the Council for the month of November? The very good
pace set by AmbassadorKuyaga, especially in holding
consultations of considerablelength, will, if followed or
emulated, make possiblethe achievementof considerable
successduring my tenure of office. This wisestep of his has
made me realize that it is not holding very many meetings
of the Security Council that matters. What matters mostis
the considerableconsultationswith colleaguesand all those
interested on certain issueswhich are to be debated. On
behalf of my delegationand my country I extend sincere
and happy greetings to all distinguishedcolleaguesin this
Council, Perhaps my distinguishedcolleaguebn my right,
Ambassador Kuyaga,may wish to say a few words in reply.

1I The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the usual practice of the Council I, as President, would wish on behalf of
the Council to pay a tribute to Ambassador KuYaga of
Poland, President of the Council for the month of
November.

5. Mr. KLJI/AGA (Poland) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, very briefly but alsomost cordially I wish to
thank you for the very generous words-indeed too
generous I would say-which you have been so good as to
address to me in your statement. I should also like to
extend to you my most cordial congratulationsand good
wishes on your accessionto the presidency for the month
of December.

2. It is with the greatest delight that I assume the very
high office of President of the Security Council for the
month of December 1971. This is indeed a most memorable
occasion for my delegation and my Government. It is
probably also a most memorable occasion for representatives here because on or about the 31st day of December
1971 I am expected not only to relinquish this high office
of President of the Security Council but also to retire for a
time from this august body in which my country has had
the honour of being represented for practically two years,
since January 1970.

6. The relations which I have had the honour and pleasure
to maintain and strengthenwith you, your qualitiesand the
experience you have already demonstrated during your
participation in the work of the Council make us certain
that you will fulfil honourably the very difficult tasks
which await you this month. I wish to assureyou of the
complete co-operation of my delegation and mine in
particular.

3. It is on the last day of this last month of the current
year also that a man with an able and most distinguished
international career is expected to retire after ten years of
excellent service with the United Nations. I refer to no
other than our revered Secretary-General, U Thant. We note

Adoption of the agenda

7. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof Poland,
AmbassadorKuyaga,for all he said.

The agendawasadopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/10396);
(6) Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/
10229 and Add.1 and 2)”

12. My delegationmade somepreliminary cornme& on
the first day of the debateon the proposalfor a settlement
of the Rhodesian problem. Those comments and the
comments which were made at the subsequentmeeting
were an immediate reaction to some of the details of the
proposal, and our intention was to obtain clarification of
the implicationsof someof its terms. A careful study of the
proposalhas strengthenedour original impressionthat its
provisionsarenot in accordancewith stated United Nations
goals with regard to Southern Rhodesia,goalswhich are
basedon a regard for the imprescriptible rights of all the
peopleof that Territory. For example, the GeneralAssentbly, by its resolution2022 (XX), warned the administering
Power that it would oppose any declaration of independence not based on universal adult suffrage wi&hout
distinction asto race or colour. The Security Council in its
resolution 217 (1965) of November 1965 called upon the
Government of the United Kingdom to take immediate
measures
in order to allow the people of Southern Rhodesia
to determine their own future consistent with the objee
tives of resolution 1514 (XV). I am surethat no one would
questionthe fact that the Security Council envisagedall the
peopleof SouthernRhodesiadeterminingthe future of the
country and not a situation where the minority continued
to prescribe the future for the majority. In these resolutions, which have been subsequently reaffirmed and
strengthened,it is clear that the United Nations main
concern was that independencefor Southern Rhodesiabe
equated with equal rights for all its people. The Organization of African Unity gave this same concern practical
expressionwith its support for the slogan:no independence
without majority rule.

8. The PRESIDENT: At the 1602nd and 1603rd meetings
of the Council the representatives of Saudi Arabia, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Kenya were invited at
their request to participate without the right to vote in the
debate of the Council on this item. I wish now also to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Zambia and Ghana requesting that they
be invited to participate without the right to vote in the
discussion of the present item. If I hear no objection I shall
invite the representatives of Zambia and Ghana to participate in the debate.
9. In view of the limited number of seats available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Saudi Arabia,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya, Zambia and
Ghana to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber on the understanding that they will be
invited to the Council table whenever called upon to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. S. A. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. J. OderoJowi (Kenya), Mr. V. Mwaanga (Zambia) and
Mr. R. Akwei (Ghana) took the places reserved for them in
the Council chamber.

13. The United Nations has soughtall along to makethe
principles of the Charter, of the Universal Declarationof
HumanRights and of the Declaration on independence
for
colonial peoplesrelevant to the Rhodesianquestion. It did
so not only because the political and human rights
establishedin thesedeclarationsexist, but alsobecausethe
political leadersof the African majority have claimedthese
rights on behalf of their people. The United Nationshasa
specialresponsibility for the protection of the rights of the
people of Southern Rhodesia,both in so far asit concerns
itself with the rights of peoplesin accordancewith General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and becauseof the fact
that the United Kingdom requestedthe Security Council
-and indeed the whole international community-to associateitself with measuresaimedat bringingabout ajust
and equitablesolution to the problemsof that Territory.

10. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Before speaking on the substance of the question before this Council, I should like to
associate my delegation with the well-deserved remarks
which you, Mr. President, have addressed to our distinguished colleague, Mr. Kulaga of Poland, for the outstanding work which he performed during his term as President
of this Council last month. To you, sir, I would say that it
is a privilege to have this meeting of the Council led by an
African of great standing and considerable eminence. I
know that with your great qualities you will be able to steer
the deliberations of the Council along a calm and constructive course.
11. My delegation has taken the floor on two occasions in
the course of this debate and has directed a series of
questions to the representative of the United Kingdom in
the hope that it would have been possible to obtain further
information on the nature and ramifications of the proposals which have been agreed upon between his Government
and the Smith rigime in Rhodesia.1 My remarks today will
be confined to a study of these proposals. But naturally,
when the information I have sought is forthcoming, my
delegation will reserve its right to speak again on the
matter.

14. My point in emphasizingUnited Nations goals and
United Nations involvement in the question of Southern
Rhodesiais that neither the goalsnor the specialrole of the
Organization with regard to Southern Rhodesiahave been
taken into account in the negotiations that precededthe
proposals and in the proposals themselves.The United
Nations should be closely associatedwith any initiative
aimed at a settlement of the Southern Rhodesianproblenl
and it should be involved not after but before the fact.
Instead, it is beingaskedto accept a biIatera1proposalthat
has been worked out not with all the peopleof Rhodesia,
but with the rebel rigime. Furthermore, it is a ProPosd
drawn up within the existing framework of minority
privilege and racial discrimination against the African

--II_

* Subscquontly issued as OfficiaI Records of the Security Council,
Twenty-sixth
Year, Special Supplement
Nos. 2 and, Corrgendutn
and 2A.
1 See Official
Records
of the Security
Council,
Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement
for October,
November
and December
1971,

doaumcnt S/10405.

2

population-a
Nations.

framework

long ago rejected by the United

the administeringPower, the United Kingdom, refusedto
accord any legal recognition. A sincere approach to the
search for justice in Southern Rhodesiademandsthat that
constitution be disregarded,as it has in the pas’tby the
international community and by the United Kingdom
Government, and a completely new one promulgated for
the Territory on the basisof equality. It will not do to offer
a glossedover version of a constitution whose expressed
purpose was to remove the possibility of majority rule and
which is phrasedin terms, and construed in a spirit, that
attack the dignity and humanity of the African people of
Rhodesia.

15. It has been pointed out by the United Kingdom
representative that the terms of the agreement have been
presented as proposals and that the British Government
intends to ascertain whether these are acceptable tb the
people of Rhodesia as a whole. But my delegation finds it
hard to understand how any British Government could be
prepared to offer these terms in the first place. They are
much more retrograde than those of the 1961 Constitution
which was rejected by Conservative and Labour Governments alike on the grounds that it did not go far enough in
according and guaranteeing the rights of the African
majority; and they do not even conform with the five
points of principle that the British Government has always
maintained it would use as the minimum basis for a
settlement. In the proposals, progress towards majority rule
is impeded at every stage; the guarantees against retrogressive amendment of the Constitution are inadequate, completely unsatisfactory; improvement in the political status
of the African population, far from being immediate,
depends on an incalculable factor-the economic progress
of Rhodesia’s African majority; there are no firm guarantees of progress towards the ending of racial discrimination,
and the modalities for determining the acceptability of the
proposalsby the people of Rhodesiaasa whole leavemuch
to bedesired.

20. The continuation of the racist assumptionsof the
1969 constitution is evident in the fact that in the proposal
the voter rolls are to remain segregated.There is to be an
African higher roll and a European roll, even though the
qualifications of voters on both rolls will be the same.In
other words, the arrangemententrenchesthe separationand
segregation of the races and, by preventing cross-voting,
deniesthe intrinsic value of a man regardlessof his race or
colour.

21. It must be noted too that many objectionable provisions of the constitution have not been modified. For
example, while the proposalgoesinto great detail about the
provisions for voters, it doesnot mention the candidates,
whose qualifications have not been changed. As the
constitution stands, anyone who has been detained or
16. The proposalswe are asked to approve are basedon
restricted for six months cannot be a candidate for five
the premise that it is for the white minority to hold back or
years after his restriction or detention. The proposal
to accord, in any manner or at whatever speedit chooses, published by the United Kingdom Government makesno
the political and social rights of the black majority. The
mention of that very important aspect. What are its
black people are not going to be asked “What do you
implications? It meansthat the majority of the African
want? “, they are going to be told “This is what you may leaders who have worked for justice for the African people
would be eliminatedfrom poiitical life at a time when their
get if you are good and do asyou are told”.
experience and dedicationare most needed.
17. What is it that the African majority may get? Let US
examine what it is they are being offered underthe various 22. The stepsby which majority rule can be implemented
headings. Under the heading “the test of acceptability” we
must lie at the heart of any attempt at a settlementof the
are told that the British Government will appoint a
Rhodesian question. However, when one considersthe
length and the difficulties of the obstaclecoursethat the
commission to ascertain directly from all sectionsof the
black majority must run before it can even hope to gain
population whether or not the proposalsare acceptable.I
political parity with the white minority, and the additional
have already pointed out that any determinationof the
difficulties that could postponemajority rule indefinitely,
wishes of the people of Southern Rhodesiashouldbe held
not only in co-operation with the United Nationsbut also one must indeed question the sincerity of those who
on the basis of United Nations objectives for Southern framed or approved the proposal. In the context of the
white minority’s clearly stated prejudices and its open
Rhodesia.
detennination to retain its privileged status,it is easyto see
18. We are also told under this heading that radio and why Ian Smith wasableto say,with regardto the proposal,
television time will be made availableto political parties that no European need harbour any anxiety about the
represented in the Houseof Assembly.I askedthe question security of his future in Rhodesia.
on the opening day of the debate-and I repeat it
23. These proposalshave generated considerabledebate
now-would the two main African political parties, now
proscribed becausethey had the temerity to askfor equal among responsiblesectionsof the British public and alsoin
the British Parliament.On this particular matter of parity, I
rights for black and white peoplein SouthernRhodesia,be
shouId like to read a most pertinent letter which appeared
given the opportunity to take part in normal political
activities? Without their participation the test of accepta- in The Times of London of 29 November 1971,written by
ProfessorRoland Oliver. He says:
bility will hardly be a valid one.
“In order to achieve parity of representation, the
African community has to find roughly the samenumber
of qualified electors as the European community, and
essentially the test is to be four years of secondary

19. Under the heading “the Constitution” one is immediately struck by the fact that the new proposalsare to be set
up within the framework of the blatantly racist Constitution of 1969, which not only the United Nationsbut also
3

/’

!

education. But whereas four years of secondary education
is provided compulsorily for every white child in Rho.,
desia, it is provided for perhaps 2 per cent of black
children, and the number of black children reaching this
level in the future remains squarely in the control of the
Rhodesian Government with its overwhelming majority
of white electors, who will not be inclined to hurry things
along towards their own political extinction.

United Nations to see how well it compares with the
standards the United Nations has established for itself over
the past twenty-five years.
27. In this connexion it is pertinent for my delegation to
draw the Council’s attention to another interesting letter
which appeard in The Times of London of 29 November,
this time from Mr. Anthony Lester. He concentrates eti
tirely on the bill of rights. The letter states:

“Furthermore it is to be noted that the stages in the
increase of African representation are to take place, not
when the African community succeeds in producing
certain absolute numbers of qualified electors, but when
it achieves certain percentages of the number of European
electors. This means that every additional European
immigrant attracted to Rhodesia will raise the number of
qualified Africans necessary to secure an increase in
African representation. When one recalls how far the
policies of past Rhodesian governments have been designed to promote white immigration, this must be a
cause for great concern.”

“The proposed ‘Declaration of Rights’ defines the
fundamental rights and freedoms which the citizens of
Phodesia will enjoy during the next 50 or 60 years of
white minority rule. In the absence of normal democratic
safeguards, such a Declaration will be the only guarantee
protecting the individual against tyrannical government.
Unfortunately, careful scrutiny of its fine print reveals
the document as a grotesque parody of a Bill of Rights,
which will actually reinforce and legitimize racial disc&n
ination and arbitrary action by the State.
“The Declaration will not affect any existing law
-except for the benefits of earlier constitutional guarantees. It enables the Government to make exceptions to
the rights and freedoms guaranteed, on a racially discrim
inatory basis; to prohibit racially mixed marriages; or
indeed to impose any racial disability which is ‘reasonably
justifiable . . . in order to secure the protection in an
equitable manner as between the various descriptions of
persons affected of their respective interests’.

That is the text of a letter written by Professor Roland
Oliver, pinpointing some of the problems and some of the
obstacles which are involved in the so-called concept of
parity rule.
24. Another unacceptable premise of the 1969 Constitution that has not been changed is the premise that Africans
cm achieve political rights only to the extent that they are
able to improve their economic status. The principle on
which this arrangement is based was rejected by the British
people for themselves as far back as 1867. Why should the
United Kingdom Government consider it suitable for
Africans in 1971? Furthermore, the economic standard
already achieved by the Europeans is used as the yardstick
for African achievement. In view of the history of
exploitation of black people by Europeans in Rhodesia and
in view of the written and unwritten laws that have
restricted the African in any attempt to better himself, it
must be concluded that, even with the help of the projected
development programmes to increase the job and educational opportunities for Africans, hope for the kind of
economic parity on which political parity must be based
lies in the very far distant future.

“It allows a minister to authorize preventive detention
for up to six weeks without judicial review. It permits
police searches, seizures, and arrests without a warrant. It
exempts inhuman or degrading punishment or treatalent
if it is authorized by an existing law. It fails to provide for
legal aid for persons accused of serious crimes punishable
by death or long imprisonment. In the guise of ‘protection’, it contemplates sweeping encroachments on free.
dom of expression, conscience, assembly and association
(including participation in trade unions).
“The British Government apparently regards it as an
important safeguard that the Declaration will be enforceable in the Rhodesian High Court. But not even the
United States Supreme Court could breathe life and
meaning into this shabby, shoddy, document, and, in one
sense worst of all, for the first time in our history, a
British Government has expressly approved a constitutional framework for a racist police State .”

25. If the proposal falls far short of what is just politically,
it is completely lacking in provisions to ensure social
justice. The independent commission that would examine
the question of racial discrimination
can only make
recommendations with the vague goal of making progress
towards ending racial discrimination. The infamous Land
Tenure Act remains as a giant step towards the South
African model of rtpartheid, and we are apparently expected to consider that acceptable progress has been made
because the racist rt5gime has given verbal assurances that
the land division will not become more inequitable than it
is at present.

28. I trust that in due course the Council will formally
take up my proposal that this draft bill of rights be
examined carefully by our legal experts.
29. I think I have said enough to indicate that both in its
basic assumptions and in its details, the Lord Home-Sidk
proposals are irrelevant to the aspirations of the African
majority of Southern Rhodesia. But even if one were to
accept its provisions as providing a valid improvement of
the situation in Southern Rhodesia, the nagging question
still remains-the question I asked on the opening day of
this debate-who is to guarantee the guarantees which the
British Government claims are built into the ProPoSed

26. At the last meeting of this Council my delegation
suggested, and now it wishes to make a formal proposal,
that the bill of rights that has been drawn up by the British
Foreign Secretary and the Smith regime be examined
carefully, assessed and evaluated by the legal experts of the
4

society, my delegation has been frank in its criticism of the
agreement reached between the British Government and the
Smith regime. We have placed on record our view of the
nature and llnplications of the agreement and we believe
that it is a view which accords with the facts. But because
of our deep concern for the preservation of the civil
liberties and fundamental rights of our brother Africans in’
Southern Rhodesia, and because of our desire to be as
constructive as possible in the pursuit of justice for the
people of that Territory, we should like to add what might
be described as a second line of approach. Since this
agreement has already been signed and since the United
Kingdom, by the vote in the British Parliament last night,
has accepted it and intends at all costs to set in motion the
machinery for a test of acceptability, my delegation would
like to make some concrete proposals which, if accepted,
would at least ensure that the consultation with all the
people of Rhodesia is a valid one, that the black majority of
Rhodesia would have a fair opportunity of understanding
the issues involved in this set of proposals, their ramifications and the alternatives open to them.

constitution? What if an even more racist and reactionary
Government than the Smith regime came into power after
Britain had granted Rhodesia what it might term legal
independence and relieved itself of all responsibility for the
affairs of the Territory? What redress would the African
people then have if it were to be subjected once more to a
full-fledged system of white political and social privilege?
30. A similar question was raised in the British Parliament
by a representative of the opposition Party. He said there
was no safeguard against legislation to annul the agreement
outside the Rhodesian Parliament itself; the agreement
imposed no obligation from any external authority, British
Commonwealth or international, on the Rhodesian Government to carry out whatever promises it made.
31. My delegation has considered very carefully the
proposition set forth by the representative of the United
Kingdom that, although these proposals are limited in scope
and in guarantees of good faith, it represents a foothold
from which progress can be made and that it is an
acceptable alternative to the steadily deteriorating situation
in Southern Rhodesia. We believe it is more practical to
view
the agreement as an opportunity for the white
minority to shake off the last vestige of Britain’s control
and to develop Southern Rhodesia on the South African
model.

35. My country at one stage in its history-in fact, not
more than 15 years ago-underwent a process of trying to
inform a largely illiterate population of the ramifications
involved in constitutional proposals affecting it. We were
also involved in an exercise of trying to explain to a largely
illiterate people the intricate system of electoral laws. It
was our experience-as it has been the experience of every
African State represented in this Organization-that unless
you allow an adequate period of education on this
fundamental aspect of political life the results may be
disastrous.

32. We feel strongly that the present proposal does not
represent sufficient grounds for Britain to claim that it has
done all that it is possible for it to do in the fulfilment of
its responsibilities towards the people of Southern Rhodesia. Simply put, to grant independence to Southern
Rhodesia while a white racist minority regime still holds all
the reins of power is to betray the African majority. Far
from preventing a downward slide into a South-Africantype society, such action by Britain could finally give the
powerful and obviously determined minority the opportunity to entrench its power, its privileges and its prejudices.

36. My delegation proposes:
[a) That the period during which the test of acceptability
is carried out should be of sufficient length SO that the
African population of Southern Rhodesia, which is largely
illiterate and which is to be found largely in the rural areas,
can have the benefit of a thorough educational campaign on
the crucial issues involved in the set of proposals;

33. It is legitimate to ask what is the alternative to the
course of action we have been asked to approve. My
delegation would propose to the United Kingdom that it
continue to act in concert with the world community and
OII the basis of the objectives set and established by this
Organization; that it continue to apply the force of moral,
political and economic pressure which, as has been admitted, has had a considerable effect on the rebel regime. The
economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations must
not only be continued but intensified. The fact that the
sanctions have not been as effective as they should have
been and that they are presently threatened further by a
course of action proposed by a Member State of this
Organization is another question to which we must give our
most determined and sincere effort. But the central fact
that must determine United Nations actions and, I would
hope, Britain’s actions towards Rhodesia is this: that the
only sure guarantee d justice for the African majority of
Southern Rhodesia lies in their being able to control their
destiny through the full exercise of all their political and
human rights.

(b) That during this critical period the apparatus of the
police State-which everyone knows exists in Southern
Rhodesia-should be removed, that responsibility for the
maintenance of public order should be taken over by the
United Kingdom Government, and that there should be
normal political activity, including political activity by the
African political parties which are currently proscribed. It is
not sufficient to send a team of expatriates to try to
explain an intricate constitution-a constitution that is
much more complicated than any kind of constitution
which an African country has had to contend withbelieving that by such a process the team will be able to
enlighten the black majority on many of the complex issues
involved. The people have to be approached through their
political leaders;

(c) That for this purpose it is necessary for the United
Kingdom to arrange for the release of all political prisoners,
detainees and restrictees in Southern Rhodesia, so that they
can take part in this important exercise;

34. Because the stake involved is the future of 5 million
people threatened by the cancer of an apartheid-type
5

(d) That the initial contribution of the United Kinadom
Government to African education, which it has announced,
should be applied immediately and specifically to adult
education on the political issues involved in the agreement,
and that it be augmented by international contributions
and by the co-operation of African States, Recognized
African political leaders should also be allowed to make full
use of the mass communications media and the audio-visual
aids. Such facilities are essential in any programme of adult
education in a largely illiterate population, particularly on a
matter as crucial as this one where the poltical destiny of.a
people is at stake.
(e) That the United Kingdom Government should arrange for a team of observers from the United Nations to
observe preparations for the conduct of the test of
acceptability and also to observe its actual exercise.
37. These are some of the basic conditions for allowing a
fair expression of public opinion on the proposals in
Southern Rhodesia. Anything short of those conditions
would be regarded by my delegation as being contrary to all
the goals that the United Nations has established for itself
and would certainly be contrary to the interests of the
African people.
38. This Council should therefore approach this matter in
two ways: it must first express itself on the proposals and
see whether they fall short of or conform ta the expectations which we have set ourselves. We should decide firmly
and speedily so that our position can be conveyed to the
people of Southern Rhodesia. They must be informed
where the United Nations stands on this matter. Secondly,
it is the hope of my delegation that countries neighbouring
Southern Rhodesia will allow their radio facilities to be
used so that programmes of public enlightenment on the
issues involved in the set of proposals are adequately carried
to the Southern Rhodesian people.

46. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation front
French): Mr. President,I shouldjust like to point out that
my delegationwasnot consulted.
47. Mr. CARASALES (Argentina) (interpretatim from
Spanish):Mr. President,my delegation,too, wishesto point
out that it wasnot consultedon this subject.

It wassodecided.
49. The representative of Somalia, AmbassadorFarah,
rightly posedsomequestionson SouthernRhodesia,which
the representative of the United Kingdom said were
pertinent and very useful. I think that one of those
questionsrelated to the bill of rights. Is the representative
of the United Kingdom now in a position to answer the
questions?

of the Syrian Arab

41. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): During the very
brilliant statement we have just heard from the Ambassador
of Somalia, to the best of my understanding he made a
formal proposal to the effect that the draft bill of rights
concluded between the United Kingdom and the Government of the minority rigime of Southern Rhodesia be
examined by the Legal Department of the United Nations
in the light of the resolutions adopted both by the General
Assembly and the Security Council in order to ascertain
whether there is any conformity between this draft bill of
rights and the relevant United Nations resolutions.

50. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I am in a
position to answera certain number of the questions;some
of them, of course, will have been taken care of in the
White Paper that hasnow been circulated.2 I am ready to
answerthe onesthat I can answer-perhapsat the end of
this morning’s meeting. I am at the disposition of the
Security Council. If the Council.wishesme to give the
answersat the end of this morning’smeetingI shallbe gIsd
to do so, or perhapsit shouldbe left to the beginningoftlte
next meeting as I see that there are a number of
representativeswho wishto speakat this meeting.

42. If I am correct in understanding that that is a formal
proposal, my delegation would like to support it.

51. The PRESIDENT: If there is any time avaiIahle
towards the closeof the meeting this morning,we may ask

43. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the usual
practice of the Council, may I’, as President, interlrene at
this stage and make the following short statement?

2 Ibid.
6

-

4.5. Tire President then promised to hold consultations
with his colleagues.These consultations have continued;
they have almost reached a conclusion. Up to this date I
have heardno objection to the proposal.If, asI have stated,
there is no objection to this suggestionto invite Mr. Joshua
Nkomo and Mr. Sithole, asindicated, the suggestionmay be
regardedasadopted.

48. The PRESIDENT: There appears to be some rnis.
understandingon whether consultationswere held with the
two delegationswhose representativeshave just spoken.
Before assumingthe presidency I had the impressionthat
those two delegationshad been consulted.I do not know
whether it would be out of placefor them to state herein a
few words whether they have any objection to this
suggestion.I apologizefor the misunderstanding,but I had
the impressionthat they had beenconsulted.Unlessthey
have any objection, the suggestionwill be adopted.

39. The PRESIDENT: I should like to thank the representative of Somalia for the kind words he said about me.
40. I call on the representative
Republic on a point of order.

44. In the course of the Security Council meeting on
Thursday, 25 November 1971 [1602nd meeting], An&assador Malik of the Soviet Union made a proposal, which
was supported by AmbassadorFarah of Somalia, that the
leaders of the two main political parties in SoutIwn
Rhodesia,Mr. Joshua Nkomo, who I think is now under
detention, and Mr. Sithole, who I think is now servinga
sentenceof imprisonment,be invited to appear before the
Council to state their views on the proposalson Southern
Rhodesia.

the representative of the United Kingdom to answer the
questions. If there is no time, then we may hear him at a
later date.

Asian countries, in their state of economic development,
need capital and technological know-how which the Western European and other States, regardless of their ideologies, are currently providing.

52. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): The Council has now formally
adopted a request that an invitation be extended to the two
leaders of ZANU and ZAPU respectively. I was wondering
whether that request should be communicated to the
administering Power.

62. Sixthly, I established the fact that sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia were ineffective, as had been evident in
the past and also in recent times,
63. Seventhly, I mentioned that economics shape the
policies of States, big and small, and for that reason it is
most unlikely that the Western European and other Powers
will cause their economies to suffer, even slightly, by any
action against Southern Rhodesia if they have no interest in
doing so.

53. The PRESIDENT:
That will be done. Once decisions
are taken here, I understand that action is taken on them
by the Secretariat.
54. The next name on the list of speakers is that of the
representative of Saudi Arabia, whom I now invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

64. Eighthly-last but not least-I brought to the attention
of the Council that the Ian Smith-Douglas-Home plan,
even if ratified by both parties, would be tantamount to
“tea and sympathy” which would neither nourish the
bodies of millions of blacks in South Africa nor nurture
their socio-political aspirations.

55. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): It augurs well that the
second part of my intervention on the question of Southern
Rhodesia is being made when such an illustrious son of
Africa as you, Mr. President, is in the Chair. I thank you
and members of the Council for graciously allowing me to
address myself again to this difficult problem with which
the Council has been confronted for several years.

65. Hence, unless the Security Council resorted to creative
measures, it would be stymied and the result would be
perhaps another resolution with no teeth in it; oratory and
rhetoric interspersed with harsh terms such as “condemn”
and “deplore” would wind up the item under consideration. It is like an alarm clock. Yes, it would wind up the
item under considerationlike an alarm clock to which a
somnolent United Nations would not respond, as has
happened to other difficult problemsof which the Council
has been seized. Theseare the facts. This is what would
happen: another resolutionwith no teeth in it. Then, those
who had submitted the resolution, if it was adopted by
consensusor by majority, wou!:! perhapsnot congratulate
one another. but feel content Lhatthey had accomplished
something. Ink on paper, that is what it would amount to.
Can anyone challengethis statement of mine after witnessingwhat the Council has been doing for the last 25
years?

56. In my last statement I promised that I would unfold
to the Council a set of points which might constitute the
basis for a not-too-distant
solution to the question of
Southern Rhodesia. But before doing so, I should like to
recapitulate what I already made clear at the last meeting of
the Council.
57. First, I established the fact that the whites in Southern
Rhodesia are obsessed by a genuine fear that if they pursue
a liberal policy in so far as the indigenous people of that
country are concerned, the whites will lose their identity by
being submerged in the ocean of a black majority. That
there is such a fear is incontestable.
58. Secondly, I mentioned that it was not expected that
the five major Powers, individually or collectively, would
use force to overthrow the Ian Smith regime in order to
establish majority rule in Southern Rhodesia; nor, as far as I
can see, would any one of those major Powers want a
confrontation
in case there were serious difference amongst
them in the Council.

66, Is there any way out of such an impasse? I submit
that nothing is insurmountablein inter-human relations
except death. Thank God for death. Only death is
insurmountable-and we should considerourselvesalive in
the United Nations lest the peopleof the world completely
lose confidence and faith in us, as they did when the
Leagueof Nationsfounderedin the late 30s.

59. Thirdly, I mentioned that no British Government,
whether
Labour or Conservative, would survive if it
adopted force or stringent measures, short of war, against
the Ian Smith regime for the simple reason that the people
of the United Kingdom consider the whites of Southern
Rhodesia to be their kith and kin.

67. Before I submit for the Council’sconsiderationthe set
of points to which I have referred, allow me to commenton
what may be consideredthe highlights of the statement
delivered here by my illustrious friend the representativeof
the United Kingdom, Sir Colin Crowe. I would not wish to
be in his shoesfor I have known him to be an honest
gentleman, like most of us, I presume, in the United
Nations. Suffice it to say that a largesegmentof the British
pressconsideredthe Ian Smith-Douglas-Homeagreementa
c‘sell-out”. This is what the headline of the Observersaid:
“A sell-out”. To put it mildly, this so-called solution
reminds the Africans and Asiansof an Arabic proverb. It is
like trying to cure a patient’s high fever with poultices of
watermelon rind. In the age of antibiotics you want, by

60. Fourthly,
I stated that the African States are in no
position to wage war against the Ian Smith regime because
Southern Rhodesia is armed to the teeth and I am afraid
that they are no match for it.
61. Fifthly, I said that it was most unlikely that African
States-and
Asian States for that matter-would
seriously
boycott
those Western European and other countries
trading with Southern Rhodesia because the African and
7

that agreement, to treat the patient’s high fever by putting
on his skin a watermelon poultice.

“Juridical” independence, “legal” independence-what is
this term, my good friend Sir Colin Crewe, “legal”
independence? Independence is independence, de facto.
We do not want de jure independence. Do you want to
bring in the lawyers? Lawyers thrive on the interpretation
of terms-legal or illegal, or what have you.

68. The British proposals for a settlement in Rhodesia are
not too dissimilar to those used by successive British
Governments whenever they were faced with what they
considered to be insurmountable difficulties. It is the
approach of “muddling through”, hoping, rightly or wrongly, that time will be on their side. I remember that in 1939
I asked a prominent English friend of mine how it was that
the United Kingdom expected to win the war when Hitler’s
Germany was armed to the teeth and Britain was unprepared. He replied, “You know, we British will muddle
through and time will always be on our side.” Had it not
been that Hitler got entangled with the Soviet Union and
those now in the United Nations were rail-roaded into the
Second World War, the policy of muddling through would
never have worked out and time would not have been on
the side of the United Kingdom.

73. I shall read out the first principle: “the principle and
intention of unimpeded progress to majority rule, already
enshrined in the 1961 Constitution, would have to be
maintained and guaranteed.” The 1961 Constitution ir
antiquated. It is from the time before the deluge. They are
referring to 1961 in 1971, in the age of computers and in
the age of efforts that are snowballing.
74. The second principle is the following: “There would
alsohave to be guaranteesagainstretrogressiveamendment
of the Constitution.” Who is the guarantor? When they say
“there would also have to be guarantees”, who is rhe
guarantor? This is like thosewatermelonpoulticesin trying
to treat the fever of the patient. Will the Councilguarantee
it? The members of the Council will bicker among
themselvesasto how those guaranteesshould be spelt out
and who would implement them in the face of any
infringement on the part of any Southern Rhodesian
Government.Let usface the facts,

69. But in spite of all that happened in the Second World
War, was time really on the side of the British? I wonder.
Was the United Kingdom able to preserve the British
Empire? It vanished in the aftermath of the war and it
crumbled, to the chagrin of such war leaders as Churchill,
Duff Cooper, Anthony Eden and other colonialists. “We
shall muddle through with this agreement”, and Ian Smith
thinks that time will be on his side. But will time be on his
side and on the side of the British? That is the question.

75. The third principle is the following: “There would
have to be immediateimprovementin the political statusof
the African population.” Weall want that, but who is going
to pave the way for it? Supposesomebody-to put it
mildly-more conservative succeedsIan Smith. Then this
would be like ink on paper. They are acting Iike the’
proverbial scrapof paper, the remarkwhich they attributed
at one time to the Kaiser: ‘mat is that treaty? A scrapof
paper.” In fairness,I must say that I have learnedfrom my
researchthat the Kaisernever saidthat. They attributed it
to the Kaiserfor propagandareasonsduring the First World
War. It washis Chancellorwho saidit. How do wehave the
assurancethat this agreementwould not be viewed asa
scrap of paper by the Governmentsthat will succeedIan
Smith’s@ime?

70. I should now like to comment on the proposals for a
settlement in Rhodesia as presented by our illustrious
friend Sir Colin Crowe. The United Kingdom issued a very,
very useful and instructive document to the press, and I
have based my comments on it. It states that Southern
Rhodesia is not an ordinary colonial situation. Well, of
course it is now an ordinary colonial situation. Therefore, it
needs extraordinary measures. Do they consider this agreement between Ian Smith and Sir Alec Douglas-Home less
than ordinary or extraordinary? We shall find out. They
say that force could not be used. I have said that for them
and I do not need to elaborate. Violent actions are
incalculable-that is true. Nobody can contest that point.
:

76. The fourth principle is the following: “there would
have to be progresstowards endingracial discrimination.”
That is a “big order”, asthey say in the United States.
“There would have to be . . .“. Who is goingto enforceit?
That is the question.I am questioningthe validity of these
principles in the light of what is happeningevery day ia
Africa.

71. Then the British speak of the effect of sanctions. Sir
Colin Crowe said: “I feel sure that this has played its part in
making the Rhodesian authorities more willing to negotiate
on a satisfactory basis” [1602nd meeting, para. lo]. I beg
to disagree with him. It was not the sanctions that made the
white Rhodesians more willing to negotiate; it was rather
the other way around. The United Kingdom was under
constant criticism from African and other States. That is
why it sent a very, very capable intermediary, Lord
Goodman, to negotiate secretly with Ian Smith. If I were
the British, I would have done the same thing. After all, the
British were subjected to a continuing bairage of criticism. It
was not the sanctions but the pressures to which the Ian
Smith regime and the British Government had been
subjected that caused them to negotiate.

77. The fifth principle is the following: “The British
Government would need to be satisfied that any basis
proposedfor independencewasacceptableto the peopleof
Rhodesiaas a whole.” That remindsme of Joha, who is a
character in Arabic folklore-a sort of jokester. Some
people sawJoha running towards the palace.They asked
him, “Why are you running towards the palace?” He said,
“I am going to ask for the hand of the King’s daughterin
marriage.” They smiled;Joha wasup to one of his pranks.
After half an hour he emergedfrom the palacebeaming
and happy. They said, “Joha, what happened?” He said,
“Everything is all right. The offer was 50 per cent
accepted.” They asked, “By whom?” He answered,“I

72. Then Sir Colin Crowe tabulated the five principles
which are pre.conditions for the granting of legal independence, That is the first time that I have heard of “legal”
independence, as though independence could be qualified.
8

accepted, but she has not accepted yet.” And this fifth
principle is a Joha joke.

of the “Rhodesian people”. Who are the Rhodesian
people? To the Rhodesian people as a whole?

78. I repeat, the fifth principle says, “The British Government would need to be satisfied that any basis proposed for
independence was acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as a
whole”. What does that “as a whole” mean? Suppose the
whites should say “We reject it”; it would be like the King’s
daughter who rejected the proposal of Joha. That is what it
amounts to. That is why I began by saying that I would not
want to be in the shoes of Sir Colin Crowe. He is really an
honest man who is familiar with my region and I have the
greatest respect for him, but, after all, he is under the
instructions of Sir Alec Douglas-Home or Lord Home-his
alias when he sits in the House of Lords.

84. I must not forget to bring to the attention of my good
friend Sir Colin Crowe the matter of the British Government having appointed a Commission headed by Lord
Pearce. We are not impressed by lords any niore. They sent
many lords to our area in Palestine. There were several
lords. There was Lord Peel and the Peel Commission. There
were so many Commissions during the Mandate, between
1920 and 1938 or 1939-the last time they sent a
Commission.
They also sent a Royal Commission to
investigate the question of Jerusalem. There were reports,
and I remember how we pored over those reports and
studied them, reams of them. And what happened?
Nothing.

79. Then we come to the test of acceptability, which was
handled very ably by my colleague Ambassador Abby
Farah. So why repeat it? There is one thing, really, which
does not worry me, but rather confuses me. It is that there
are such terms used in that memorandum of Sir Colin
Crowe as “the African higher roll” and the “African higher
rolls”-as if the word “higher” would impress us. What is
the “African roll”? Is it a Rolls-Royce? Rolls-Royce is
bankrupt. The “existing African roll”-not “role”, but roll.
It rolls, it has wheels. And the wheels turn to give more and
more authority to the Africans. That is what I believe it
means. I do not know; I am confused by it.
80. Then, with reference to the development programme,
it is mentioned here that “the British Government will
provide up to 2.5 million per year for a period of 10
years , . .“, I feel sorry for the British taxpayer, even if he
were to pay only g500,OOO per year. If it were to be
applied to any programme like this, it would be like
sweetening the sea with a pound of sugar. Have members
heard of that proverb about sweetening the sea with a
pound of sugar? What will that $5 million do? Nothing.
81. Development should come from within after independence. Of course, the blacks are developing, but the whites
are highly developed. They should provide the money, and
not the poor British taxpayers. There are one million
tmemployed in the United Kingdom, victims of the vestiges
of colonialism. And this is a vestige of colonialism.
82. I am defending here taxpayers everywhere, including
those of the United Kingdom, because they are human
beings like us. They sweat and then they are exploited in
order that, in their name, $5 million should be contributed
to a regime that is tyrannical, that is lording it over the
Africans. And that is parliamentary government, a democratic Government. In the name of democracy, a lot of
tyranny is perpetrated on the individual.
83. Then we come to the conclusion of the British
memorandum. I am glad that Sir Colin Crowe mentions
here that there is an “increasingly unhealthy trend”[ibid.,
para. 531. But then I also laud him for his honesty, on
behalf of his Government, in saying: “. . . we do not
pretend to have the last word. We leave that to the
Rhodesian people themselves” [ibid/. Here there is no
distinction between the blacks and whites when he speaks

85. The United Kingdom threw the question of Palestine
into the lap of the United Nations after it had lost the war
economically. The British were victorious, so to speak,
militarily, but they could not afford to be the Mandatory
Power. They were supposed to prepare the people of
Palestine for independence-94 per cent of them.
86. And in the light of what happened during the time of
the Mandate, between 1920 and 1939, how can we have
confidence in Commissions such as that headed by Lord
Peel? They used to be called “Royal Commissions”. I do
not know why they do not call them “Royal Commissions”
any more.
87. This is in effect what the British Government is doing:
throwing the question into the lap of the United Nations
and the Security Council to boot. And here, gentlemen,
you sit helplessly trying to elaborate draft resolutions,
thinking that they will be the panacea for that question of
Southern Rhodesia.
88. It w8s rumoured and whispered that this agreement
involves from 25 to 30 years. Who is young here? I will not
be here to witness what will happen in 30 years, but I can
envision what will happen-not in 25 years, but in 10 years,
knowing from statistics how the black population of
Rhodesia is on the increase. The birth rate of the whites is
meagre compared to that of the blacks. The poor blacks,
they have nothing to do except copulate and procreate
because all the work is in the hands of the whites. They
have a very low standard of living and it is’s good thing that
they are copulating and procreating. I thought there were
only 4 million but now I am told there are 5 million and
there is an increase of 250,000 per year.
89. How does the British Government want to deal with.
this situation? How does it expect with that meagre
%5 million to try to improve the economic and social
situation of the blacks? They will probably have to
indoctrinate the blacks and give them birth control pills.
And how do we know that, with modern medical progress,
they will not put something in the water that the blacks
drink-beware,
I am a chemist and I know something about
these things-to make them sterile? But you cannot do
these things. By sheer force of numbers, before the end of
the century we will have possibly 15 million blacks in
Rhodesia-l 2 to 15 million statistically speaking. And how

will you apply those five principles of the Ian SmithDouglas-Home agreement in the light of that?
90. I come now to my three principal sets of points. I have
been leaving them to the end-as when Antony referred to
Caesar’s will, and people wanted to know the contents of
the will. I shall now state what I meant by those sets of
points which I mentioned in my last statement and to
which I referred earlier in my intervention today.
91. There should be an open approach to the question.
Will Sir Alec Douglas-Home, who represents the British
Government as Foreign Secretary, and Mr. Ian Smith agree
to suggestions that are made by some Members of the
United Nations? First, I presume-1 have made inquiries
about this-that the blacks live in quarters of their own.
You see, the whites are afraid that if they lived amongst
them some charcoal would come off and change their
complexions. So they have to live in quarters of their own
all over Southern Rhodesia. I do not know, but no doubt
there are some whites-very small numbers-interspersed.
Will Mr. Ian Smith accept cantonments and municipal rule
by the blacks? After all, every municipality has its own
political structure regarding social and economic affairs. It
is more or less autonomous, within the framework of the
State of course. If I were black myself I would not want to
mix with the whites but I would want the right to organize
in that peculiar situation on an autonomous municipal basis
or, if you prefer the word “cantonment”, on that basis.
Because how can the blacks develop their political institutions if they are left under the pressure of Ian Smith and his
white Government. That is my first point, which also I pose
as a question.
92. My good friend Sir Colin Crowe referred to education,
and rightly so, because education is the key to the door of
knowledge and there is a lot of ignorance that prevails
amongst the blacks because they have been kept down as
serfs in order to be exploited by the white minority. At one
time in the Fourth Committee-that
was several years
ago-I put my good friends the Americans on the spat when
I said “Why don’t you send a U-2 plane? ” That was at the
time when such a plane had been sent over the Soviet
Union, in the days of the late President Eisenhower, and
then the Americans had to exchange Mr. Powers for
Mr. Abel. I used to see him on the street. I never knew that
he was a spy. You all spy on one another, you big Powers. I
said in the Fourth Committee that a U-2 plane or some U-2
planes should be sent over the skies of Rhodesia and that
they should carry educational leaflets for the blacks-and
for the whites; I pity the whites there, they are so bigoted,
so self-righteous and holier-than-thou about human rights
and about what is going on in this world. At one time I
thought that parachutists should come from above and put
Ian Smith and his Government in straitjackets and bring
them to an asylum or to a psychiatrist who could treat
them for having such antiquated ideas in the twentieth
century. But they will not do that. Now I will settle for
something less and perhaps better.

only amongst the blacks but also amongst the whites, Will
Ian Smith accept the presence of the United Nations for the
enlightenment of black and white alike in Southern
Rhodesia? UNESCO is one of the most successful agencies
of the United Nations. Will he dare? Or is it all sugar pills
which we are supposed to swallow? That is the second
point.
94. The third point is novel in its application there but it
is not new. Is the United Nations prepared to establish a
fund and then, in case everything fails with Mr. Ian Smith
and his regime, to use that fund for putting into action
sQafl&-civil
disobedience as applied by the late
Mahatma Gandhi, which I witnessed in my earlier days?
The whites are using the blacks, and they are more
developed economically and socially, and in knowledge.
What if everything fails in accelerating those institutions
that are a precondition
for the independence of the
blacks? What if al1 our efforts, all our appeals, all our
cajoling and all our persuasion fail? This is the plan: we
will preach civil disobedience so that the blacks who work
for the whites will boycott the whites. They will strike, and
then the whites will be brought to their knees. The whole
thing is economic.
95. “Now,” you say, ‘&who will feed those workers who
live from hand to mouth? ” From the funds that we will
provide, just as unions provide the funds for their strikers.
What is wrong with that? In the late twenties I was in
England. They were very worried about civil disobedience.
Gandhi was not the initiator. It had begun with one of the
kings in India in the third or fourth century. Asoka was a
mighty king who was saddened by the human suffering and
tribulation caused by war and conflict. This satyagraha is an
Asian way of doing things against tyranny, not by force of
arms but by civil disobedience and boycott.
96. Why does not the United Kingdom initiate such a fund
and contribute to it in order to make Ian Smith and his
regime think clearly and be more sagacious politically?
They do not say it but this is what it amounts to: they are
afraid that they will be submerged in the African ocean, the
black ocean.
97. Those were the three points that I wanted to make.
They may be radical; they may set precedents. But
something should be done. We should not content ourselves
with passing resolutions that will signify nothing.
98. Thank you, Mr. President, for being so patient with
me; and I also thank the members of the Council for having
graciously listened to me.
99. The PRESIDENT: I think this would be a mcst
convenient time to adjourn since we shall meet again this
afternoon. So we will adjourn until 3.30 p.m., if there is no
objection.
100. I call on the representative of Poland on a Point of
order.

93. My second point is this: under the educational
development programme of the whites UNESCO would go
there and propagate the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the International Covenants on Human Bights, not

101. Mr. KUIJAGA (Poland): I have no objection to uur
meeting this afternoon. I just want to raise a very brief
10

L

I
I

point of order in connexion with the question of the
invitation of Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole. I wish to say that
after the 1602nd meeting, when we undertook consultations with members of the Council, we did approach all
members of the Council. I made an interim report at the
1603rd meeting of the Security Council on these consultations. I did not wish to interrupt the proceedings this
morning, but I thought it would be appropriate for me to
raisethat point of order.

104. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation fium
I apologize for speaking on this question of
consultations. I would like to express my regret to the
representative of Poland if some misunderstanding has
arisen in this connexion. Some representations may have
been made which one interlocutor regarded as a consultation, which another might not have regarded as a consultation. It is a question of the level and of the form, about
which it can sometimes happen, of course, that certain
difficulties of interpretation arise. In all good faith and
sincerity, we considered that we had not been consulted.
But I recognize that there may be some doubt in the mind
of my interlocutor.
French):

102. If I may, Mr. President, I would like to thank the
representative of Somalia for the very kind words he
addressedto me today.

105. In any event, Mr. President, my understanding from
your prelnninary statement was that you were announcing
that these consultations had not been quite concluded. For
all I know, the last country to be consulted was Sierra
Leone, perhaps. Be that as it may, we placed ourselves in
the category of those who perhaps still had something to
say,but I do not believe that this will in any case create any
difficulty.

103. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Poland will
remember that I cautiously stated that I had the impression
that all representatives had been consulted. And I further
stated that up to this morning, up to the time of my
speaking, no representative had objected, and that if there
wasno objection, the suggestion would be adopted. So if
anybody had wanted to object, he could have done so.
Anyway, I thank the two representatives in question for
their co-operation.

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

11

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publicoticnr
des
ddpositaires
du monde
Nations
Unier,
Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los public&ones

in United

Nations,

New York

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Safer Section,

DES NATIONS

Nations
Unies
sent en venfe
entier.
Informer-vow
oupri?r
des venter,
New York ou Gen&e.

PUBLICACIONES
de

Jar Nociones

Price:

$U.S.

eslcin

en vento

a IU librero

o diriiase

1.00 (or equivalent

throughout
New York

UNIES

dons
les librairies
et ler crgencer
de votre libroirie
ou odresrez-vous
b:

DE LAS NACfONES
Unidas

en lodas
porter del mundo. Consulte
Venlar,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

UNIDAS
en

in other

librerior
a: Nociones

currencies)

y casas
Unidos,

distribuidoros
Seccibn

de

82195~September

1973-2,050
