General Assembly-Forty-second Session

IX. RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE 1

CONTENTS
Da,e of

Resolution
No.

Title

42/22

Declaration on the Enhancement of the Effectiveness of the Principie of Refraining
from the Threat or Use of Force in lnternational Relations (A/42/766) ...... .
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law (A/42/833) .................. .
Progressive development ofthe principies and norms ofinternational law relating to the
new international economic order (A/42/834) ..................... .
Peaceful settlement of disputes between States (A/42/815) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind (A/42/835)
Report ofthe United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its twentieth session (A/42/836) ................................. .
Draft Convention on International Bilis of Exchange and International Promissory
Notes (A/42/836) ........................................... .
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives (A/42/769) .......... .
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries (A/42/816)
Report of the International Law Commission (A/42/837) ................. .
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization (A/42/817) ............... .
Development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States (A/42/818)
Measures to preven! international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human
lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms and study of the underlying causes of those
forms ofterrorism and acts ofviolence which líe in misery, frustration, grievance and
despair and which cause sorne people to sacrifice human lives, including their own, in
an attempt to effect radical changes:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Convening, under the auspices of the United Nations, of an international conference to define terrorism and to differentiate it from the struggle of peoples for
national liberation (A/42/832) .............................. .
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country (A/42/878)
Resolution A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. ........ .
Resolution B .............................................. .

42/148
42/149
42/150
42/151
42/152
42/153
42/154
42/155
42/156
42/157
42/158
42/159

42/210

42/22.

Declaration on the Enhancement of the Effectiveness of the Principie of Refraining from the
Threat or Use of Force in International Relations

ltem

adoption

Page

131

18 November 1987

287

127

7 December 1987

289

128
129

291
291

130

7 December 1987
7 December 1987
7 December 1987

292

132

7 December 1987

292

132

7 December 1987

294

133

7 December 1987

294

134
135

7 December 1987
7 December 1987

296
296

137

138

7 December 1987
7 December 1987

297
298

126

7 December 1987

299

136

17 December 1987
17 December 1987

301
301

136

Considering that the Special Committee has completed a
draft Declaration on the Enhancement ofthe Effectiveness
of the Principie of Refraining from the Threat or Use of
Force in International Relations and has decided to submit it to the General Assembly for consideration and
adoption,
Convinced ofthe need for the effective universal application of the principie of refraining from the threat or use of
force in international reiations and of the importance of
the role of the United Nations in this regard,
Convinced a/so that the adoption of the Declaration on
the Enhancement of the Effectiveness of the Principie of
Refraining from the Threat or Use of Force in lnternational Relations should contribute to the improvement of
international relations,
1. Approves the Declaration on the Enhancement of
the Effectiveness of the Principie of Refraining from the
Threat or Use of Force in International Relations, the text
of which is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee
on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principie of Non-

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/76 of 3 December 1986, in
which it decided that the Speciai Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principie of Non-Use of Force
in Internationai Relations should complete a draft declaration on the enhancement of the effectiveness of the principie, including, as appropriate, recommendations on the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and submit its final report
containing a draft declaration to the General Assembly at
its forty-second session,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee,
which met in New York from 9 to 27 March 1987,2
1 For the decisions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee, see

sect. X.B.8.

2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Se.ssion,
Supplement No. 41 (A/42/41).

287

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

288

Use ofForce in International Relations for completing its
work by elaborating the Declaration;
3. Recommends that every effort should be made so
that the Declaration becomes generally known.
73rd plenary meeting
18 November 1987

Recalling that States are under an obligation not to intervene directly
or indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the interna] or externa! affairs
of any other State,
Reaffirmingthe duty ofStates to refrain in their international relations
from military, political, economic or any other form of coercion aimed
against the political independence or territorial integrity of any State,
Reaffirming the principie of equal rights and self-determination of
peoples enshrined in the Charter,

ANNEX

Reaffirming that Sta tes shall ful fil in good faith ali their obligations under international law,

Declaration on the Enhancement of the Effectiveness of the Principie of
Refraining from the Threat or Use of Force in International Relations

Aware of the urgent need to enhance the effectiveness of the principie
that States shall refrain from the threat or use of force in arder to contribute to the establishment of lasting peace and security for ali States,

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling the principie that States shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations,
Recalling that this principie is enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4, of
• the Charter of the U nited N ations and has been reaffirmed in a n umber of
international instruments,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principies of lnternational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the U nited Nations, 3 the Defü,ition of Aggression 4 and the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
lnternational Disputes, 5
''
Reaffirming the obligation to maintain international peace and
security in conformity with the purposes of the United Nations,
Expressing deep concern at the continued existence of situations of conflict and tension and the impact of the persistence of violations of the
principie ofrefraining from the threat or use offorce on the maintenance
of international peace and security, as well as at the" loss of human life
and material damage in the countries affected, the development of which
may thereby be set back,
Desiring to remove the risk of new armed conflicts between States by
promoting a change in the international climate from confrontation to
peaceful relations and co-operation and by taking other appropriate measures to strengthen international peace and security,
Convinced that, in the present world situation, in which nuclear weapons exist, there is no reasonable alternative to peaceful relations among
States,
Ful/y aware that the question of general and complete disarmament is
of the utmost importance and that peace, security, fundamental freedoms and economic and social development are indivisible,
Noting with concern the pernicious impact of terrorism on international relations,
Stressing the need for ali Sta tes to desist from any forcible action aimed
at depriving peoples of their right to self-determination, freedom and independence,
Reaffirming the obligation of States to settle their international disputes by peaceful means,
Conscious of the importance of strengthening the United Nations system of collective security,
Bearing in mind the universal significance of human rights and fundamental freedoms as essential factors for international peace and security,
Convinced that States have a common interest in promoting a stable
and equitable world economic environment as an essential basis for
world peace and that, to that end, they should strengthen international
co-operation for development and work towards a new international economic arder,
Reaffirming the commitment of States to the basic principie of the sovereign equality of States,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of every State to choose its political,
economic, and social and cultural systems without interference in any
form by another State,

l.

Solemnly declares that:

l. Every State has the duty to refrain in its international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent
with the purposes ofthe United Nations. Such a threat or use offorce
constitutes a violation of international law and of the Charter of the
United Nations and entails international responsibility.

2. The principie of refraining from the threat or use of force in international relations is universal in character and is binding, regardless
of each State's political, economic, social or cultural system or relations of alliance.
3. No consideration of whatever nature may be invoked to warrant resorting to the threat or use offorce in violation ofthe Charter.
4. States have the duty not to urge, encourage or assist other States
to resort to the threat or use of force in violation of the Charter.
5. By virtue ofthe principie of equal rights and self-determination
enshrined in the Charter, ali peoples have the right freely to determine,
without externa! interference, their political status and to pursue their
economic, social and cultural development, and every State has the
duty to respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter.
6. States shall fulfil their obligations under international law to refrain from organizing, instigating, or assisting or participating in
paramilitary, terrorist or subversive acts, including acts of mercenaries, in other States, or acquiescing in organized activities within their
territory directed towards the commission of such acts.
7. States have the duty to abstain from armed intervention and ali
other forms of interference or attempted threats against the personality ofthe State or against its political, economic and cultural elements.
8. No Sta te may use or encourage the use of economic, political or
any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain
from it the subordination of the exercise of its sr,·ereign rights and to
secure from it advantages of any kind.
9. In accordance with the purposes and principies of the United
Nations, States have the duty to refrain from propaganda for wars of
aggression.
10. Neither acquisition ofterritory resulting from the threat or use
offorce nor any occupation ofterritory resulting from the threat or use
of force in contravention of international law will be recognized as legal acquisition or occupation.
11. A treaty is void if its conclusion has been procured by the
threat or use offorce in violation ofthe principies ofinternational Jaw
embodied in the Charter.
12. ln conformity with the Charter and in accordance with the
relevan! paragraphs of the Declaration on Principies of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, States shall fulfil
in good faith ali their international obligations.
13. States have the inherent right of individual or collective selfdefence if an armed attack occurs, as set forth in the Charter.

11
3 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
4 Resolution 3314 (XXIX), annex.
5 Resolution 37 /10, annex.

14. States shall make every effort to build their international relations on the basis of mutual understanding, trust, respect and cooperation in ali areas.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

15. States should also promote bilateral and regional co-operation
as one of the importan! means to enhance the effectiveness of the principie of refraining from the threat or use of force in intemational relations.
16. States shall abide by their commitment to the principie of
peaceful settlement of disputes, which is inseparable from the principie
of refraining from the threat or use of force in their international relations.
17. States parties to international disputes shall settle their disputes exclusively by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered. Por this
purpose they shall utilize such means as negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlemenl, resort lo regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own choice,
including good offices.
18. States shall take effective measures which, by their scope and
by their nature, constitute steps towards the ultimate achievemenl of
general and complete disarmament under stricl and effective intemational control.
19. States should take effective measures in order to preven! the
danger of any armed confticts, including those in which nuclear weapons could be used, to prevent an arms race in outer space and to halt
and reverse it on Earth, to lower the leve! of military confrontation and
to enhance global stability.
20. States should co-operate in order to undertake active efforts
aimed at ensuring the relaxation of international tensions, the consolidation of the international legal order and the respect of the system of
international security established by the Charter of the United Nations.
21. States should establish appropriate confidence-building measures aimed at preventing and reducing tensions and at creating a better climate among them.
22. States reaffirm that the respect for effective exercise of ali human rights and fundamental freedoms and protection thereof are essential factors for international peace and security, as well as for justice and the development offriendly relations and co-operation among
ali States. Consequently, they should promote and encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, in ter alia, by strictly complying with their international obligations and considering, as appropriate, becoming parties to the principal international instruments in this
field.
23. States shall co-operate at the bilateral, regional and international levels in order to:
(a)

Prevent and combat international terrorism;

Contribute actively to the elimination ofthe causes underlying
intemational terrorism.
(b)

24. States shall endeavour to take concrete measures and promote
favourable conditions in the intemational economic environment in
order to achieve intemational peace, security and justice; they will
take into account the interest of ali in the narrowing of the differences
in the levels of economic development, and in particular the interest of
developing countries throughout the world.

289

accept and carry out the decisions of the Council in accordance with
the Charter.
28. States should give the Security Coundl every possible type of
assistance in ali actions taken by it for the just settlement of crisis situations and regional confticts. They should strengthen the par! the Council can play in preventing disputes and situations the continuation of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance ofinternational peace and
security. They should facilitate the task of the Council in reviewing
situations of potential danger for international peace and security al as
early a stage as possible.
29. The fact-finding capacity ofthe Security Council should be enhanced ,m an ad hoc basis in accordance with the Charter.
30. States should give full effect to the importan! role conferred by
the Charter on the General Assembly in the area ofpeaceful settlement
of disputes and the maintenance of intemational peace and security.
31. States should encourage the Secretary-General to exercise
fully his functions with regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with the Charter, including those under Articles 98 and 99, and
fully co-operate with him in this respect.
32. States should take into consideration that legal disputes
should, as a general rule, be referred by the parties to the lntemational
Court of J ustice in accordance with the provisions of the Sta tute of the
Court asan important factor for strengthening the maintenance of international peace and security. The General Assembly and the
Security Council should consider making use of the provisions of the
Charter concerning the possibility of requesting the Court to give an
advisory opinion on any legal question.
33. States parties to regional arrangements or agencies should consider making greater use of such arrangements and agencies for dealing with such matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security as are appropriate, pursuant to Article 52 of the
Charter;
2. Declares that nothing in the presenl Declaration shall be construed as:
(a) Enlarging or diminishing in any way the scope of the provisions
of the Charter concerning cases in which the use of force is lawful;
(b) Prejudicing in any manner the relevan! provisions ofthe Charter
or the rights and duties of Member States or the scope of the functions
and powers of the United Nations organs under the Charter, in particular those relating to the threat or use of force;
3. Declares that nothing in the present Declaration could in any way
prejudice the right to self-determination, freedom and independence, as
derived from the Charter, of peoples forcibly deprived of that right and
referred to in the Declaration on Principies of lnternational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter ofthe United Nations, particularly peoples under
colonial and racist régimes or other forms of alien domination; nor the
right of these peoples to struggle to that end and to seek and receive support, in accordance with the principies of the Charter and in conformity
with the above-mentioned Declaration;
4. Confirms that, in the event of a conftict between the obligations of
Members of the United Nations under the Charter and their obligations
under any other international agreement, their obligations under the
Charter will prevail in accordance with Article 103 of the Charter.

III
25. The competent United Nations organs should make full use of
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations in the field of the
maintenance of international peace and security with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the principie of refraining from the threat
or use of force in international relations.
26. States should co-operate fully with the organs of the United
Nations in supporting their action relating to the maintenance of international peace and security and to the peaceful settlement of international disputes in accordance with the Charter. In particular, they
should enhance the role of the Security Council so that it can fully and
etfectively discharge its duties. In this regard, the permanent members
of the Council have a special responsibility under the Charter.
27. States should strive to enhance the effectiveness of the collective security system through the etfective implementation of the provisions of the Charter, particularly those relating to the special responsibilities of the Security Council in this regard. They should also fully
discharge their obligations to support United Nations peace-keeping
operations decided upon in accordance with the Charter. States shall

42/148.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law 6 and the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral and adopted by the Advisory Committee on the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in that report,
6 A/42/718.
