UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/30
3 July 1996
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3678th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 July 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council, in accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution
1037 (1995), has considered the report of the Secretary-General of
26 June 1996 (S/1996/472) submitted pursuant to this resolution on the
United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium (UNTAES).
"The Security Council notes that the implementation of the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(S/1995/951, annex), signed on 12 November 1995 (the Basic Agreement), is
proceeding according to the timetable established by this Agreement. In
particular it notes with appreciation that the demilitarization proceeded
smoothly and was completed on 20 June 1996. It expresses its satisfaction
at the cooperation that both parties have shown in this respect. It calls
upon both sides to refrain from any action that might raise tension and to
continue to cooperate closely with UNTAES on all aspects of the Basic
Agreement to maintain peace and security in the Region. It expresses its
readiness to consider favourably the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations military observers in UNTAES as recommended in the report.
"The Security Council expresses its satisfaction with the work already
achieved by UNTAES, in particular through its operational joint
implementation committees, for the re-establishment of normal conditions of
life for all the inhabitants of the Region. The Council welcomes the
efforts now in train to begin the return of displaced persons and refugees
to their homes in the Region. It notes that it is equally important that
persons who fled from their homes in Western Slavonia and elsewhere in
Croatia, in particular in the Krajina, should be permitted to return to
their homes of origin. The Council calls upon both parties to cooperate
fully with UNTAES in that respect.

96-16612 (E)

030796

/...

S/PRST/1996/30
English
Page 2

"The Security Council recalls the statement of its President of
22 May 1996 (S/PRST/1996/26). The Council regrets that the Government of
the Republic of Croatia has not yet taken steps to adopt a comprehensive
amnesty law concerning all persons who, either voluntarily or by coercion,
served in the civil administration, military or police forces of the local
Serb authorities in the former United Nations Protected Areas, with the
exception of those who committed war crimes as defined in international
law. The Council urges that this action should be taken as soon as
possible and calls on the Croatian Government to cooperate with UNTAES to
that end.
"The Security Council expresses its concern at the worsening economic
situation in the Region, particularly since the closure in April of the
Djeletovci oilfields, which constitute the Region’s most important economic
resource, and at the subsequent lack of revenue available to the local
administration to meet salaries and other operating costs of the Region.
The Council urges the Government of the Republic of Croatia to cooperate
closely with UNTAES to identify and provide funding for the local
administration and public services. It also underlines the importance of
economic development in stabilizing the Region.
"The Security Council expresses its support for the efforts of UNTAES
to establish and train a Transitional Police Force which will have the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of law and order, operating
under the authority of the Transitional Administrator and monitored by the
United Nations civilian police. The Council also supports the efforts of
UNTAES and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to facilitate
mine clearing for humanitarian purposes. It calls upon States and others
concerned urgently to contribute in support of such activities.
"The Security Council commends the Transitional Administrator and all
the personnel of UNTAES for the impressive results they have achieved so
far and expresses its full support for them.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
