III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

with a view to reaching early agreement on effective
measures for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
for their destruction;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, as well as to accede to or ratify the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,
and calls again for strict observance by all States of
the principles and objectives of those instruments;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents of the thirty-first session of the General
Assembly relating to chemical weapons and to chemical
means of warfare;
6. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations
to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/66.

Urgent need for cessation of nuclear and
thermonuclear tests and conclusion of a
treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the cessation of nuclear-weapon testing would be in the supreme interest
of mankind, both as a major step towards controlling
the development and proliferation of nuclear weapons
and to relieve the deep apprehension concerning the
harmful consequences of radio-active contamination for
the health of present and future generations,
Gravely concerned at the continuation of both atmospheric and underground nuclear-weapon testing
since the thirtieth session of the General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this subject, the
most recent being resolution 3466 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
Recalling the stated aim of the parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water17 and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons18 to seek to
achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of
nuclear weapons for all time,
Noting the information concerning agreements concluded by two nuclear-weapon States limiting the scope
of underground nuclear-weapon tests and making provision in this connexion for the control and supervision
of peaceful nuclear explosions including, in certain
cases, arrangements for on-site verification, 19
Considering that conditions are favourable for these
two nuclear-weapon States to step up their efforts to
reach agreement on the means of verifying a comprehensive test-ban agreement,
Taking note of that part of the report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament15 relating to
the question of a comprehensive test-ban treaty,
11 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.
1s Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
19 See A/31/125, annex.

480, No. 6964, p. 43.

33

l. Condemns all nuclear-weapon tests, in whatever
environment they may be conducted;
2. Declares its profound concern that substantive
negotiations towards a comprehensive test-ban agreement have not yet begun and re-emphasizes the urgency
of concluding a comprehensive and effective agreement;
3. Calls once again upon all nuclear-weapon States
to suspend the testing of nuclear weapons by agreement, subject to review after a specified period, as an
interim step towards the conclusion of a formal and
comprehensive test-ban agreement;
4. Emphasizes in this regard the particular responsibility of the nuclear-weapon States which are parties
to international agreements in which they have declared
their intention to achieve at the earliest possible date
the cessation of the nuclear-arms race;
5. Calls upon all States not yet parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water to adhere to it forthwith;
6. Urges the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to continue to give the highest priority to the
conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban agreement and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session on the progress achieved;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Urgent need
for cessation of nuclear and thermonuclear tests and
conclusion of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/67.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution 3467 (XXX) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3079
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3258 (XXIX) of
9 December 1974 and 3467 (XXX) of 11 December
1975, eight of which contain appeals to the nuclearweapon States regarding the signature and ratification
of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco),20
Reiterating its firm conviction that, for the maximum effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol,
Recalling with particular satisfaction that the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America, France and the People's
20 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.

34

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Republic of China are already parties to Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco),
1. Again urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco);
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session an item entitled "Implementation of General Assembly resolution 31/67 concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/68.

Effective measures to implement the purposes and objectives of the Disarmament
Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it declared the decade of the
1970s the Disarmament Decade and envisaged a link
between the Disarmament Decade and the Second
United Nations Development Decade,
Deeply concerned that, despite the repeated requests
by the General Assembly for the implementation of
effective measures aimed at its cessation, the arms race,
particularly of nuclear armaments, has continued to
increase at an alarming speed, absorbing enormous material and human resources from the economic and
social development of all countries and constituting a
grave danger for world peace and security,
Considering that the ever spiralling arms race is not
compatible with the efforts aimed at promoting international peace and security as well as establishing a
new international economic order, as defined in the
Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order,
contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, and in the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, contained in its resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
Recalling its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it recognized that all States have a
deep interest in disarmament negotiations,
Convinced that the participation of all nuclear-weapon
States in the efforts to contain the nuclear-arms race and
to reduce and eliminate all armaments is indispensable
for a full measure of success in these efforts,
Conscious that, disarmament being a matter of grave
concern to all States, there is a pressing need for all
Governments and peoples to be informed about and
understand the situation prevailing in the field of the
arms race and disarmament, and that the United Nations
has a central role in this connexion in keeping with its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting the suggestion made by the Secretary-General
in the introduction to his report on the work of the
Organization that the General Assembly might discuss
various ways in which public concern about disarmament could be stimulated and channelled in constructive
ways, 21
21 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 1 A (A/31/1/ Add.l), sect. V.

Having received the report of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament, including, in particular,
the part dealing with its mid-term review of the Disarmament Decade with a view to reappraising its tasks
and duties in order to accelerate the pace of its efforts
to negotiate truly effective disarmament and arms limitation agreements, 22
l. Reaffirms the purposes and objectives of the
Disarmament Decade;
2. Deplores the meagre achievements of the Disarmament Decade in terms of truly effective disarmament
and arms limitation agreements, and the detrimental
effects on world peace and economy of the continuing
unproductive and wasteful arms race, particularly the
nuclear-arms race;
3. Calls again upon all States, as well as the organs
concerned with disarmament issues, to place at the
centre of their preoccupations the adoption of effective
measures for the cessation of the arms race, especially
in the nuclear field, and for the reduction of military
expenditures and to make sustained efforts with a view
to achieving progress towards general and complete
disarmament;
4. Calls upon Member States and the SecretaryGeneral to intensify their efforts in support of the link
between disarmament and development, envisaged in
General Assembly resolution 2602 E (XXIV) on the
Disarmament Decade, so as to promote disarmament
negotiations and to ensure that the human and material
resources freed by disarmament are used to promote
economic and social development, particularly in the
developing countries;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure a
proper co-ordination of disarmament and development
activities within the United Nations system of organizations and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to offer appropriate assistance and information to Member States that
may require them in pursuance of the purposes and
objectives of the Disarmament Decade;
7. Urges the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to adopt, during its 1977 session, a comprehensive programme dealing with all aspects of the
problem of the cessation of the arms race and general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2602 E (XXIV) proclaiming the
Disarmament Decade;
8. Calls upon non-governmental organizations and
international institutions and organizations to further
the goals of the Disarmament Decade;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Effective
measures to implement the purposes and objectives of
the Disarmament Decade".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/69.

Implementation of the Declaration on
the Denuclearization of Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 2033 (XX) of 3 December 1965, 3261 E
2 2 [bid.,

Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27), paras. 227-246.
