S/PV.8042

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8042

nd meeting
Monday, 11 September 2017, 6 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-28149 (E)
*1728149*

S/PV.8042

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 6.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Republic of Korea to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/769, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2375 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this meeting and allowing us
to take this vote.
The images from space of North-East Asia at night
show brightness and prosperity surrounding a dark,
lonely space that is North Korea. Those images are a
good illustration of where the North Korean regime is
today. It is alone. It is dark. And it is getting darker.
North Korea’s neighbours, its trading partners and
the entire international community are united against its
dangerous and illegal actions. Today’s resolution 2375
(2017) builds on what were already the deepest-cutting
2/13

11/09/2017

sanctions ever imposed on North Korea. We have
been down this road before. The Security Council has
expressed its condemnation and has imposed sanctions.
But today is different. We are acting in response to a
dangerous new development — North Korea’s test on
3 September of what it claims was a hydrogen bomb.
Today we are saying that the world will never accept
a nuclear-armed North Korea. And today the Security
Council is saying that if the North Korean regime does
not halt its nuclear programme, we will act to stop
it ourselves.
Over the years, we have learned many things about
the North Korean regime. We have learned that it does
not care about being a part of the community of decent,
law-abiding nations. It has violated every United
Nations resolution against it. We have learned that
the North Korean regime does not care about its own
people. It has denied them the most basic necessities in
order to finance its weapons programme. And we have
learned that half-measures against the regime have
not worked.
Previous efforts to bring North Korea to the
negotiating table have failed. It has repeatedly walked
back every commitment it has made. Today the
Security Council has acted in a different way. Today we
are attempting to take the future of the North Korean
nuclear programme out of the hands of its outlaw
regime. We are done trying to prod the regime to do the
right thing. We are now acting to stop it from having the
ability to continue to do the wrong thing. We are doing
that by hitting North Korea’s ability to fuel and fund
its weapons programme. Oil is the lifeblood of North
Korea’s effort to build and deliver a nuclear weapon.
Today’s resolution reduces the oil provided to North
Korea by almost 30 per cent, by cutting off more than
55 per cent of the supply of its gas, diesel and heavy
fuel oil. Furthermore, today’s resolution completely
bans supplies to North Korea of natural gas and other
oil by-products that could be used as substitutes for the
reduced petroleum. That will cut deep.
Moreover, a large portion of North Korea’s revenues
comes from exports — revenues that it uses to fund its
nuclear programme. Last month, we adopted resolution
2371 (2017), which bans its coal and iron exports.
Today’s resolution bans all of its textile exports. That
is an almost $800 million hit to its revenues. With these
new, stronger sanctions added to those adopted last
month, more than 90 per cent of North Korea’s publicly
reported exports are now fully banned. Moreover, the
17-28149

11/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resolution also puts an end to the regime’s ability to
make money from the 93,000 North Korean citizens it
sends to work overseas and whom it taxes heavily. This
ban will eventually starve the regime of an additional
$500 million or more in annual revenues. And beyond
the $1.3 billion in annual revenues that we will cut from
North Korea, new maritime authorities will help us
stop it from obtaining funds by using ships to smuggle
coal and other prohibited materials around the world.
Furthermore, the resolution prohibits all joint ventures
with the regime, resulting in a significant amount of
lost revenue. But more important, the regime can no
longer obtain the foreign investments, technology
and know-how that are critically needed for its
commercial industries.
Finally, today’s resolution imposes asset freezes on
the most crucial entities of the North Korean regime,
affecting both the military and the Government itself.
In short, these are by far the strongest measures ever
imposed on North Korea. They give us a much better
chance of halting the regime’s ability to fuel and finance
its nuclear and missile programmes. But we all know
that those steps will work only if all nations implement
them completely and aggressively.
Today’s resolution would not have happened
without the strong relationship that has developed
between President Trump and Chinese President Xi
Jinping, and we greatly appreciate the fact that both
teams are working with us. We have seen additional
encouraging signs that other nations in Asia have
stepped up to the plate. The Philippines has cut off all
trade with Pyongyang. Thailand has drastically cut
its economic ties to North Korea. And States much
farther away are also doing their part. Mexico recently
declared the North Korean Ambassador to its country
persona non grata. Along with the strict enforcement of
sanctions, those are important steps towards complete
international unity. They make it clear that all nations
can act to deny North Korea the funds to build its
nuclear arsenal.
Today is a solemn day in the United States. It is
the sixteenth anniversary of the terrorist attacks that
killed nearly 3,000 innocent people, most of them in
this very city. It hurts as much today as it did 16 years
ago. We will never forget the victims of 11 September.
And we will never forget the lesson that people who
have evil intentions must be confronted. That day, the
United States saw that mass murder could come from
a clear blue sky, on a beautiful Tuesday morning. But

S/PV. 8042

today the threat to the United States and the world is
not coming out of the blue. The North Korean regime
has demonstrated that it will not act on its own to end
its nuclear programme. The civilized world must do
what the regime refuses to do. We must stop its march
towards a nuclear arsenal with the ability to deliver it
anywhere in the world. We must do that by cutting off
the fuel and the funding that support it.
We do not take pleasure in further strengthening
sanctions today. We are not looking for war. The North
Korean regime has not yet passed the point of no return.
If it agrees to stop its nuclear programme, it can reclaim
its future. If it proves that it can live in peace, the world
will live in peace with it. On the other hand, if North
Korea continues its dangerous path, we will continue
with further pressure. The choice is theirs.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2375 (2017). We would like to
express our great appreciation for the leadership of the
United States, which has made it possible for us to adopt
the resolution today. We also thank other members of
the Council for their support.
By swiftly adopting resolution 2375 (2017) today,
after North Korea’s ballistic missile launch on 29 August
that flew over Japan, as well as its sixth nuclear test
on 3 September, the Security Council has sent a clear
signal to North Korea and the international community
as a whole that North Korea’s continuation of its nuclear
and missile development can never be accepted.
We recently adopted resolution 2371 (2017)
unanimously, on 5 August, in response to the two
ballistic missile launches of intercontinental range in
July. The resolution was intended to be very impactful,
with the expected effect of reducing the revenue of
the North Korean regime by approximately $1 billion
a year.
The resolution we have adopted today will
strengthen sanctions against North Korea to an
unprecedented level, further reducing the resources
that the North Korean regime uses to continue its illicit
programmes. The ban on textile exports from North
Korea is expected to reduce its revenue by around
$800 million. The resolution also requires countries
not to provide work authorizations for North Korean
workers, who have been an important source of revenue
for the North Korean regime. In addition, the oil supply
that flows into North Korea is expected to be cut by
approximately 30 per cent. This is intended to have

17-281493/13

S/PV.8042

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

11/09/2017

a great impact on North Korea’s continuation of its
weapon of mass destruction programmes.

today to deliver three messages of a political nature in
the form of three requirements.

Today’s resolution is an urgent call on the North
Korean regime to change its behaviour. The Security
Council will not back off in the face of North Korea’s
persistent provocations, which challenge its repeated
resolutions. It is the collective will of the international
community that we continue to put maximum pressure
on North Korea so that it shows seriousness and takes
concrete action towards the goal of denuclearization.

The first requirement is that of clear thinking in the
face of the evolution of the threat. Let us not deceive
ourselves. Following this year’s intercontinental
ballistic missile launches, and then the nuclear test
of unprecedented scale on 3 September, the threat
has changed in dimension and even in nature. From
regional, it has become global; from virtual, it has
become immediate; and from serious, it has become
existential. The threat now compels and brings us
together. It demands a strong and united reaction of the
Security Council, for which France has called from the
beginning and without reservation.

We should bear in mind that the Security Council has
repeatedly expressed its determination to take further
significant measures in the event of a further launch
or nuclear test by North Korea. This is again clearly
stated in paragraph 31 of the resolution. A peaceful,
diplomatic solution, which we all want, is in the hands
of the North Korean regime. If North Korea wants peace
and security, it needs to take concrete measures for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, comply fully
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
joint statement of the Six-Party Talks, and thus come
back to the dialogue table.
In the meantime, all Members of the United Nations
must show their renewed commitment to rigorously and
thoroughly implementing the existing Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375
(2017). Japan will continue to work very closely with
the Security Council member and all other Member
States to reach a solution to the problems related to
North Korea.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2375
(2017), which reinforces the sanctions imposed by
the United Nations against North Korea. I thank the
Permanent Representative of the United States, Nikki
Haley, and her team, as well as every member of the
Council, for their commitment to that end.
The tragic anniversary of 11 September 2001, which
we are commemorating today, leads me once again to
express our deepest sympathy to our American friends
and to all countries that have been affected by terrorism.
This commemoration and the solemnity surrounding it
also call on us to rise collectively to the responsibilities
of the Council with respect to the crucial question of
war and peace and the conditions of peace. That is the
question that brings us here today to discuss North
Korea, and it is why, on behalf of France, I should like
4/13

The second key requirement today is that of
firmness. In the face of the regime’s irresponsible
headlong dash and its contempt for its international
obligations, it was more than ever necessary to act
quickly, in unison and with resolve. It was essential
to respond to this attack on the norms of peace and
security and the legal system on which they are based.
The resolution that we have just adopted constitutes an
important and necessary step in that regard in order to
maximize the pressure on the North Korean regime.
In a significant and targeted manner, this robust
resolution reinforces and expands several important
aspects of the the sanctions regime. In particular, I
would refer to the very strong reinforcement of the
constraints on the sectors of the economy that directly
fund the North Korean regime, such as textiles and
North Korean workers. I refer also to the important
restrictions imposed on oil exports to North Korea.
Finally, the resolution strengthens the tools available
to us to prevent the circumvention of sanctions,
especially in the maritime field. The latest report
(S/2017/742, annex) of the United Nations Panel of
Experts established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009)
confirms that the North Korean regime is becoming
increasingly innovative in avoiding the sanctions
imposed on it. Let us know how to make our sanctions
correspondingly inventive.
This is not a mere show of resolve. The sanctions
are neither a leitmotiv without purpose nor an end in
themselves. Our united, firm and unequivocal response
today has a dual objective. On the one hand, we must
resist the unjustifiable attitude of Pyongyang and avoid
any signal of impunity with regard to the flagrant
violation of our decisions; and, on the other hand,
17-28149

11/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8042

we must maximize the pressure on the North Korean
regime in order to lead it back to its obligations and
to reason.

aggression, that we will not be intimidated or cowed,
that we will match North Korean provocations with
clear, targeted consequences.

In that context, the third requirement, logically
and chronologically, is that of diplomacy, to which
the determination we express together today will,
we hope, pave the way. France’s conviction is that
maximal resolve today, in the form of a strengthening
of sanctions, is our best leverage for promoting a
political settlement tomorrow. Contrarily, anything that
could be perceived by the North Korean regime as an
admission of weakness or the expression of divisions
among us would encourage it to pursue its provocations
and would objectively heighten the danger of a resort
to extremes. Simply put, the great resolve that we are
expressing together today is our best antidote to the risk
of confrontation and our best chance to open a path to the
diplomatic process, which we believe must be founded
on the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

Today we have enacted strategic measures that,
together with existing obligations, add up to the most
stringent United Nations sanctions regime placed on
any nation in the twenty-first century. We have enacted
measures today that show our determination to act. This
resolution does three big things. First, it will curtail gas,
petrol and oil imports. Secondly, it will ban all textile
exports, thereby taking hundreds of millions of dollars
from revenues that the North Korean regime uses to
fund its nuclear and missile programmes. And, thirdly,
it will end future work authorizations of North Korean
overseas labourers, stopping a sickening industry built
on modern slavery and used to divert funds to the
regime. Therefore, make no mistake: we are tightening
the screw, and we stand ready to tighten it further. Until
the regime sees that diplomacy, not duplicity, is the
way forward, we must use all of our diplomatic tools to
bring pressure to bear on Pyongyang.

We are therefore not closing the door to dialogue,
and we never will. It is the North Korean regime that
is showing its obstinacy by rejecting dialogue through
its irresponsible and unacceptable attitude. So long
as North Korea remains deaf to our entreaties and
continues to heighten its threat with provocation upon
provocation, we will have no other choice than to step
up pressure in response. That is the sole solution to
bring North Korea to the negotiating table and to open
up the path to the necessary political and diplomatic
way out of this matter.
For France, these are the three necessary demands
that should guide us: clarity as to the existential nature
of the threat, maximum resolve to respond to it, and
diplomacy as the way forward — all, we hope, towards
a political solution to resolve the North Korean nuclear
crisis. The security of us all is at stake. For the sake of the
future of the backbone that is the entire non-proliferation
regime, France calls upon all the actors concerned to
together follow this demanding path.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Just over a week
ago, North Korea sent a brazen message of provocation,
a message of belligerence — a sixth nuclear test,
carried out once again in clear contempt for the
Security Council, the region and the international
community. Today, through the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2375 (2017), we have sent a message of
our own in response. Through this vote we have made
clear that we will not stand idly by in the face of such

Some observers doubted that the Council would be
willing or able to react speedily or in unison, or even
at all, to this new provocation. With this resolution
we have shown that we are united in condemning this
illegal and reckless act, and that we are determined
that the North Korean regime change course. The
unanimous agreement today of the States around this
table is a powerful step. We now call on all States to
redouble their sanctions implementation, while taking
note of the decisions that we have made today under
international law.
North Korea is engaged in a dangerous policy of
provocation. Our role as a Council, and as an international
community, is to constrain them so that they change
course. Sanctions are a vital part of that effort. It is the
regime that bears full responsibility for the measures
that we have enacted today. It is their continued, illegal
and aggressive actions that have brought us here. Such
actions are in no way a proportionate response to the
legitimate defensive military exercises of South Korea
and the United States.
There is a way out. Diplomacy can end this
crisis. First, North Korea must change its reckless
course. There must be an end to the tests, an end to
the provocations. Until North Korea changes course,
we must maintain the maximum pressure possible.
Through this resolution today, we have done just

17-281495/13

S/PV.8042

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

that. The onus now falls on Pyongyang to do the right
thing — to step back from confrontation and to step
towards de-escalation.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2375 (2017) in
response to the sixth nuclear test conducted by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We commend
the strong leadership of the United States, which made
the adoption possible.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
Ukraine’s solidarity with the people and the Government
of the United States as they commemorate the sixteenth
anniversary of 911. I am proud that Ukraine was able
to contribute to the Security Council’s response to that
horrific terrorist act back in 2001 as a non-permanent
member of the Council, including by providing our
Permanent Mission’s premises for the Council’s
urgent consultations.
North Korea’s advancing nuclear and ballistic
missiles programmes remain the most significant
proliferation global challenge at the global scale.
Moreover, the increasing militarization has already
severely impacted, and continues to threaten, the
livelihoods of the population of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Besides continuously
diverting resources from acute human needs to fuelling
its nuclear arsenal, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has succeeded in evading sanctions. We therefore
fully support imposing new robust measures against
the North Korean regime, along with strengthening the
existing conditions and restrictions. Our decision today
clearly proves that the Council remains united and
decisive in its response to the growing nuclear threat on
the Korean peninsula, as well as in its intention to avoid
affecting the people of North Korea.
I wish to reiterate the key importance of the full and
comprehensive implementation of all of the Council’s
resolutions related to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, by all States Members of the United Nations,
in order to avert the risk of further provocations
and curb the rampant nuclear and missile ambitions
of Pyongyang.
Ukraine voted for this resolution, trusting that any
responsible member of the international community
must spare no effort in restoring respect for international
law and finding solutions to counter the greatest threats
to global peace and security.
6/13

11/09/2017

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2375 (2017) and
welcomes its unanimous adoption. In the 21 months
that we have been a member of the Security Council,
this is the fifth resolution we have adopted to impose
sanctions on North Korea. This is also the fifth time that
my delegation has stressed that the Security Council’s
action and the unity of its members are crucial in order
to counter the grave threat to international peace and
security posed by the repeated violations by North
Korea of the Council’s resolutions. As well, this is the
fifth time that my country maintains that nuclear tests
and ballistic missile launches exacerbate instability
on the Korean peninsula and tension in the region and
constitute ongoing provocations of the international
community. And, too, this is the fifth time that Uruguay
reiterates the urgent need that the Government of North
Korea respect the resolutions of the Security Council
and halt its nuclear and ballistic missiles programmes.
Uruguay once again urges that country, for the fifth
time, to wholly, verifiably and irreversibly abandon
its nuclear programme and immediately end all related
activities, including launches involving ballistic missile
technology, and other provocative acts.
Sanctions are simply a means of bringing the
Government of North Korea to the negotiating table.
It is necessary to work towards a sustainable, resultsfocused dialogue as soon as possible. Resolving the
North Korean conflict will be made possible only
through dialogue and diplomacy and within the
framework of an international strategy that includes
a firm commitment by all countries to ensure the
appropriate and effective implementation of the
sanctions put in place by the Security Council.
Lastly, and again for the fifth time, we reaffirm our
unwavering commitment to continue working towards
a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution in order to
denuclearize the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2375 (2017). We thank the United
States for leading the process with an appropriate
sense of urgency and for conducting negotiations in a
spirit of transparency — that is appreciated given the
constraints imposed by the grave situation provoked by
North Korea.
The resolution comes at a unique moment of threat
to international peace and security with very serious
challenges to regional stability. Just one week ago,
17-28149

11/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the Security Council met (see S/PV.8039) to condemn
the sixth nuclear test carried out by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea regime, following a series
of increasingly reckless missile launches. We reaffirm
our strong condemnation of those irresponsible acts.
All such actions taken together reveal a cycle of
unprecedented, deliberate and escalatory provocations
by North Korea, directed against the international
community as a whole and aimed at undermining the
foundations of the global non-proliferation regime,
as well as the authority of the Council. We reiterate
our deepest concern about the advancement of the
North Korean nuclear and missile programme, which
constitutes an unacceptable threat of a global nature.
Today we stand united once again by taking action
to protect our collective security and ensure that the
North Korean regime’s threats do not go unanswered.
The resolution adopted today is a balanced text
that provides for a strong, comprehensive package
of restrictive measures, while taking into account
humanitarian concerns and the need to achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula through a
negotiated process. Those measures are a reflection of
the gravity of the current situation and they constitute a
proportional and appropriate response.

S/PV. 8042

effective implementation of the sanctions regime by the
whole membership of the United Nations.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China): On 3 September, while
defying the general opposition on the part of the
international community, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea conducted yet another nuclear
test. The Chinese Government strongly opposes and
condemns such an act.
China is consistently committed to denuclearizing
the Korean peninsula, ensuring peace and stability
on the peninsula and resolving the issue through
dialogue and consultation. The Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 2375 (2017) today reflects those
three commitments and the united position of the
international community in opposing the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s development of its nuclear
and ballistic missile capabilities and preserving the
international non-proliferation regime.

We fully share the call of the resolution on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to immediately
cease all nuclear and missile-related activities and to
make credible progress on its obligation to denuclearize
and open the way to a peaceful solution through
meaningful negotiations.

China urges the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to earnestly heed the expectations and will of the
international community to halt the country’s nuclear
and missile development, effectively abide by and
implement the Council’s resolutions, stop any further
nuclear and missile tests and effectively work towards
denuclearization. At the same time, the resolution
reiterates the need to maintain peace and stability on
the peninsula and in North-East Asia. It also commits
to resolving the issue through peaceful, diplomatic
and political means and supports the resumption of
the Six-Party Talks, as well as the commitment voiced
in the statement of 19 September 2005, while also
emphasizing the importance of de-escalating tension
on the peninsula. All parties should effectively and
comprehensively implement the relevant provisions set
out in Security Council resolutions. The nuclear issue
on the Korean peninsula must be resolved peacefully.
Comprehensive measures must be taken to balance the
legitimate security concerns of all parties.

We also fully share the concern for the humanitarian
situation in the country and the need to ensure that
these new sanctions do not have an adverse impact.
We must not forget that the people of North Korea are,
first and foremost, victims of the regime’s self-isolating
ambitions. The international community must therefore
continue to provide assistance for those in need.

China has made unremitting efforts towards
denuclearization and maintaining peace and stability
on the peninsula. On 4 July, China and Russia issued
a joint statement on the issue of the Korean peninsula,
based on China’s proposal of a dual-track approach
of promoting the denuclearization of the peninsula
through a suspension-for-suspension approach.

Finally, as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), we will
continue to maintain a sharp focus on the full and

China calls on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to halt its nuclear and missile activities, and
on the United States and the Republic of Korea to

However, the resolution is not only about stronger
sanctions. It also signals the political path through
which, if it so chooses, North Korea can revert to
international legality and a different pattern of relations
with the international community, in order to resolve
the situation peacefully.

17-281497/13

S/PV.8042

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

11/09/2017

suspend their large-scale military exercises, in line
with Russia’s proposal for a step-by-step approach.
China and Russia have formulated a road map for
the solution of the Korean peninsula issue. The joint
Chinese and Russian initiative is realistic and feasible.
It aims to tackle both the symptoms and root causes of
the problem, so as to advance the peaceful settlement
of the Korean peninsula nuclear issue and maintain the
peace and stability of the peninsula. In that vein, we
hope to obtain a positive response and backing from
relevant parties.

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): The persistent disregard for
global norms and the consistent defying of Security
Council resolutions by North Korea puts millions of
people at risk. Its actions represent a threat not only to
the region but to all of us. This is indeed a clear threat
to international peace and security. For this reason,
Sweden welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2375 (2017). In the face of North Korea’s destabilizing
actions, it is important that the Council once again stand
united and determined to address the most dangerous
crisis we are facing today.

We hope that the United States will incorporate
the following four “don’ts” into its relevant policies
regarding the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea:
don’t seek regime change; don’t incite a collapse of the
regime; don’t seek an accelerated reunification effort of
the peninsula; and don’t send its military north of the
thirty-eighth parallel.

Sweden reiterates its condemnation of North
Korea’s recent nuclear test. We once again urge North
Korea to heed the Council’s decisions and the call
of the entire international community that it cease
provocations, fulfil its international obligations,
engage in meaningful dialogue and abandon its nuclear
weapons and missile programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner.

China is a close neighbour of the Korean peninsula. We
have been consistently committed to its denuclearization
and are against any war or chaos on the territory. The
strengthening of military deployment on the Korean
peninsula and the goal of denuclearization and reaching
peace and stability run counter to each other.
The deployment of the Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense system severely undermines the reaching
of a strategic balance. It also undermines the strategic
security interests of the countries in the region, of
which China is part. China strongly urges the relevant
parties to halt its deployment and remove all related
equipment. At present, the situation on the peninsula
is sensitive, complex and grave. The relevant parties
should remain calm and avoid a rhetoric or action that
could aggravate the tensions. The priority at present is
to comprehensively and strictly implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and the parties concerned
should resume talks and negotiations sooner rather than
later, endeavour to advance the denuclearization process
and maintain peace and stability on the peninsula. The
Council should shoulder its historical responsibility in
this regard.
China will continue to advance dialogue and
consultations, work together with all relevant parties
and make a positive and constructive effort to ensure
that an appropriate settlement is reached at an early
date so as to resolve the current issue on the peninsula,
attain denuclearization and ensure long-term peace and
stability on the peninsula.
8/13

The strengthened sanctions adopted today aim to
add further pressure on the North Korean regime and
to contribute to a change in behaviour. To achieve that
end, the sanctions must be implemented in full. More
efforts are needed in this regard. Recommendations by
the Panel of Experts to the sanctions Committee must
be implemented. All States Members of the United
Nations have a responsibility to do their utmost to
ensure that the sanctions regime works.
Sanctions alone, though, will not resolve the
situation on the Korean peninsula, nor is there a
feasible military option to end the crisis. The solution
must be a peaceful, diplomatic and political one. We
welcome the call in the resolution for further work
to reduce tensions so as to advance the prospects for
a comprehensive settlement. Therefore, in parallel
with the tightened sanctions adopted today, we must
urgently undertake intensified, creative diplomatic
efforts to decrease tensions, increase confidence and
prevent escalation, paving the way for dialogue on a
peaceful and comprehensive solution.
It is clear that in order to achieve the longerterm objective, there is a pressing need for regional
security arrangements. The United Nations should
provide additional support, especially with regard
to confidence-building activities in the region,
and we should explore how the good offices of the
Secretary-General can contribute. The continued
provocations by North Korea, as well as the current
17-28149

11/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

confrontational rhetoric, are dangerous and risk
leading to unintended consequences. In the immediate
term, while tensions are running high, lines for direct
inter-Korean communication are critical so as to avoid
misunderstanding and miscalculations. As a member of
the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, we call
on North Korea to resume contact at the border station
in Panmunjom.
While the North Korean regime invests in expensive
weapons programmes, it shows utter disregard for the
well-being of its own people, who continue to suffer
from serious human rights violations and the grave
humanitarian situation. It is important to underline
that none of the measures adopted today or in previous
resolutions should prevent or make more difficult the
ongoing efforts of the United Nations and its partners to
provide life-saving humanitarian assistance. It is also
important to note that as the harsh North Korean winter
approaches, more support and humanitarian efforts are
likely to be needed.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia does not accept the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s claim to become a
nuclear State and has supported all Security Council
resolutions demanding an end to the nuclear and
missile programmes of Pyongyang, with a view to the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We have
therefore supported and are supporting the sanctions
contained in the resolutions aimed at compelling the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to meet the
demands of the Security Council.
This applies fully also to the demands contained
in resolution 2371 (2017), even though when it was
adopted we underscored that the measures involving
financial and economic pressure on the leadership of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had basically
been exhausted and that any further restrictions would
be tantamount to attempts to suffocate its economy,
including the placing of a total embargo on the country
and provoking a deep humanitarian crisis. In other
words, what we are talking about here is not just cutting
off the channels that allow for banned nuclear and
missile activities, but, rather, inflicting unacceptable
damage on innocent civilians.
At the same time, we proposed a reasonable and
realistic alternative to the ultimatum logic of the
sanctions, which has proved unworkable time and again.
The alternative consisted of the following: beginning

S/PV. 8042

implementation of not just the sanctions-related parts of
the aforementioned resolutions of the Security Council,
but also those of the provisions calling for a peaceful
political and diplomatic settlement of the nuclear
issue on the Korean peninsula through dialogue and
negotiation. Such provisions are contained in all of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Ignoring them
would represent a direct violation of the consensus
agreements reached in the Council.
Furthermore, the authors’ unwillingness to include
in the resolution the idea of using the good offices and
mediation potential of the Secretary-General, as well
as the refusal to reaffirm the statement made by the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Tillerson, on the
“Four Nos” — that there are no plans to start a war,
effect regime change, force the reunification of the two
Koreas or violate the 38th parallel — all give rise to
very serious questions in our minds to which we have
not yet received answers.
Russia, as was underscored by President Putin on
5 December in China, firmly denounces the recent
provocative step taken by Pyongyang, that is, the
test carried out on 3 September. We are convinced,
however, that dissipating the threat looming from the
Korean Peninsula could be done not through additional
sanctions but exclusively through political means. That
is exactly the approach that was proposed by Russia
and China in the joint statement dated 4 July, which
set out a joint roadmap on a step-by-step move towards
a settlement, starting with de-escalation, a bilateral
lowering of tensions and then the implementation
of confidence-building measures and the creation
of conditions for the resumption of negotiations.
We believe that it would be a serious mistake to
underestimate this Russia-China initiative. It remains
on the table at the Security Council, and we will insist
on its consideration.
We supported resolution 2375 (2017) today because
despite our belief that there is no future in endless
pressure and refusals to talk, it would be wrong not to
react strongly to nuclear tests.
At the same time, we underscored immediately that
the reaction of the Security Council needed to be thought
through and had to take into account the humanitarian
aspects of the situation in North Korea, the legitimate
interests of its civilians and the specific aspects of
the bilateral relationships between Pyongyang and its

17-281499/13

S/PV.8042

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

foreign partners that have nothing to do with nuclear
or missile tests but would meet the needs of civilians.
In the course of working on the draft resolution,
many of our colleagues stated that it was a prologue
to efforts to achieve a political settlement. We would
like to see proof of that in the very near future. We call
upon all Council members and United Nations Member
States to undertake specific efforts — not in word but
in deed — to find a political and diplomatic settlement
of the issue of the Korean Peninsula.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Senegal welcomes the unanimous adoption by the
15 members of the Security Council of resolution 2375
(2017) on non-proliferation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It also commends the constructive
spirit that has prevailed in the negotiations on and the
adoption of this resolution, whose penholder is the
United States delegation.
As the Security Council has the primary
responsibility in maintaining international peace and
security and in accordance with the many resolutions
that it has adopted on this issue, the Council had to
take action by adopting supplementary measures that
considerably bolster those that are already in force.
Strong reactions are logical as the regime of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
pursue an illegal military regime, in flagrant violation
of Security Council resolutions and of non-proliferation
resolutions. Its nuclear programme is furthermore
a direct threat to aviation security and the safety of
millions of people who live, work and travel throughout
the region, as the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
gave no warning or notice concerning the launches and
tests of a hydrogen bomb on 3 September, which caused
an earthquake that was felt in neighbouring countries.
The Senegalese delegation wishes to underscore
that this set of targeted measures, taken quite rightly in
response to the challenge posed by the ballistic missile
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, must be pursued in the framework of global and
political strategies to encourage the parties to engage
in dialogue with a view to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula, with the support of the international
community. I therefore reiterate once again my country’s
support for a peaceful settlement of this issue.
I call on the Council to remain unified with regard
to the resumption of the six-party talks in order to
achieve a verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
10/13

11/09/2017

peninsula that will ensure the peaceful coexistence of
countries and peoples of the region. Fortunately, the
strong point of today’s resolution is that paragraphs
28, 29 and 30 of resolution 2370 (2017) pave the way
for a commendable political solution. We must now
rise to the challenge of implementing this resolution.
As the Permanent Representative of Italy stated during
consultations, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), there remains much
to be desired in its implementation.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of resolution 2375 (2017), based on its
unwavering principled commitment to the credibility
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) regime and the credibility and role
of the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security. Egypt wishes to set an example on
how to seriously deal with any threat to the NPT regime
without double standards.
Egypt, once again, calls upon the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to put an end to its continued
violations of Security Council resolutions. We call upon
it to return to the NPT as a non-nuclear State. We call
upon it to heed the repeated calls to return to dialogue
and negotiations on the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula with a view to sustainable peace between
the two Koreas. Egypt urges the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to immediately cease any action
that would undermine regional security in north-east
Asia or international peace and security. We do this
out of our understanding of the nature of North Korea’s
repeated violations of Security Council resolutions
as they threaten international and regional peace and
security. They are a serious threat to regional security
in North-East Asia.
Egypt reaffirms its condemnation in the strongest
possible terms of all violations by North Korea. We
support a continued role for the Security Council
in assuming its responsibility. Egypt again calls on
all stakeholders to seek a peaceful settlement of the
situation in the Korean peninsula, in accordance
with the provisions of Security Council resolutions,
including a revitalization of the Six-Party Talks. This
would break the current impasse which fuels tension and
escalates the conflict. Egypt reaffirms the need to bear
in mind the humanitarian considerations and needs, as
we implement the stringent measures adopted today.
17-28149

11/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

In conclusion, Egypt welcomes all constructive
ideas and initiatives aimed at resolving this crisis,
whose negative repercussions are far reaching and
extend beyond the region of North-East Asia, through
negotiations. Egypt supports a key role for the United
Nations in these efforts in promoting diplomacy and a
political path and calls for unity among the international
community and the Security Council as we address this
crisis with the wisdom it requires.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan welcomes
the unanimous resolve of Council members in urging
North Korea to stop its nuclear programme by adopting
resolution 2375 (2017), which entails a tougher and
broader sanctions regime.
We deplore the fact that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues to tirelessly violate
Security Council resolutions which inevitably leads to
greater consequences for the country and its leadership.
Despite the urgent appeals and rejection by the world
community of its provocative actions, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea consistently continues to
develop its nuclear missile potential, which poses a
threat to peace and destabilizes the situation in the East
Asian region and globally. In that regard, we are talking
not about a virtual threat, but rather a real threat to the
people of the neighbouring countries and beyond.
After a series of launches of improved ballistic
missiles, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
once again shocked the planet with its horrible nuclear
test. The irresponsible policy of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea negatively affects the global process
of nuclear non-proliferation and undermines collective
efforts to ensure a nuclear-weapon-free future of the
planet. As a country seriously affected by nuclear
tests, Kazakhstan is strongly opposed to such heinous
violations. We are strongly convinced that, in the
twenty-first century, there is no place for nuclear tests.
Proceeding from its principled position, Kazakhstan
supports the new resolution in the hope that it will send
a clear and strong message to Pyongyang that the world
does not accept the nuclear policy of North Korea. We
hope Pyongyang will hear the call and act accordingly.
The resolution envisages tough sanctions as the means
to persuade Pyongyang to change its course in favour of
a nuclear-weapon-free future. At the same time, it also
leaves room for a resumption of dialogue — if North
Korea really wants it.

S/PV. 8042

Once again, we call upon the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to heed the message of humankind
and seek the path of prudence and dialogue.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Once again, Bolivia expresses its
strongest condemnation of the nuclear and ballisticmissile tests carried out by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We once again call on that country
to abandon its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme
in a comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible manner
and to comply with the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. As part of the world’s
first declared nuclear-weapon-free zone — in line with
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean, better known as
the Treaty of Tlatelolco — Bolivia voted in favour of
resolution 2375 (2017). In doing so, we were motivated
by our calling as a pacifist State and by our rejection of
the development and manufacture of nuclear weapons
as constituting a grave violation of the relevant
international treaties on the subject, of human rights
and of the right to life itself.
We believe that sanctions must not be an end in
and of themselves. They must be used to draw the
parties to the negotiating table, while always taking
into account, in this case, the humanitarian situation
of the population of North Korea. Sanctions alone will
not resolve the problem. Were there to be a lack of
political and diplomatic solutions, we would be facing
a collective failure on the part of the Security Council.
In that regard, in accordance with the provisions
of paragraph 27 of resolution 2371 (2017), Bolivia
proposes that the Security Council begin working
as soon as possible to bring the parties back to the
negotiation table and resume the Six-Party Talks. We
urge avoiding any provocative or unilateral acts or any
other act beyond the framework of international law
or the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We reiterate once again our support for
the Chinese dual suspension initiative, which seeks to
enable a simultaneous freeze on actions on the Korean
peninsula, as well as for the Russian-Chinese initiative
and road map, which currently is the only concrete
proposal to resolve the situation.
Lastly, Boliva urgently calls on all the parties
concerned to rule out any type of military solution or
threat of the use of force and to return to negotiations
to reach a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution

17-2814911/13

S/PV.8042

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

that will result in the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2375 (2017), which we believe is an appropriate
response by the Security Council following the series
of provocative actions by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that represent a dangerous escalation
of the situation on the Korean peninsula. The most
recent action by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has made the situation even more dangerous.
It is absolutely vital that we continue to maintain
Council unity with regard to this very serious matter,
which easily has the potential to get out of hand with
all of the consequences that that possibility implies.
The resolution just adopted is very mindful of that
in underscoring its concern that developments on the
Korean peninsula could have dangerous, large-scale
and regional security implications. We are pleased
that it is this awareness that explains the unity within
the Council we continue to see. That was amply
demonstrated in the result of the negotiations, of which
this resolution is an affirmation.
We believe that there is no military solution to the
crisis on the Korean peninsula, and we hope that this
resolution and the unity among Council members will
facilitate the search for a comprehensive diplomatic
solution, which is sufficiently stressed in the resolution.
All efforts should be made to ensure that that happen
sooner rather than later, as the alternative to a peaceful
solution of the crisis is — to put it mildly — hardly a
viable option.
Let me conclude my brief comments by expressing
appreciation for the flexibility demonstrated by all
those who played an active part in the finalization of
this resolution and for the wisdom that is so manifest in
the final product.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s
meeting to follow up on our discussion (see S/PV.8039)
last week concerning North Korea’s sixth nuclear test,
on 3 September. I very much appreciate the opportunity
to participate in this important discussion.
12/13

11/09/2017

The Republic of Korea welcomes and fully supports
the adoption of resolution 2375 (2017), which introduces
new robust sanctions measures against North Korea
in response to its most powerful nuclear test to date,
conducted in defiance of the repeated warnings of the
international community. We appreciate the leadership
of the United States, which was crucial in bringing
about this resolution. We know how difficult it is to
secure such a significant negotiated outcome within the
time frame of one week. Our appreciation also goes to
the other members of the Security Council, especially
China and Russia, for their cooperation, without which
the adoption of today’s resolution would not have
been possible.
The unanimous adoption of this resolution in such
a swift manner reflects not only the sense of urgency
on the part of the Security Council in addressing the
North Korea nuclear problem, but also the true gravity
of the situation on the Korean peninsula caused by that
unjustifiable act in flagrant violation of international
norms and obligations. The resolution includes the
strongest measures ever against North Korea. Not only
will the oil supply to North Korea be substantially
reduced, but North Korea will also lose two of its
largest income sources, namely, textile exports and
overseas labourers. We believe that those measures, if
fully implemented, will significantly undercut North
Korea’s capability to pursue further nuclear-weapon
development. The resolution also sends a clear message
to Pyongyang that enough is enough. Continuing on
the wrong path will only deepen its isolation, seriously
endanger its political stability and hinder its economic
development. That is surely not what North Korea
desires, but is what it will certainly face if it does not
change its course immediately.
By introducing the most biting and robust measures
in this new resolution, the international community
has reaffirmed its unwavering commitment to remain
united in stopping North Korea’s further pursuit
of nuclear weapons. Our goal is not to bring North
Korea to its knees, but to achieve a peaceful solution
to the North Korean nuclear issue. Under the current
circumstances, whereby North Korea categorically
rejects any kind of dialogue with any country in the
world, there are simply no viable options, other than
scaling up sanctions, to make Pyongyang return to the
negotiating table for denuclearization. Strong economic
sanctions are undoubtedly the only diplomatic means
available to that end under the present circumstances.
17-28149

11/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

So as to make North Korea wake from its delusion
of becoming a nuclear-weapon state, I call on all the
members of the international community to fully and
thoroughly implement the measures in all the relevant

S/PV. 8042

Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2375
(2017), adopted today. Pyongyang will then feel the real
pain of sanctions this time around.
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.

17-2814913/13
