UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2219’”

MEETING:

29 APRIL

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2219)

... .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. ... . ... .. ... .. ...

1

.. ... . ... .. ... .. .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. .. .. ... ... ..

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13832).;
Letter dated‘ 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13855) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV.2219

Q,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted.before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2219th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 29 April 1980, at 5.30 p.m.
Rights of the Palestinian People and the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to
take places at the Council table.

President: Mr. Porflrio MUfiOZ LED0 (Mexico).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui
(Algeria), Mr. Al-SafSar (Bahrain), : Mr. Roa-Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. B. C. Mishra
(India), Mr. Bafi (Iraq), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Tut%i (Lebanon), Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar),
Mr. Ayachi (Morocco), Mr. Mansouri (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet
Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber
and Mr. Kane (Chairman
of the Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took places at the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2219)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13855)
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Bulgaria,
Guyana, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic and the United Arab Emirates
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

was called to order at 5.40 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Yankov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Douglas (Guyana), Mr. Jamal (Qatar),
Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Adan (Somalia),
Mr. Lipatov (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) and
Mr. Humaidan (United Arab Emirates) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13855)

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The members of the Council have before them document S/13911, which contains the text of a draft resolutio,n sponsored by Tunisia.

1, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [2204th, 2205th, 2207th and 2208th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Cuba,
Egypt, India, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Madagascar, Morocco, the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet
Nam and Yugoslavia to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote and 1 invite the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable

4. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation
from
Chinese): Since the beginning of this year, while continuing their occupation of large tracts of Arab territories, the Israeli authorities have stepped up their
efforts in pursuing the policies of aggression, expansion
and annexation. Particularly since the adoption of
Council resolution 465 (1980) on 1 March, wilfully
clinging to their own course, the Israeli authorities
have not only refused to dismantle the settlements on
1

the West Bank of the Jordan, but have flagrantly
decided to intensify their forcible expropriation
of
land and establishment of more settlements and other
facilities in the occupied Arab territories,
and have
repeatedly declared that they will never make any concession on the question of Palestine and will oppose
any efforts to establish a State of Palestine. By their
statements and acts, the Israeli authorities have made
it clear that their reactionary stand on perpetuating
their occupation of Arab territories and negating the
legitimate
rights of the Palestinian
people has not
changed at all. On the contrary, they are evidently
taking advantage of the current international
tension
created by hegemonists
that are intensifying
their
armed aggression, thus making even more truculent
provocations
against the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples.

peoples and to take effective measures to implement
them. This is not only a matter of great importance
that concerns the upholding of justice but is one that
concerns the maintenance of peace in the Middle f:ast
and the entire world.
9. Finally, we sincerely hope that with the solidarity
and support of all justice-upholding
countries and peoples, the Palestinian and other Arab peoples will close
their ranks, make common endeavours and continue
to surmount all kinds of difficulties
on their road of
progress, so as to strive for the final victory of
recovering their lost territories and regaining their
national rights.
10. Mr. LUSAKA
(Zambia): No other aspect of the
conflict in the Middle East is more relevant and central
to the search for a just, comprehensive ‘and durable
settlement than the one pertaining to the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. Unless and until the
Palestinian
people are enabled to exercise all their
inalienable rights, including the right to establish an
independent State in Palestine, durable peace in the
Middle East will continue to elude us. The region will
continue to be characterized
by bitter conflict and
-what
is more-generations
of the people of the
Middle East will yearn in vain for peace and security
and remain exposed to tension and war.

5. The question of Palestine is the core of the Middle
East question. Without the solution of the Palestine
question, there will be no just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. In the present circumstances in which the
people of the world are calling for unity to deal seriously
with hegemonists that are stepping up their expansion
in South-West Asia, South-East Asia and the Gulf
region, it is imperative effectively to halt Israeli aggression and expansion and to make efforts to achieve
the complete solution of the Palestine question.
6. Over a long period, under most difficult and
complex conditions, the Palestinian people, led by the
Palestine Liberation
Organization,
has carried on a
courageous and tenacious struggle and constantly
dealt heavy blows to the Israeli aggressors. Their
struggle has won widespread sympathy and firm
support from the people of the world. The PLO has
likewise won recognition from a growing number of
countries.

11. This debate on the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is therefore highly appropriate. It is in
itself a cause for hope and expectation, in that at long
last there appears to be a universal realization that
the core of the Middle East conflict has to be addressed. Indeed, it is time that the need for the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable right
to self-determination,
including the right to a national
homeland, is realized by all as the only realistic basis
for the solution of the Middle East conflict. Any serious
initiative to solve the question of the Middle East can
succeed only if it is predicated on that basis.

7. I should like to reaffirm on this occasion that the
Chinese Government
and people strongly condemn
the Israeli authorities for their policies of aggression
and expansion and their intransigence in obstructing a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question,
and we will, as always, resolutely support the Palestinian people in their just struggle to regain their
national rights, including the right to return to their
homeland, the right to self-determination
and the right
to establish their own State. We firmly support the just
struggle of the Arab peoples to recover their lost
territories.

12. It goes without saying, therefore, that the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People have the
full support of my delegation. The General Assembly
has repeatedly endorsed them, as has the non-aligned
movement.
Through the resolutions of the General
Assembly
and the decisions of the non-aligned
moveinent,
the overwhelming
majority of Member
States have been very clear as to what needs to be
done to resolve the Middle East ‘conflict and thereby
establish conditions of peace and security and cooperative
relationships
among the countries and
peoples of the region.

8. Since its establishment,
the Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable -Rights of the Palestinian
People has done a great deal of work for the realization
of the national rights of the Palestinian people. We are
in favour of those parts of the report of the Committee’
that reaffirm or conform to General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3376 (XXX). In our view, the
Security Council is in duty bound to adopt clear-cut
resolutions on the settlement of the Palestine question
in the interests of the Palestinian
and other Arab

13. In the view of my delegation, it would be hypocritical and erroneous to speak of self-determination
for the Palestinian people and at the same time to
dismiss the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
or
adopt a hostile attitude towards it. The recent example
of Zimbabwe should serve as an important lesson.
2

Until a few months ago, some denied the Patriotic
Front its due status as the authentic and legitimate.
representative
of the people of Zimbabwe. Today,
we have in Zimbabwe a Patriotic Front Government,
which came into being after a resounding victory in
free and fair elections that confounded its critics.

The Council can help restore peace to the Middle East
by recognizing the core of the conflict in the area,
through the adoption of an appropriate resolution on
the inalienable rights of the Palestinians.
19. Many important
resolutions,
including resolution 242 (1967), have been adopted,by the Council on
the situation in the Middle East. Indeed, many important initiatives have been undertaken to solve the
Middle East conflict. In our view, the regrettable
failure that has so far attended initiatives in this regard
has been caused by unwillingness on the part of some
members of the Council to adopt a realistic attitude
towards the Palestinians and recognize their inalienable right to self-determination,
including their right to
a national homeland.

14. The PLO is the sole and authentic representative
of the Palestinian people. It champions the cause of
the Palestinian
people-indeed,
their struggle to
exercise their inalienable right of self-determination,
including the right to establish an independent homeland with the full attributes of sovereignty.
It is
imperative,
therefore, that it should be both recognized and enabled to participate fully, on an equal
footing with other parties, in any genuine effort
towards the solution of the problem of the Middle
East.

20. We are, however, encouraged by the fact that
there is now a growing recognition,
particularly
in
Western Europe, that the Palestinian problem is more
than a problem of refugees. We are beginning to
hear voices advocating Palestinian self-determination
and a realistic attitude towards the PLO. That augurs
well for the comprehensive
settlement of the Middle
East conflict.

15. Israel, in particular, should realize that intransigence, labels and slogans will not bring peace to the
Middle East. The Patriotic Front has been repeatedly
described by some, even around this table, as a
This month, the Patriotic
“terrorist
organisation”.
Front formed a respectable Government
of a new
nation which has won overwhelming
recognition and
goodwill from the international
community.
The PLO
too has the interest of its people at heart. Israel would
no doubt meaningfully contribute to the cause of peace
and justice in the Middle East by accepting the reality
of the existence of the PLO.

21. I wish, in conclusion, to reaffirm that the questions of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
and Israeli withdrawal from occupied Arab territories
will remain cardinal in Zambia’s position on the situation in the Middle East.

. 16. Zambia, of course, strongly condemns Israeli
policies and practices in the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem. Continued Israeli settlements and other illegal practices in the occupied territories are more than acts of provocation:
they are a
sad example of Israeli bad faith in any process of
negotiation. They demonstrate a stubborn determination on the part of the Israeli authorities to cling to the
occupied territories. Israel is under obligation to withdraw from all Arab territories occupied since June
1967.

22. Mr. MILLS
(Jamaica): For over 30 years the
issue of the Middle East situation has been the subject
of extensive debate and numerous resolutions in the
United Nations. As we proceed with this debate, and
as we begin another decade, we face the reality of
limited achievement in terms of progress towards a
just and comprehensive
solution to the conflict. The
developments
in the occupied Arab territories and
the events in Southern Lebanon with which we have
dealt recently in the Council have further outlined the
troubling
aspects of the overall situation.
These
developments must be seen as symptoms of a problem
which has deep and profound causes. We all recognize
the Middle East problem as a complex one. But behind
this complexity lies a basic fundamental issue; that is
the issue of rights. History has shown, and the developments in the Middle East have demonstrated clearly,
that the continued denial of the rights of a people
constitutes an unending source of grievance and conflict. Throughout
this century we have seen the
struggles, the sacrifices and the conflicts which have
arisen from the denial of the rights of a people. The
tragic history and the present plight of the Palestinian
people exemplify the injustice which breeds- hostility
and conflict.

17. Another disturbing feature of the situation in the
Middle East is the continued Israeli aggression against
Lebanon. Israel should desist from all acts of aggression against Lebanon
and fully respect that
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Israeli
raids into Lebanon this month have posed a particular
challenge to the authority of the Security Council.
We have witnessed a barbaric assault on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon which has led to loss
of life and wanton destruction of property. The attacks
on the Force surely deserve strong condemnation
from the entire international
community.
Everything
should be done to put an end to the cold-blooded
murder of soldiers serving with the Force.

23. My delegation remains convinced that the Palestinian question lies at the heart of the whole Middle
East problem, and that a just solution to that question must be found if peace is to prevail in the region.

18. The conflict in the Middle East has defied solution for too long. The people of the area would like
to cherish peace, since they are entitled to peace.
3

For there can be no real peace without justice, and
there can be no justice without recognition and implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. We believe that it is time that the Council
recognized this reality ‘and dealt with it as an essential
requirement in the search for peace.

first, implementation of the right of the Palestinian
people to return to their homes to live in peace, and
of their rights to self-determination, national indee
pendence and sovereignty; secondly, the withdrawal
of Israel from the Arab territories occupied in the war
of June 1967; thirdly, the establishment of appropriate
arrangements to guarantee the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all States in the
area, including the State of Israel, and their right to
live in peace and security within recognized boundaries. Those three elements would, in our view,
ensure and safeguard the legitimate rights of all parties
in the region and provide the basis for a comprehensive
settlement. We also believe that the search for such a
settlement should involve the participation of all the
parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation
Organization as the representative of the Palestinian
people. Jamaica believes that that is the best means
by which we can hope to settle this question and lay
the basis for a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

24. In this regard, we consider the recommendations
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People to be a realistic and
positive contribution to the search for a solution within
the framework of the United Nations. We support
as a matter of principle the Committee’s endorsement
of the rights of the Palestinians to return to their homes
and to live in peace with their neighbours, and their
right as a people to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty. The principles of the
Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights affirm these rights for all peoples. The Palestinians can be no exception. They have the right to
exist in circumstances which will allow them to live in
dignity and shape their own future. The Committee
has also made concrete proposals on the implementation of these rights and has defined the territorial
basis for a sovereign independent State for the
Palestinian people. These are constructive proposals
which neither violate nor conflict with the rights of
other parties in the region.

29. If the Council is to avoid repeating the failures of
30 years, it has to learn from the lessons of the past.
The lesson is clear that the problem will remain with
us in its dangerous manifestations until we remedy the
injustice which is the underlying factor. As the organ
primarily responsible for the maintenance of intemational peace and security, the Council has a serious
responsibility and a duty in this matter which it cannot
continue to avoid. The cause of peace and justice
demands that the Council take a principled and constructive approach to end the nightmare of violence,
injustice and conflict in the Middle East and to lay the
basis for a just and lasting peace in the region. The
Council can take an important step in advancing that
process by adopting positive measures on the question
of the rights of the Palestinian people. The draft resolution now before the Council is designed to achieve
that purpose.

25. It is therefore clear that a practical means can be
found for enabling the Palestinian people to attain the
rights to which they are entitled. What is required
now is for the Council to give its recognition to these
rights and thus pave the way for an effective and
permanent solution to the Middle East question. It is
clear that despite certain positive elements in its
previous resolutions, and in particualr resolution 242
(1967), there has been a failure to recognize, through
positive action by the Council, an essential ingredient
-namely, the political rights of the Palestinian people.
26. It is therefore necessary at this stage, in order to
give impetus to the efforts towards a comprehensive
solution of the problems of the Middle East, to remedy
the deficiencies of past pronouncements and open the
way to a principled and realistic approach. It has long
been clear that the future of the Palestinian people
cannot be approached in terms of the treatment of
a refugee problem. Such an approach falls far short of
the demands of justice and the objective requirements
for peace.

30. The PRESIDENT (interpretatiarzfiom
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Qatar.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
31. ’ Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): Mr. President, I should like
to thank you and the other members of the Council
for allowing my delegation to participate in this important debate. It is with great satisfaction that we see
you, Ambassador Muiioz Ledo, in the chair at this
important meeting which is dealing with the exercise of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people living
under Israeli military occupation and those who are
living in exile. Your past record in dealing with the
explosive international situation makes you a perfect
choice for bringing this debate to a fruitful conclusion.

27. My delegation believes that a broad consensus
now exists in the international community on the need
to add new elements to those already endorsed in
resolution 242. (1967), just as there is, in our view,
general agreement on the essential principles of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. Those principles
have been repeatedly neaffirmed in the General Assembly in recent m. 1;:~j .,

32. The ournose of our meeting today is to trv one
more time to redress the inj&ices inflicted -upon
the people of Palestine, who are deprived of their
homes and their human and national rights, and sub-

28. Jamaica believes that the requirements of a
comprehensive
‘I, solution must include the following:
4

jetted to the mercies of a ruthless colonizer which is
trying to annihilate them physically in order to replace
them with foreign settlers who will take over and
settle their lands. What we are discussing here today
is nothing less than the fate, the very existence, of
the Palestinian people, whose plight has on numerous
occasions been the subject of deliberations in the
Council and in the General Assembly. Those proceedings culminated in the establishment of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People by General Assembly resolution
3376 (XXX), which was to suggest ways and means of
restoring the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. The recommendations of that Committee have
been reaffirmed time and again at each subsequent
session of the Assembly, their validity being undiminished by the passage of time.
33. Those recommendations have not been implemented because of immobility in the Council, which
has yet to take a position on the question, although
the urgency of the situation is clearly demonstrated by
the increasing violence in the area as a result of
continuing Israeli aggression against the neighbouring
countries and increased repression in the occupied
territories, which are endangering international peace
and security.
34. The Government of the State of Qatar, as well as
the whole world community, is waiting for the Council to take the crucial decisions that could restore
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, thereby
allowing the achievement of a peaceful settlement in the
Middle East and defusing the danger to international
peace and security.
35. Let it be clear that we are not dealing with the
domestic affairs of a Member State but with the fate of
a people subjected to foreign military occupation and
the future of territories which are internationally
recognized as occupied territories which have been
taken by sheer aggression.
36. Even as we are discussing the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, among which is the right to
establish an independent State oftheir own in Palestine,
the Zionist State has taken measures aimed at the
annexation of the rest of Palestine through the expropriation of properties and the imposition of economic
and fiscal measures with a view to dispossessing and
exploiting the population of those territories. Collective punishment, in particular the blowing up of
Arab homes and the mass demolition of houses and
villages, as well as the continued establishment of
settlers* colonies, indicate Israel’s determination to
pursue and consolidate its expansionist policies and to
frustrate international efforts to find a peaceful
settlement of the problem.
37. Israel is in clear violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War of 12 August 1.949,*in particular of

article 47, which prohibits the annexation of territories under the military occupation of an occupying
Power, and of article 49, which prohibits the transfer
of citizens of the occupying Power into the occupied
territories.
38. Israel’s violation of the human rights of the
inhabitants of the occupied territories exceeds what
has so far been mentioned, and includes the violation
of their archaeological and cultural property, interference with their religious freedoms and practices,
as well as the desecration of their holy shrines, interference with their family rights and customs, obstruction of their educational and scholastic activities, the
brutal suppression of all forms of student expression
of opinion and the illegal exploitation of the Palestinians’ natural wealth and water resources.
39. Faced with all the aforementioned facts, the
Council has not yet been able to take any positive
action to condemn .Israel’s illegal occupation and
inhuman acts against the Palestinian people or its
breaching of the Geneva Convention and the United
Nations Charter, to deter Israel from its continued
and utter disregard of General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions and to restore the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. The actions of the
Council have always been blocked by the b&s and
inflexible stand of one permanent member, namely,
the United States. The United States, which has
protested Israel’s actions outside the United Nations
premises in the strongest terms, in line with President
Carter’s declared human rights policy, still &ems to
be inhibited from withdrawing its blind support of
Israel’s massive and systematic violations of human
rights within the framework of the United Nations,
from co-operating with the members of the Council
in denouncing those policies, and from taking the
appropriate positive measures recommended by the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, thus serving the cause of
peace in the region.
40. The position of the’state of Qatar on the question
of Palestine has been made clear on many occasions.
Once again, I should like to restate that position.
41. First, we firmly believe that the question of
Palestine is at the heart of the Middle East conflict
and that without a just and lasting solution of this
question peace cannot be achieved in this troubled
area of the world. Secondly; the solution of the question of Palestine must be based on the full implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people,.namely, the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination, to national independence and
sovereignty and the right to return to their homes
and property. Thirdly, the Palestine Liberation Organization is the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people. Its participatiqn on an equal footing
with other parties in deliberations and negotiations on
the Middle East is essential in order to achieve a just

and lasting peace in the Middle East. Fourthly, the
State of Qatar, adhering to its strong commitment to
the just cause of the Palestinian people, to the resolutions of the Arab summit conferences and to the
Charters of the League of Arab States and the United
Nations, considers the Camp David accords a violation
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and
regards them as a violation of the.Arab consensus and
of the Charter of the Arab League and the Charter
of the United Nations. We believe that the Camp
David agreements cannot provide an appropriate
framework for the search for a settlement of the Middle
East issue, because those agreements ignore the
fundamental elements of the Palestinian problem.

importance for small States which lack the military
capability to deter violation of those principles in
respect of themselves.
47. This 0,rganization has a proud record as the
moral and political pressure point for the universal
application of the principle of self-determination, the
implementation of which has resulted in the independence of so many nations. However, one of the
most striking contradictions in the Organization’s
impressive record in this regard has been not only its
failure to have this principle applied to the nation of
Palestine but also its historical role in denying the
Palestinian people the exercise of its right to selfdetermination. It is timely, therefore, that, at a moment
when the worsening international situation is causing
deep concern to many independent nations that have
come into being as a result of their exercise of the
right to self-determination, the Council should be
debating a question that was born of the violation of
this very right and which, more than any other,
dramatizes the very grave threats to international
peace and security overhanging our world today.

42. I should like on this occasion to express our
total rejection of allegations made in the United States
and elsewhere, according to which the Arab States do
not wish to see ajust solution of the Palestine question
or the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State. Those allegations are in complete contradiction
of the well-known Arab position and represent the
wishful thinking and cheap propaganda of the Zionists
and their supporters.

48. That the crisis stemming from the eviction and
expulsion of the Palestinian people from its homeland
should still be unresolved after more than 30 years is
a woeful commentary on man’s capacity to tolerate
and even abet the most repugnant forms of injustice.
Now a tense and unsettled international environment
is reinforcing the appeal of the oppressed Palestinians
for fresh efforts to be undertaken in a serious and
constructive manner to undo the injustice inflicted
on them and so contribute to the long-sought and
much-desired solution to the Middle East conflict and,
thereby, to the strengthening of international peace
and security.

43. Unless the Council is prepared to take positive
action, words alone are not likely to correct the
serious,situation. The present situation in the region
does not allow for further delay. It is imperative that
the Council act now in a decisive manner to bring
about a just and lasting settlement in the Middle East.
44. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Guyana.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
45. Mr. DOUGLAS (Guyana): Mr. President, I wish
to thank you, and through you the other members of
this Council, for giving my delegation an opportunity
to address this body on the question of the exercise
by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights.

49. The Council once again is presented with the
opportunity of taking such action as would move the
Middle East question beyond its present stalemate.
The Council’s task is facilitated in that the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People has put forward a reasonable, balanced
and phased programme for the implementation of the
rights of the Palestinian people. This programme
enjoys widespread support in the General Assembly,
where it has been endorsed on several occasions.
As it is firmly based on the relevant resolutions of
the Assembly and the Council, the programme therefore reflects the cohective wisdom of this Organization. Its purpose is to serve the interests of the
international community, which is anxious for a final
settlement of this enduring problem. Obviously it
does not cater to the narrow and necessarily selfdefeating interests of the few as opposed to the many.

46. The world is at present”experiencing a period
of increasing tension, of sharpening confrontation
between the super-Powers and of renewed efforts to
assert claims to, or demarcate, spheres of interest in
accordance with perceived strategic considerations.
Such developments have given rise to understandable
fears and anxieties about the preservation of international peace and security. Small States in particular
are disturbed by present trends in international relations and have become acutely aware of their own
vulnerability in a world in which their very independence is jeopardized by the cynical resort to
force or the insidious encouragement of acts of destabilization by the militarily and economically powerful. In this atmosphere of crisis and militarization,
the role of the United Nations in reaffirming and
applying those principles that are the foundation-stone
of their independence and provide the best guarantee
for its future protection assumes particularly critical

50. The passage of time has shown the inadequacy
and futility of Middle East initiatives that have ignored
the fundamental importance of implementing Palestinian rights as a sine qua non for resolving the
Middle East dispute. Step-by-step and partial ap6

\
I

proaches have done nothing to advance the cause of
Middle East peace. Instead, they have worked in
favour of the occupying Power, allowing it to exploit
the opportunity
offered by a gradualist approach to
consolidate its hold on the occupied territories. Israel
now has a vested interest in the maintenance of the
status quo that is manifested in its increasing violation
of the rights of Palestinians and an unbending and
vigorous settlements
policy. Contemptuous
of the
United Nations framework for a Middle East settlement and encouraged by its participation
in piecemeal
and more convenient arrangements, Israel has become
even more arrogant and defiant in the execution of its.
settlements policy. Witness its utter disregard of resolution 465 (1980) and the policies Israel has pursued
since the adoption of that resolution. These actions
on the part of Israel have not only produced the
Middle East stalemate that we are witnessing, they
also move us further away from the peaceful settlement that we all desire.

Arab Emirates, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
54.

Mr. HUMAIDAN

(United Arab Emirates) (interFirst of all, I should like to
thank-you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the’council
for having allowed me to take part in this
important debate on the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
.

pretation

from

French):

55. . With regard to the recommendations
of that Committee, ‘we stated in the Council, on 18 June 1976
[192&h meeting]., that they can constitute a valid and
realistic basis to enable the Palestinian
people to
exercise its inalienable *rights and to prepare the
ground for a settlement of the Palestinian question,
which is central to the Middle East crisis. However,
one notes with regret that those recommendations,
many times approved by the General Assembly, have
so far not been the subject of a decision by the
Council. Why? Because one major Power, which
protects Israel, has constantly blocked the adoption of
such a decision; The political and military assistance
given by that major Power ‘to Israel has encouraged
the latter to continue denying the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people in their ancestral homeland and
to persist’in its policy of expansionist colonization.

5 1. The deteriorating situation in the occupied territories taxes to the very limit the patience so far shown
by the Palestinian people and its acknowledged representative,
the Palestine
Liberation
Organization.
Despite the inglorious role of the United Nations in
relation to their fate, the Palestinians have shown and
continue to show a commendable
faith in the ability
of the Organization to correct a long-standing injustice.
They have chosen to work with the international community in formulating
a programme
that has the
potential for achieving that elusive goal of a just and
comprehensive Middle East settlement. In responding
to the trust that they have placed in us, we have an
obligation to set about actively implementing
the programme with which they identify and to ensure their
full participation
in all efforts directed towards the
solution of the Middle East problem, of which, it is
almost redundant to stress, they constitute the key
element.

56. We note also, with satisfaction,
the success
scored by ‘the Palestinian cause throughout the world
last year and since the beginning of this year. We are
in .fact witnessing the emergence of a broad consensus
in the international
community
on the need to take
into account the rights of the Palestinian people in
every peace effort in the Middle East. Support for the
Palestinian
people was confirmed in the decisions
adopted at the Summit Conference of the Organization
of African Unity, held at Monrovia, and at the Sixth
Summit Conference of Non-Aligned
Countries held at
Havana. Such support has also been expressed in.
many other conferences which have been held on that
subject by public organizations in all continents, and
in particular in western Europe. Some countries of
western Europe which are members of the Common
Market have also intensified their dialogue with the
Palestine Liberation
Organization
and have opened
PLO offices in their respective countries. Such support
was also manifest in the statements of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of various countries during the general
debate at the thirty-fourth
session of the General
Assembly, and in particular in the statements of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of some countries which
in the past had sympathized with Israel.

52. Recently the world witnessed the birth of the
nation of Zimbabwe. Its independence, after years of
hard struggle, shows how the indomitable
spirit of
the true fighters for freedom cannot be subdued and
how inevitable is the need to come to terms with this
fact. No settlement of the Middle East question is
possible without the realization
of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. No settlement of the
Middle East question is possible if the PLO is excluded
from negotiations that are directed towards that goal.
The Council cannot for ever avoid recognition of this
reality, which enjoys almost universal acceptance. By
adopting the programme for the implementation
of
Palestinian rights, the Council will be placing itself
in step with a growing international consensus and will
put an end to its anomalous separation from this
almost universally shared position.

57. That said, we must also note the regrettable fact
that the United States has refused to join in this new
awakening in the international
community to the Palestinian problem. In fact, the United States continues
to aid Israel militarily,
financially and diplomatically.
And we all know very well that in the absence of that
American support, Israel could not have continued to

53. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of the United
7

defy the will of the international community. Taking
that into account, the Tenth Arab Summit Conference,
held in Tunisia, declared that
“the continuation of that policy will have an adverse effect on the mutual relations and interests
of the Arab countries and the-united States”.3.
58. Once again I wish to afBr& that the Camp David
accords and the Washington treaty constitute, in our
view, a negative and dangerous development in the
Palestinian question. My colleague and brother from
Algeria, Ambassador Bedjaoui, submitted to the Council on 9 April [2208th meeting], a comprehensive
analysis, both political and legal, of what he termed
the deep crisis of credibility surrounding that separate
settlement. My delegation endorses that analysis
and those well-founded arguments, and I also wish to
recall that the President of the United Arab Emirates
has stated on several occasions that no Arab leader
has the right to take unilateral decisions concerning
this matter of destiny, in the defence of which the Arab
nation has mobilized all its energies and potential.
Is it not true that those accords have brought about a
strategic imbalance in Arab solidarity, which is the
cornerstone of the struggle of the Arab world to recover
its legitimate rights through the liberation of occupied
Arab territories? Is it not also true that those so-called
peace accords do not open up the way for’a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the problem in the
Middle East, because they neglect the, two basic
principles for such a solution-to wit, withdrawal
from all Arab territories occupied since 1967out of an
imperatively necessary respect for the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
and the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, independence and the creation of a
sovereign State in Palestine? To that let us add that
those accords ignore the problem of sovereignty over
Arab Jerusalem. Furthermore, those accords disregard
the United Nations resolutions and public opinion in
general which affirm that the Palestinian people must
participate, through its legitimate representative, the
PLO, in all efforts or negotiations aimed at finding a
solution to this problem.
59. I should be remiss in my duty if I did not thank
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
Ambassador Kane of Senegal, as well as the other
members of the Committee, for the sincere and serious
efforts they have been making in fulfilling their important task. Let me conclude this statement by
affirming that I entirely agree with the Chairman of the
Committee in his conclusion concerning the quest for
urgent solutions to the problem, that:
“The search for a solution can be accomplished
initially, as we see it, by the adoption of a resolution which would recognize the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people, as they have been
defined by the General Assembly.” [S/PV.2204,
para. 35.1

60. The PRESIDENT (interprefation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Somalia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
61. Mr. ADAN (Somalia): Mr. President, I thank you
and the other members of the Council for giving me
the opportunity to take part in this debate on Palestinian rights.
62. Let me first of all congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
current month. Your accession to this office is particularly welcome because of your political experience
and diplomatic skill, and in view also of your country’s unceasing efforts to promote the principles and
purposes of the Charter.
63. Ever since the question of Palestine became a
responsibility of the United Nations, the Organization
has sought to resolve the grave problem of the area
with the aid of a series of commissions, special missions and committees. Many of these bodies have made
recommendations or negotiated agreements which
have had far-reaching effects on the Middle East
situation. It is a matter of great satisfaction to Somalia
that in the present phase of the Palestinian question
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People is following the
precedents set by former United Nations bodies. The
establishment of the Committee by the General Assembly has emphasized the competence of the United
Nations to deal with the problem of Palestine.
64. Under the admirable chairmanship of Ambassadors Fall and Kane of Senegal, the Committee
has shown the determination of the international
community to redress the historical wrong done to the
Palestinian people. Above all, the work of the Committee reflects an international consensus, now firmly
established, on the principles and measures which
must be implemented to ensure a just and lasting
Middle East peace.
65. My Government strongly supports the recommendations of the Committee with regard to the return
of the exiled Palestinians to their homeland, with
regard to the recognition of the Palestine Liberation
Organization as the legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and with regard to the establishment of an independent and sovereign Palestinian
State.
66. Over three decades ago, the Palestinian people
were terrorized into flight and excluded from their
homeland by a people that had intimate knowledge
of the bitterness of diaspora, and this wrong, as we
know, has been at the heart of the Middle East conflict. The world community needs to change its annual
reaffirmation of the right of the exiled Palestinians to
return to their homeland from mere ritual and rhetoric
to active implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly.

67. It should be evident that no one can speak for the
Palestinians other than the representatives they have
chosen; so the PLO must be allowed to participate as
an equal and independent
party in all international
conferences on the Middle East.

account because more than 2000 years ago certain
Hebrew tribes occupied parts of Palestine.
72. The unanimous adoption of resolution 465 (1980)
only a few weeks ago shows that all sectors of the
international
community fully understand that Israel’s
occupation policy is unjust, illegal and completely
untenable and must not only be stopped but reversed
if there is to be any prospect of peace in the Middle
East. In the light of the welcome unanimity
of the
Council on the nature of the obstacles to a Middle
East settlement and in the light of the widening consensus that peace in the area is impossible without the
realization of Palestinian rights, it would seem only
logical for the Council to move forward and take
positive steps to remove these obstacles and lay the
foundations of a just and lasting settlement. Obviously,
mere condemnations
of Israel’s violations of intemational law will be of no more avail now than they
have been in the past.

68. Most important of all, the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
and statehood
in Palestine must be restored. These rights, as the
historical record shows, were dishonestly and illegally
taken away from them early in the century and traded
in the market-place of imperialist interests.
69. The major obstacle in the way of implementing
these principles is, of course, the intransigence
of
successive Israeli Governments,
which has reached
new heights in the blind fanaticism of the Government
of Menachem
Begin. As we know, far from withdrawing from all occupied Arab territories as required
by resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the Israeli
Government has steadily progressed from a policy of
creeping colonization
of Arab lands to one of blatant
annexation and expansionism,
in pursuit of the plan
for an expanded Israel.

73. Somalia has already expressed, in this and other
international
forums, its conviction that the Council
should endorse, without delay, the international
consensus on Palestinian rights expressed in resolution 3236 (XXIX)
and reaffirmed in its resolution
34/65 A. We believe that, in doing so, the Council
would provide an essential building block of a Middle
East peace which is missing from its resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). We believe that the Council
must also consider possible courses of action necessitated by its responsibility
for removing threats to
international
peace and security. No one denies that
the Middle East conflict threatens world peace or that
the Palestine question is central to the Middle East
conflict; so the Council’s duty in this regard is clear.

70. The Council is familiar with the details of Israel’s
harsh military occupation and of its illegal policies
carried out on the West Bank and in Jerusalem in
defiance of the Geneva Conventions governing the
conduct of an occupying Power. Zionist annexations,
expropriations
and illegal settlements began to be
effected soon after the 1967 war and these illegal
measures
have been repeatedly
described
and
repeatedly condemned in the General Assembly and
in the Council. It is instructive, however, to let The
New
York Times, a newspaper which cannot be
accused of pro-Arab bias, describe the situation.
In an editorial of 13 February it said:

74. One of the most tragic aspects of the Palestinian
problem from the earliest days of its existence has
been that the rights of the Palestinian people have
always been held hostage to external interests. We see
this at the present time, when sincere attempts to
advance the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people are being unfairly linked with materialist
considerations
about the supply of Middle East oil.
It was also evident in the past, when the issues
governing Palestinian rights were not those of justice
and humanity but of the desire to reward world Jewry
at the expense of the Arab people of Palestine for
financial and other support in times of war.

“Under the cover of the Camp David accords and
East-West tensions, Israel continues to change the
legal and demographic conditions in the West Bank.
By one ruse after another, Jews are encroaching
upon the region’s Arabs, adding to the ‘archaeological’ and ‘army’ camps with newly requisitioned
or purchased rural lands and now with claims to
ancestral homes inside . . . Arab cities.”
The editorial also noted the hollowness of Israel’s
defence of its actions on grounds of security, pointing
out that Arab hostility was being knowingly provoked
and that the spreading tentacles of Israeli settlements
were themselves the excuse for new security arrangements.

75. Today, the special relationship
between the
United States and Israel is one of the crucial factors
affecting the resolution of the problem of Palestine,
since the unquestioning
and open-ended moral and
material
support of Israel by the United
States
undoubtedly
fuels Israeli intransigence.
Unfortunately, the United States’ foreign policy towards the
Middle East is bedevilled by ambiguities. A tradition
of democracy and fairness leads the Government
of
the United States to subscribe, at least in principle,
to international
decisions on the Middle East, but the

71. The world community
is now faced with the
cumulative
effects of the illegal policies carried out
by Israel over the past 14 years. It is challenged
also by the arrogant Zionist claim, now openly
asserted, that international
law, international
agreements and the resolutions of this Council are of no
9

Zionist constituency
in America demands active
opposition to the implementation
of those decisions.

of the full realization
estinian people.

76. Zionism in the United States and in Israel has
been masterful in its exploitation
of fears of antiSemitism and in its sustained misuse of the historical
tragedy of the Nazi holocaust. It is possible in the
United States to criticize the Governments
of countries on any continent of the world without being
accused of prejudice against the racial characteristics
or prejudices of any of those Governments
or countries. It is not possibie, however, to make the mildest
criticism of the policies of the Government
of Israel
without an immediate
outcry and charges of antiSemitism and of raising the spectre of a new holocaust.

78. In any event, the steadily increasing momentum
of the struggle of peoples against foreign domination
and to gain self-determination
and independence will
not be stopped. This has been evident over the past
decades. The recent accession to independence
of
Zimbabwe after years of struggle and sacrifice by its
people and with the active support of the United
Nations provides the most recent evidence of the
fact that the tide of history is running strongly with the.
forces of liberation. The United Nations, for its part,
must continue to exert every effort to bring about by
peaceful means the realization of all legitimate national
aspirations and in particular those of the Palestinian
people, which has been so grievously wronged.

77. Here in the United Nations we are also familiar
with-but
less impressed by-unscrupulous
attempts
to divert attention from Israel’s inhuman and illegal
policies through the gross exploitation
of sensitive
issues. But the result of Zionist influence in the United
States is that the reaction of successive American
administrations
to Israel has been to give in to its
every whim for fear that it will throw a tantrum. In
the context of the Middle East question, such attitudes
only serve to increase the danger of renewed regional
conflict and of serious international
repercussions.
This situation presents a moral and political challenge
of the highest order to the leadership of the United
States. We hope that it will come to realize and
lead the American people to the realization that a just
and lasting Middle East peace is in the interests of all
the peoples of the Middle East, including those of
Israel, and that this can only be obtained on the basis

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

of the national

‘rights of the Pal-

79. In conclusion,
I reaffirm my Government’s
support for the full exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable
rights and for the view that any
settlement of the Palestinian question should be made
on the basis of the self-determination
of the Palestinian
people and the establishment
of an independent,
sovereign Palestinian State.
The meeting

rose at 6.50 p.m.

NOTES

’ OfJicial Records of the General Assembly,
Session, Supplement No. 35.
* United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
3 A/34/763, annex.

Thirty-Fourth

83-61462-August

1986-2.425

003cil
