SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

‘THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

.2449th

MEETING:

NEW

31 MAY 1983

YORK.

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2449)

,...................................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2449

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Recorrls of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2449th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. UMBA
I

:

di LUTETE

31 May

(Zaire).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption

1983, at iO.30 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision-taken at-the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a
place at the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2449)
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma
place at the Council table.

of the agenda

2. The *situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

took a

4. The PRESIDENT
(intertrretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at pre;ious meetings on
this item [2439th to 2444th, and 2446th to 2448th meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria,
Angola, Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Cuba,
Democratic
Yemen, Egypt,
Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Grenada,
Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, the Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper
Volta, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia and Zambia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
.

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation ht Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

1

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistart), Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Muiiiz (Argentina), Mr. Woolcott (Austra- .
lia), Mr. Hashim (Bangladesh), Mr. Moseley (Barbados),
Mr. Adjibade (Benin), Mr. Mogwe.(Botswana), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Trucco
(Chile), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus),
Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr.
Davin (Gabon), Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. Ott (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr.
Rdcz (Hungary), Mr. Rao (India), Mr. Kusumaatmadja
(Indonesia), Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda (Japan),
Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mrs.
Jones (Liberia), Mr. Bunvin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Tan Sri Zainal Abidin (Malaysia), Mr. Traore (Mali),
Mr. Marin Bosch (Mexico), Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongoha), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Chissano (Mozam-

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maudave (Mauritius) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of
the Council to take places at the Security Council table.
1

bique). Mr. Oumarou (Niger). Mr. Boiokor (Nigeria), Mr.
Cabrera (Panama), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Marinescu
(Romania), Mr. Niasse (Senegal) Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles). Mr. Stevens (Sierra Leone), Mr. Adan (Somalia).
Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Fonseka (Sri
Lanka), Mr. EI-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Slim
(Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Owiny (Uganda), Mr.
SaIim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bassole (Upper
Volta), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela), Mr. Le Kim
Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Mojsov (Yugoslavia) and Mr.
Goma (Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the CounciI chamber.

debate will assist the process of bringing Namibia to independence. As a number of speakers before me have said,
this debate should be used as an opportunity for constructive progress and not for the venting of rhetoric which
seems aimed at purposes other than the early independence of Namibia.
11. The Australian delegation has closely followed the
debate and commends the spirit of conciliation and moderation that has been demonstrated by most of the parties
directly involved. This is a hopeful development. There
have, of course, been some extravangant statements but
mostly from countries far removed from the scene.
Regrettably, the statement by the representative of South
Africa did not fit this pattern of conciliation
and
moderation.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Ghana
and the Islamic Republic of Iran in which they request to
be invited to take part in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite them to
take part in the discussion without the right to vote, under
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

12. Since the adoption of Council resolution 435
(1978), the path towards its implementation
has been
arduous. There have been substantial achievements but
also substantial setbacks. Undeniably the negotiations
have oscillated between troughs and peaks. I refer to the
pessimism after the 198 1 Geneva pre-implementation
meeting was torpedoed by South Africa and the optimism last September when the contact group advised the
Secretary-General of the agreement on a set of constitutional principles. But by any standard the path has been
too long and too slow-unnecessarily
so, in Australia’s
view. My delegation, therefore, expresses its emphatic
conviction that resolution 435 (1978) should now be
implemented as soon as possible to allow the people of
Namibia to determine their own future and set about the
task of reconciliation and nation building.

AZ the invitation of the President, Mr. Gbeho (Ghana)
and Mr. Serajzadeh (Islamic Republic of Iran) took pIaces
at the side of the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
first speaker is the representative of Australia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
7. Mr. WOOLCOTT
(Australia): Mr. President, first let
me say that the Australian delegation is pleased to see you
presiding over the Council during this important series of
meetings. Let me also, through you, thank the members
of the Council for agreeing to Australia’s request to participate today.

13. Australia’s policy on this question is predicated on
support for Council resolutions 431 (1978), 432 (1978)
and, as I have already mentioned, 435 (1978). In resolution 431 (1978) there was a call for the early independence of Namibia through free elections under the
supervision and control of the United Nations. In resolution 432 (1978), Walvis Bay was recognized as an integral
part of an independent Namibia, while resolution 435
(1978) provided a means of fulfilling the pledge contained in resolution 431 (1978).

8. Australia rarely seeks to intervene before the Council
and has only done so today for a number of reasons..
First, we recognise the particular importance of the subject under discussion and the unique responsibility of the
United Nations for it. Secondly, as one of the few Western
members of the United Nations Council for Namibia, we
thought it appropriate to add our perspective. Thirdly,
the newly elected Australian Government has recently
completed a review of its policy on the question of Namibia and we wanted to take this opportunity to state that
policy.

14. Much attention has been paid during these meetings to the reasons why resolution 435 (1978) has not yet
been implemented.
The Australian Government very
much regrets the delay that the question of so-called linkage is creating. We should be concerned if the linkage of
negotiations on Namibian independence to other issues
were to cause a stalemate in the pursuit of independence
for Namibia, at a time when all the other signs for early
independence looked propitious.

9. Australia’s commitment to a free and independent
Namibia is unquestioned and unequivocal. There can be
no doubt that South Africa’s occupation of the Territory
is illegal and that this is a position held by the intemational community.

15. I should add, however, that Australia does not
think that criticisms directed at specific Western States
contribute to an improved climate for negotiations.
Insead, we would urge those responsible for the negotiations to focus again on resolution 435 (1978), which contains the essential elements of a settlement, in order to
promote afresh, and as a matter of priority, the independence of Namibia.

10. The question is not whether Namibia should be free
and fully independent-on
that there is international
consensus-but rather when that should occur and under
what conditions. We earnestly hope that this Council
2

16. Australia acknowledges the efforts to date of the five
Western members of the contact group. The inability of
the group so far to complete its allotted task is a cause of
frustration to the Australian Government, as indeed it is
to the parties most diectly involved. Australia is convinced, however, that the contact group still offers the
best chance for bringing about an internationally acceptable solution to the question of Namibia and looks forward to the resumption of progress in the group’s efforts.

22, The importance of this debate is amply demonstrated by the presence during its course of so many ministers for foreign affairs. South Africa should be left in no
doubt that it is isolated in its apparent determination to
stall the negotiations on independence for Namibia.
23. I have already noted that southern Africa has
become an area of heightened tensions and military activity. We believe that the independence of Namibia should
be the next step in the complex process of bringing stability to the southern African region because of the immediate impact it would have on the climate of confidence in
the area. We should not lose sight of the fact that the
primary objective is the independence of Namibia.

17. Many speakers have made reference during this
debate to the escalating cycle of violence in southern
Africa. This violence is to be deeply deplored, as are the
continuing efforts of South Africa to destabilize its neighbours. Australia cannot condone the indiscriminate use
of violence and, as the Australian Prime Minister, Mr.
Robert Hawke, said in the Australian Parliament as
recently as 24 May: “The Australian
Government
unequivocally condemns the latest use by South Africa
of its air force to attack a sovereign neighbouring
country.”

24. It is the sincere wish of the Australian Government
that the parties directly concerned in the negotiations
should take the lead from these expressions of international solidarity and seize the opportunities at hand for
the early implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) and
bring to Namibia and its people the independence which
for far too long has been denied them.

18. Australia cannot support the endorsement of armed
struggle as a means of achieving independence for Namibia, as this would be inconsistent with the Charter of
the United Nations. We are committed as a matter of
principle to a peaceful, negotiated settlement of the question of Namibia.

25. Mr. SCHELTEMA
(Netherlands): Since this is the
last day of your presidency, Sir, it is perhaps a little late
to congratulate you on your assumption of that office,
but I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you on the very skilful and very diplomatic way you have
so far handled the business of the Council. I have full
confidence that you will handle it on your last day in the
same way. I should like to add that it was a great pleasure to me to see, during parts of the debate we had last
week on this question, a former colleague of ours, now
your Ministerfor Foreign Affairs, Sir, presiding over the
meetings of the Council.

19. At the same time, however, the Australian Government understands the frustrations that have led many
countries and people to take the view that, if peaceful
methods do not produce the necessary results, force may
inevitably occur, as a last resort, to end institutionalized
discrimination
in southern Africa. South Africa must
quickly agree to remove its armed forces not only from
the Territory of Namibia but also from the sovereign
State of Angola. It is essential that all States in the region
can be confident about their security without the threat of
South African incursions.

26. Finally, I take this opportunity
to congratulate
your predecessor, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, on the very able and
dignified way in which she conducted the business of this
Council.

20. As a member of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, Australia recognizes the Council as the sole
legal Administering Authority of the Territory until independence. We shall continue to work actively and constructively within the Council. We believe that the
Council could be a force for good in the complex and
delicate negotiating process and we shall continue to
oppose efforts by some Council members to push it into
an obstructionist position.

27. The present meetings of the Government unmistakably reflect the feelings of impatience and disappointment felt by the international
community over South
Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia. They
also signal widespread uneasiness at the slow pace of the
negotiations conducted with the aim of securing internationally recognized independence for the Namibian
people. Ever since 1968 the Council has decided to
remain seized of this question, which is a particular
responsibility and concern of the United Nations. Seventeen years after South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory was terminated by the General Assembly [resolution
2145 (XX0 of 27 October 1964, Council resolutions 385
(1976) and 435 (1978) are still awaiting implementation.
South Africa so far has failed to comply with those
resolutions.

21. The Australian delegation would like to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General. His assiduous efforts on this
difficult issue demonstrate his clear commitment to the
cause of an independent Namibia. We especially appreciate the forthright nature of his report [S/Z5776J We
should also pay a tribute to his Special Representative for
Namibia, Mr. Ahtisaari, and express the hope that he will
be available to continue his valuable work. My Govemment rejects any imputation against the impartiality of the
Secretary-General and his staff and takes this opportunity
to express again our full support for his involvement.

28. The international
community is confronted with
South Africa’s intransigence and that country’s practice
of constantly raising the price for co-operation in the
implementation
of the United Nations plan for a settle3

ment. More than once has the South African Government resorted to delaying tactics, raising new problems
that have needed to be addressed. My Government
seriously questions the willingness of South Africa to
vacate the Territory and grant independence to the Namibian people. This will be denied, of course, by the
South African side, and they will point to their acceptance of resolution 435 (1978). Whose responsibility is it
then, that, five years after the independence plan was
adopted, the Namibian people still remain deprived of
their legitimate rights? My Government cannot but draw
the conclusion that South Africa has not yet decided if it
will live up to its declared intentions.

tiality in the supervision of the electoral process as well as
on the size, composition and deployment of UNTAG.
32. All outstanding problems thus seemed to have been
resolved. But then it transpired that a major difficulty had
arisen in the .negotiations: the linkage of South Africa’s
withdrawal from Namibia to the withdrawal of Cuban
forces from Angola.
-33. My Government regrets that this issue has caused
delay in the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). The
presence of foreign forces at the invitation of a sovereign
neighbouring country of Namibia falls outside the scope
of the proposals for a settlement that were accepted by all
sides and should therefore not stand in the way of the
early exercise by the Namibian people of their intemationally
recognized and inalienable
right to selfdetermination
and independence. We should therefore
have preferred that the present more complex situation
had not presented itself. In the present circumstances,
however, we can subscribe to the view that the parties are
justified in trying to reach an understanding on issues
that are relevant to the situation which will prevail after
Namibia’s independence. For it has been recognized that
there should be no need for the presence of foreign forces
in Angola once the threat of South African military
action against that State has been eliminated. But we
should not insist on solving all the problems of the region
at once. In this regard, we can subscribe to the view of
the Secretary-General as expressed in his report to the
Council: the independence of Namibia is “the essential
and primary issue, which we must now face up to without further delay” [S15776, para. 201.

29. The Netherlands, not being directly involved in the
negotiations that resulted from the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), welcomed the settlement plan and has
consistently encouraged all parties concerned to persevere in their efforts and to show all possible flexibility
and goodwill in order to facilitate its peaceful implementation. For its part, my Government has offered to contribute a detachment of civilian police to the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) which
will assist the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
for Namibia in supervising Namibia’s orderly transition
to internationally
recognized independence.
30. Before I continue, I should like to pay a warm tribute to the Secretary-General for his objective, balanced
and lucid further report concerning the implementation of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia [S/15776j. We fully concur in his analysis and we wish to reiterate our deep
appreciation for his indefatigable efforts. to discharge
what he rightly describes in his report as his special
responsibility for the problem of Namibia in view of the
unique relationship between the United Nations and the
people of Namibia. As the Secretary-General’s report
indicates, five years of protracted negotiations since the
adoption of resolution 435 (1978) have so far not yielded
conclusive results. Yet the report also sets out in convincing detail the substantial progress that has been achieved
thanks to the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, the front-line States, Nigeria, SWAPO,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and, last but not
least, the contact group of five Western States, which are
the authors of the settlement plan, My Government
intends to continue to support these efforts towards the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) because they
remain the only viable way to enable the Namibian people
freely to exercise their right to selfdetermination
at the
earliest possible date.

34: Namibia, being a Territory with an international status, can only proceed to independence through an internationally acceptable process of self-determination,
as
provided for in-the independence plan. For that reason
the Netherlands considered the unilateral elections which
South Africa organized in Namibia in 1978 as null and
void. We shall continue to reject any further measures
which the South African administration
of the Territory
might take with the aim of arriving at an internal settlement of the Namibian problem. The Netherlands also
,condemns the repeated acts of aggression by South
Africa against neighbouring States.
..
35. Five years of protracted negotiations since the
adoption of resolution 435 (1978) have as, yet failed to
yield conclusive results. The patience of the international
community has been stretched almost to its limits. If the
Council in its wisdom now wishes again to grant a new
lease of life to the negotiations and abstains from invoking its powers under the Charter of the United Nations,
this should not be misunderstood by South Africa as a
sign of weak-mindedness. Instead, it should be regarded
as an urgent appeal to all concerned to redouble their
efforts and to remove, in the coming months, the last
obstacles on the way towards the implementation
of the
settlement plan. We, for our part, urge the contact group
of five to remain conscious of the responsibility they have
accepted .towards the Namibian people and the world
community. In the time ahead they should be able to

31. In the summer of 1982, consultations between the
parties reached a new level of intensity and expectations
rose that an agreement was finally within reach. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the ftve members of the Westem contact group stated in a communique issued in New
York [S/15287) that there was agreement on the constitutional principles for the Namibian Constituent Assembly
and on a method for electing the assembly, and that substantial progress had been made on the question of impar4

..- -.

iota of recognition has been given to South Africa by the
Maltese nation ever since South Africa instituted its racist
policies at home and its illegal presence in Namibia. What
we have given is high-level university and technicalcollege education to several Namibian students.

assess South Africa’s readiness to co-operate seriously at
last in the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), after
which the Council should convene once again to determine if the enabling resolution for the independence plan
can be adopted or, alternatively, to consider how further
to press South Africa for compliance with previous decisions of the Council.

42. It is commonly acknowledged that the Namibian
road to independence has been immorally
long and
unjust and the end, which seemed within reach a few
years ago, has recently and unfortunately been made to
recede. The last lap was supposed to have been relatively
smooth, instead, new and formidable obstacles were
placed in the way, some foreseen and foretold, but others
quite unexpected and extraneous and deliberately
interposed.

36. Surely none of those involved in the negotiations
can hope to profit from a renunciation of the commitment to enable the people of Namibia freely to exercise
their right to self-determination
at the earliest possible
date. We hope, therefore, that the present debate, which
has so clearly demonstrated the general feeling of uneasiness and impatience at the lack of decisive progress, will
induce in all parties concerned a fresh sense of urgency
and provide them with new resolve to overcome the final
hurdles. Time is running out. If this debate succeeds in
conveying this message, only then will it have answered its
purpose.

43. The momentum
for progress has slowed down.
Mercifully, however, it has not completely died out; even
in the most negative of’the statements made here last
week a slight ray of hope still emerged. We must now
analyse carefully what precise and effective steps we can
take so that by concerted international
action and by
peaceful means we can again rekindle the fire of hope,
dampen the discord of suspicion and sustain the people
of Namibia in what is perhaps their darkest hour-we
hope, however, the darkest hour before the dawn.

37. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Mr. President, your nation has
done us a signal honour this month in sharing the presidency of the Council between two of its most eminent
citizens. As your presidency and the current debate on
Namibia draw to a close, I trust our exercise will not be
another *‘betrayed mission” this time, but rather a prelude to the birth of a new and independent African
nation, Namibia.

44. To help us in our task we have the valuable. report
of the Secretary-General which, as we have come to
expect, not only sets an objective tone over developments
since 1981 but also, most properly, touches the real heart
of the matter. He urges that

38. Together with a number of other African statesmen,
your Minister for Foreign Affairs has explained, with
matchless eloquence and deep conviction, the historical
background to the justified impatience over the faltering
progress in the quest for Namibian independence. The
prolonged suffering and the frustrations of the Namibian
people over the delay in the attainment of their cherished
goal have been stated forcefully and forthrightly by the
President of SWAPO, whose presence we welcome here.

“the Namibian problem be regarded as a primary
question in its own right,“-and
I emphasize that
phrase-“the
solution of which will in itself ease other
’ tensions in the region and be in the long-term interest
of all concerned.‘? [ibid]

39. The presence of so many ministers for foreign affairs
amongst us is a testimony to their steadfast faith in the
Organization, as well as of their united determination to
pursue their goal by peaceful means. Together they have
provided a comprehensive catalogue of the innumerable
difficulties posed by South Africa; many have been
patiently considered and taken favourably into account
by SWAP0 and the front-line States; there are others,
deliberately introduced, which simply cannot be condoned as they run counter to the peaceful progress that
should have been achieved years ago.

45. This fundamental principle has been overlooked so
often in the past that it is necessary for it to be stressed
loud and clear today. It is the one and only key to a
lasting solution. It is a clarion call to which we are bound
to respond. That is the principal perspective which we,
for our part, fully endorse. It sets the right tone for our
debate and of course for its outcome. I would therefore
hope it will be possible for all of us-and particularly the
countries most directly involved-to
keep the primacy of
this objective with inflexible persistence and with uncompromising dedication, especially in consideration of the
clear legal responsibility that the United Nations has
towards the people of Namibia. Collective and bilateral
efforts are now even more resolutely called for; they need
to be intensified and some countries in this respect
remain with much more to contribute towards compliance than most of us. Their influence, however, should
be exercised exclusively to promote the right of the Namibian people to independence.

40. I do not wish to cover the same ground, except to
say in all sincerity that we fully understand and sympathize with their frustrations and we particularly regret the
suffering of the Namibian people in their quest for social
emancipation and political liberty.
41. In any case, Malta’s position has been stated in the
past; we have made our maximum potential contribution
to the promotion of Namibian independence. I need only
recall, perhaps, that not a pennyworth of trade, not a
gram of gunpowder, not one crumb of comfort, not one

46. I feel that this is not a time to recriminate and even
less to falter. We must stick firmly to the guidelines spelt
out in resolution 435 (1978) but concentrateatthis
stage
5

on the most effective modalities with which to achieve
those guidelines in practical terms.
47. On this aspect also the Secretary-General’s report
informs us that progress has also been made-in fact, a
large measures of agreement has been reached. The
sooner free and United Nations-supervised elections are
held, the more emphatic and incontestable will be the
verdict of the people concerned as to their future. Agreement on the modalities should therefore be our immediate priority. We should not allow ourselves to be
distracted from this direct approach.
48. It is also gratifying to note in the same report that all
the parties to the negotiations remain committed to the
principles contained in resolution 435 (1978). Just as that
resolution was impressively supported, so must the backing for its implementation
be generous, consistent and
specific. South Africa’s response must be clear and
unequivocal.
49. It is therefore hoped that, on this occasion, the replies to be expected from the South African Government
will soon be forthcoming and that no further pretexts will
be provided to camouflage delay, so that it will soon be
possible to take practical steps for the commencement of
the implementation
of that unanimously adopted Council
resolution.

53. As all members are aware, the draft resolution
before the Council [S/Z5&Vj is the outcome of collective
effort and prolonged negotiation. Even at its lowest common denominator, it clearly reaffirms the legal responsibility of the United Nations for Namibian independence;
it denotes an expression of great concern over the lack of
progress and it identifies the source of the obstacles to
progress; it introduces a new sense of urgency and a determination to concentrate efforts on the fundamental
objective-self-determination
for the Namibian people; it
calls for the mobilization of the best resources available to
the Organization in the peaceful pursuit of its objective;
and it finally introduces a time element as well as conveying a clear indication that, in the event of failure to record
progress, further action within the prerogative of the
Council would be called for.
54. These elements in turn reflect the dominant themes
that emerged from this high-level debate, together with
the widespread hope that our worst fears would not
come to pass, but rather that the best aspirations of the
international
community for the achievement of selfdetermination
by the Namibian people would soon be
realized.
55. There is a common feeling that a. unanimously
adopted Council resolution would create a positive political impact and would provide a psychological boost for
steady progress in the near future. The invaluable resources of a collective and concentrated international effort,
backed by the dedicated efforts of the Secretary-General
and his team, constitute an irresistible tide for final victory. South Africa should join, rather than impede, this
final sprint.

50. It is equally highly appropriate that we should all
accord priority to helping the Secretary-General in the
organization
of the required consultations and team
effort. A first, essential objective is for the Council to raise
its authoritative voice to secure the appropriate climate
for the proposed cease-fire in Namibia. Preparations for
the sending of UNTAG to the spot should be finalized as
a necessary corollary; agreement on details would stimulate the positive momentum that is needed in order to
maintain the promise and the progress on which the international community has set its sights and which the
people of Namibia have awaited for far too long.

56. To the Namibian people goes Malta’s assurance of
continued support in their search for independence, freedom and progress in peace. We long for the day when we
can greet them as brothers in this family of nations. It is
the sacred trust of each one of us represented here.
57. Mr. NATORF (Poland): The question of Namibia
has been turned into a perennial international problem of
multifarious and dangerous dimension. South Africa’s
occupation of Namibia and its persistent acts of aggression against neighbouring States pose a serious threat to
international peace and security and violate the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions and
decisions of the United Nations. Taking this dangerous
situation into account, the International
Conference in
Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held recently in Paris,’ was strongly of the
view that the United Nations and the international community must act urgently and energetically in support of
the legitimate struggle of the Namibian people for se&
determination,
freedom and national independence.

51. MY delegation therefore urges the Government of
South Africa on this occasion no: to crack its racist whip
once more or to flex its military muscle, but rather to heed
the humanist call of the international community by being
forthcoming and extending all necessary co-operation. It
is, after all, in South Africa’s own long-term interests to
have a neighbouring people and country well disposed
towards it, despite its tragic arrogance and the economic
exploitation it has -inflicted on Namibia in the past.
52. In its search for zradual entente with its other neighbours, South Africa needs to mend the damage done-by
its past prevarication and to start writing a new chapter in
the human and political history of southern Africa and
inside South Africa itself. By its actions now, the Council
can set the tone, the scenario and the arrangements for
this process finally to commence. Its authority should
encourage, ensure and supervise an overdue start. A
unanimously adopted resolution would signal the determination of the Council to carry out its solemn
commitment.

58. The Conference also called for these very meetings
of the Council to continue further action on the implementation of its relevant resolutions. The importance attached to these meetings of our body is emphasized by the
participation
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of nonaligned countries, particularly the African States. Their
6

presence here is evidence of unswerving support for the
cause of Namibia’s independence.

delusive hope that the activities conducted by the so
called contact group would lead to a solution concerning
the liberation of Namibia, now, after so many years have
elapsed, that illusion no longer exists.

59. We were happy to see again, in the seat of the President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire, Mr.
Kamanda wa Kamanda, who in the most able manner
conducted the proceedings of the Council when it was
considering the present item on our agenda.

67. We have many times in the past pointed out that the
thesis that the events and the tension in southern Africa
are a result of Cuban or other influences is false. Disseminated in certain circles in the United States, this thesis is
not only false but also dangerous.

60. Today, in a disquieting and complex international
situation, it becomes more important than ever that all
United Nations resolutions concerning the question under
consideration be fully implemented. It is high time that
this body condemn and stop discernible manoeuvres on
the part of the racist regime of South Africa.

68. The policy of linkage and diversionary tactics stemming from this thesis should be flatly rejected. This debate
has emphasized that very forcefully.
69. Poland fully supports the decisions of the OAU and
non-aligned countries concerning the question of Namibia. My country reaffirms its unconditional support for
the struggle of the Namibian people for independence,
under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole and authentic
representative. On this occasion, my delegation would
like to extend special greetings and assurances of full solidarity to the delegation of SWAPO, headed by its President, Mr. Sam Nujoma.

61. We all heard South Africa’s statement in this debate.
One should not be misguided by the cultivated language
and soft manner in which it was delivered. It was full of
false and unfounded allegations, threats and pretensions.
We know the facts very well. We know well these efforts
to sail under false colours. Supported by its allies, South
Africa has been raising one obstacle after another on the
path to Namibia’s independence. At the same time, the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa imposed
by the Council [resolution 418 (1977)J has been violated by
the same Powers.

70. My delegation read with interest the further report
of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)
concerning the question of Namibia [S/15776J. We highly
appreciate its clarity. Yet, what is most important for us is
the fact that its concluding observations correspond fully
with the spirit and conclusions of our present debate.

62. It is quite clear now that the continuation of these
policies would not have been possible without the cooperation that exists between major countries of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organ&ion,
particularly between
the United States and Pretoria.

71. This snirit is reflected in the draft resolution on
which the Council is about to vote [S/15803]. It is important that this draft resolution condemns in a clear-cut
way South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia and
calls for compliance with and implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). In our view, a very important provision
of the draft resolution is the request addressed to the
Secretary-General to report to the Council on progress
within a period of three months.

63. It is worth recalling that, while the General Assembly has consistently advocated comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against Pretoria as one of the means of
resolving the situation, some Western countries have prevented that action. For that reason, we have always considered that the Council should urgently take effective
measures to terminate all collaboration with the Pretoria
regime in the political, diplomatic, economic and military
fields.

72. Setting a deadline shows the determination of the
Council to &main actively seized of the matter. It should
also serve as a warning to those that one day will support
the draft resolution and the ne:;t proceed with further
confirmation of policies that are contrary to what they
voted for. They should know that the matter will not be
postponed ad kalendas Graecas and that the political and
moral assessment of their two-faced standard of behaviour will be made in this chamber.

64. The long-standing position of principle of Poland
with regard to the racist South African @me and its
criminal policies of apartheid has been clearly defined
both in the United Nations and elsewhere.
65. My Government observes with deep concern the
deteriorating and explosive situation in and around Namibia. We consider that South Africa’s military build-up
and its brutal acts of armed aggression against Angola
and other neighbouring
countries constitute a grave
danger to peace and stability in this region of the world.

73. We hope that progress will be achieved in the forthcoming months. However, if obstacles persist, we believe
that the Council should be ready to consider and adopt
all necessary measures in order to ensure implementation
of its resolutions.

66. Namibia is the direct responsibility of the United
Nations until genuine independence is -achieved by its
people. Council resolution 385 (1976), together with resolution 435 (1978) and other United Nations resolutions
pertaining to Namibia, are the only basis for a peaceful
settlement of the Namibian question. If there ever was a

74. In conclusion, may I state once again that the Polish delegation will continue to make the maximum contribution
to the solution of the problem
under
7

people and people of goodwill within, our country,
within South West Africa and within our region to
assure us all of peace and prosperity.” [244Oth meeting,

consideration. We hope that the Council will discharge
its obligations in order to help the Namibian people to
exercise fully and immediately its inalienable rights.

para. 102.1

75. The PRESIDENT
(interpretafionfron? French): The
next speaker is the representative of Barbados. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

80.. At this point I am forced to say: “Aye, there’s the
rub.” For, taking into consideration the basic philosophy
of the policy of apartheid, who can trust the sense of
justice of people who ruthlessly deprive the native inhabitants of a country of their land, institutionalize by their
laws the dehumanization of those inhabitants and defy
world opinion by so doing? At this point I am forced to
say: “They make a wilderness and call it peace.” And yet,
the Government of South Africa must know that, however low an opinion it may have of the backbone of the
truly native inhabitants, it cannot continue for ever to
deny them the inalienable right of self-determination,
which is a goal aspired to by all peoples throughout history, and it is to be expected that the tight to the death for
freedom and justice and against tyranny will not be
abandoned.

76. Mr. MOSELEY
(Barbados): Before launching on
the sombre task of making a contribution to the debate
on the question of Namibia, my delegation begs your
leave, Sir, to engage in the far happier undertaking of
offering, on behalf of our country, sincere congratulations to you not only on your assumption of the presidency of this body but also on the impeccable dignity
and efficiency with which you have conducted its affairs,
especially the current debate-on a matter so fraught with
difficulties. My country, for reasons that are not difficult
to understand, takes a vicarious pride in the fact that a
native son of Africa has demonstrated such a high degree
of diplomatic
skill and judicial poise as you have
throughout this debate on a topic which must of necessity impinge sharply on the sensibilities of your illustrious country and on your own sensibilities.

81. One more word, let me add, in this context. The
world must understand that, if the test and touchstone in
South Africa were one of ideology, the possibility might
exist that a change of one’s ideology might give birth to an
accommodation
wherein peace might have a chance to
grow. Where the test and criterion are race and colour of
skin, there is no way yet discovered whereby such an
accommodation
may be achieved by a change of race.
That is at the heart of the dilemma which continues to
face the protagonists of apartheid.

77. My delegation also thanks the other members of the
Council for having acceded to our request to’be heard.
78. My delegation ventures to say that, of all the matters which may properly be brought before the Council
for consideration, none is more likely to stir the dark
emotions of rage, frustration, bitterness and hatred than
the question of Namibia and its twin sister, the question
of apartheid. Indeed, the world will not soon forget that
the factors underlying these two questions are the selfsame factors-ideas
of racial superiority, injustice and
greed-that
fuelled one of the bloodiest holocausts and
wars in the recorded history of this earth. On the other
hand, the world will long remember that, as the sun
emerging from behind a dard cloud promises a brighter
day, so this great organization, the United Nations, with
its Charter, and the Security Council hold out a beacon
of hope for all mankind.

82. Earlier in my statement I expressed the view that the
subject under debate is powerfully evocative of emotional
reaction. The time has come now to deal as objectively as
possible with the basics of the problem-and
this if for no
other reason than to establish beyond doubt that my
country’s policy is not to be shrugged off as a mere recital
of sentimental petulance. Indeed there is no subject in the
realm of international affairs about which my country is
more united, more resolute or more concerned than that
of the welfare of Africa in general and southern Africa in
particular.
83. In blunt terms, my delegation can state my country’s position on the question of Namibia by saying that
the Government of Barbados continues to offer unqualified support to the struggle of the Namibian people to
achieve complete self-determination,
freedom and national independence. Barbados supports the recognition
of SWAP0 as the sole authentic representative of the
Namibian people until such time as fair and free elections
under the supervision and control of the United Nations
produce an elected Government.

79. It is in this context that my country views with horror but firm resolve the harsh throwing-down of the
gauntlet and the arrogant defiance expressed and implied
by the representative of South Africa in the statement he
made recently before the Council. In fairness, however, it
must be said that that same statement contained some
elements that on the surface appear reasonable and some
that, by a tremendous stretch of the imagination, might
even be read as vaguely conciliatory. By way of example, I
cite the following:

84. Barbados remains unwavering in its contention that
Walvis Bay is an integral part of Namibia and that the
territorial integrity of Namibia should not be compromised in any way, particularly with respect to Walvis Bay.

“Where we can, we shall continue to help our neighbours who commit themselves to peaceful coexistence
and constructive co-operation. Inside our country we
shall continue to maintain order and stability and we
shall carry on with the process of controlled reform.
We believe that there are more than enough moderate

85. Barbados fully supports Council resolution
(1978), 432 (1978) and 435 (1978) and, incidentally,
8

431
has

decided in principle to provide police monitors as part of
UNTAG if and when required to do so.

States that. would place their own selfish or ideological
interests above the clear demands of natural justice.

86. My country, faithful to. its obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations greatly deplores violence
and rejects the use of force as a morally or legally acceptable means of achieving the just solution of problems.
My country is not unaware of the difficulties, especially
those associated with the economics of the problem,
which have rendered a peaceful solution so far depressingly elusive. Barbados notes the efforts of the contact
group. In this connection, however, Barbados is very
strongly supportive of the reservations, doubts and anxieties expressed by SWAP0 and will continue most eamestly to hope that the countries involved will never lose
sight of the lessons of history, which teach that the sacrifices of moral principles upon the altar of expediency
and appeasement paves a certain road to the most dire
of consequences.

92. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation>om
French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Niger. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
(Niger) (interpretationfiomFrench):
93. Mr. OUMAROU
Since it is impossible to have too much of a good thing, I
should like to add my very sincere compliments to the many
well-deserved compliments that have been lavished upon
you, Mr. President. Having seen you at work’througbout
this busy month of May, I share today the general feeling
that, in this debate devoted primarily to Africa, you,
through your presidency of the Council, are doing great
honour to our continent. We are therefore grateful to your
great country, Zaire, with which the Niger maintains the
warmest relations, for having accredited you to this prestigious body at such a crucial time, when we truly need a man
with an open mind and the experience to succeed our great
friend, now promoted to the office of Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, with whose enthusiasm and clear-sighted militancy we are all familiar and with
whom I am happy to have had in the Organization a
friendly relationship both strong and enriching. I hope that
the conclusion that the Council will soon be reaching will
reflect your personal sense of balance and your praiseworthy efforts.

87. Neither extraneous considerations nor the so-called
strategic or other interests of other States should be
allowed to delay further the independence of Namibia.
Linkage of the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola
with the termination of the illegal occupation of Namibia
by South Africa is such an extraneous consideration. Is
there any brand of justice which can deny sovereign
Angola the right to choose its own friends, or is justice
really the interest of the stronger?

94. We also followed the presidency of Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, the representative of the United States and I offer
her the sincerest congratulations of my delegation on the
outstanding way she carried out her delicate tasks.

88. Barbados recognizes with gratitude and sincere
appreciation the efforts made by the Secretary-General
in striving for a just solution of the Namibian problem,
urges the continuation and strengthening of those efforts
and compliments him on his report [S/lS77fl.

95. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Niger-who
could not be present-asked me expressly to take part in
this debate to say that the Niger deems it a great honour to
have been designated at New Delhi by the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries [see S/1567.5 and Con-. 1 and 2, annex, sect. I,
para. 493 to come here to support in this chamber the just
cause of Namibia and the inalienable right of the valiant
Namibian people to sovereignty and independence. I am
particularly anxious to do that because this is a cause that
rallies the whole of the international community and which
the Niger is always ready to support.

89. Barbados endorses the Paris Declaration
on
Namibia and the Programme of Action on Namibia,
adopted at the International Conference in A~ril,~ and in
consequence supports the call for, first, the immediate
implementation
of the United Nations plan approved in
resolution 435 (1978); secondly, appropriate action by
the Council to ensure compliance with its resolutionsthis involves the appropriate answer to the arrogant
defiance and threat expressed and implied by South Africa’s stated refusal to accept a deadline for the independence of Namibia;
and, thirdly, an end to the
destabilization of the front-line States.

96. The multitude
of eminent ministers for foreign
affairs distinguished statesmen and diplomats from the
four corners of the earth, who are now following the
debate, or who have spoken to proclaim, loud and clear,
their common impatience and common disenchantment
at the deadlock, either deliberate or nurtured, which
characterizes the process of decqlonization of the Namibian nation, must be for our brother Sam Nujoma,
present here, a moving endorsement of the justness of his
struggle. I am particularly happy to make this further
statement in his presence, which supplements our previous pronouncements on this matter, when the Niger
repeatedly condemned here, in the General Assembly
and in other relevant forums, every obstacle, every subterfuge and every additional inadmissible delay in the

.90. Barbados reiterates that Namibia
is the direct
responsibility of the United Nations and that the selfdetermination and independence of that country are in
the care of the Organization. The question of Namibia is
essentially one of decolonization.
91. In closing, I would say that my country, while not
seeking or wishing for the parties concerned a mindless
confrontation, is unequivocally committed to the view
that the Council, while striving to maintain peace and
security in southern Africa, cannot risk compromising its
very reason for existence by yielding to the claims of those
9

I

implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). Thus, the linkage recently trumped up by South Africa, between the
settlement of the Namibian problem and the presence of
Cuban troops in Angola, was denounced in the strongest
terms by my Government.
97. You will understand, therefore, Sir, that at the
outset I wish to reiterate the growing ,concem of my
country and Government,
not only at what must be
called the lost opportunities on the road to independence
of Namibia, but particularly the anguish that now besets
Africa and the world, in view of the absence of any
serious date for this inevitable event.
98. Certainly, no decolonization is easy; in the course
of implementation,
no decolonization has been, at one
time or another, without hesitations or changes of position, characterized by what is, after all, anachronism and
folly. But the history of decolonization in Namibia will be
a different story.
99. This is a country which, cheated of its independence
in 1920 and then in 1945, welcomed with new hope resolution 1514 (XV), which the General Assembly adopted
in 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. But it
was soon to experience, in the place of what rightfully
belonged to it and as a result of its liberation struggle,
more frustration, when in 1966 South Africa, recognized
as having faiied as the administering
Power, rebelled
against the $)rganization,
rejecting General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, which terminated the Mandate which up to that time it had exercised
over that Territory by the very will of the ,Organization.

present here in this chamber, representing the international
community, who urge the contact group to renounce its
complacency, to step up its pressure on South Africa, and to
compel that embarrassing partner to respect the commitments it has entered into. What we are asking this group to
do, over and above the undeniable results-which the
Secretary-General, with objectivity and clarity, described in
his outstanding report [S/25776)-is clearly not to take the
place of South Africa in order finally to bring about the
liberation of Namibia; it is not to discuss once again with
that country the terms of another settlement plan. The plan
exists. We are requesting it to refuse, out of respect for its
role and to protect the credibility of the Organization, to
follow rebel South Africa in its recent or future attempts to
ensure that the problem of Namibia is bogged down in
considerations that are completely extraneous to resolution
435 (1978) and, furthermore, were neither raised nor envisaged during the negotiations on that resolution. For, after
all, this resolution dates from 1978. The Cuban troops,
which Pretoria is now setting up as a bugbear and a screen,
have been stationed in Angola since 1975, at the request of
and for the sovereign needs of that country, without their
presence ever being mentioned as an obstacle to Namibian
independence-in
any event, until the pre-implementation
meeting at Geneva in January 1981, where the racist
authorities evaded their responsibilities so spectacularly.
Let us therefore be wary of such procedures which, pushed
to their limits, could lead our planet into the direst
calamities.
103. My delegation believes, however, that we should
not be too eager to reject the contact group outright
because, since South Africa has already been outlawed by
this international community, on more than one charge,
and, as we know, holds the United Nations in low esteem,
it might be harmful to give that international outlaw the
feeling that, henceforth, would be living in a world without constraints, rules or laws, a world where it could consolidate its gains, ignore any condemnation and commit
at will further crimes. An imperfect contact, but one that
is more sensitive to pressure, is always better than no
contact at all. The most embarrassing thing for a callous
country like South Africa is still perhaps its friends. We
hope that the contact group will assume the commitment,
after today’s meeting, to make clear to South Africa that
henceforth it will no longer be protected from the sanctions of the international community unless, of course, it
agrees to submit unconditionally
and without delay.

100. Then ‘came the illegal occupation, the oppressive,
plundering and racist occupation, which the intemational community denounced right from the outset and
has constantly, and again today, denounced with evergreater force and determination. Finally, in 1978, thanks
to the concerted impact of diplomatic pressure and the
armed struggle organized and stepped up by SWAPO,
the sole authentic representative of the Namibian people,
there came another glimmer of hope. It came in this very
chamber in the form of resolution 435 (1978), which
acted like a balm to soothe the battered Namibian
people, and they solemnly glimpsed the prospect of
regaining their freedom, which was so dearly bought,
within a year, one year too many.

104. I should now like to take this opportunity to reaffi
the full solidarity of the Niger with the front-line countries,
which, daily and with courage and self-denial, face the
disgraceful, repeated acts of aggression of South Africa, and
which, through their sacrifices for the cause of militant
Namibia, will rightly go down in the finest pages of the
heroic history of the decolonization of that great country.
It is incumbent on the Council to set the stamp of shame
on the recent raid of which Mozambique was the victim, a
raid that the international community denounced and
that our Minister for Foreign Affairs solemnly condemned at the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of
the OAU held on 25 May last.

101. Since then, five years have gone by. Not only is
Namibia not yet independent, but the Organisation has
been flouted because, not content with taking advantage
of and enjoying with impunity the fruits of its rebellion,
rebel South Africa has the strength and the effrontery to
attack the United Nations and even to come and take a
seat at this table, in this international forum-the
most
prestigious and the most representative in the world-to
defy all tthe nations of the world.
102. This means that those who are aggravated by this
slow progress are not always wrong: in other words, all of us
10

105. Finally, Mr. President, my delegation is loath to
allow you, Sir, to close this decisive, important debate
without mentioning the fact that, at its meeting last August,
in our capital, Niamey, the Thirteenth Islamic Conference
of Foreign Ministers, of which the Niger is the current
Chairman, discussed the Namibian question at length and
reflected the concern of the member States of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in a unanimous resolution
[see S/15466, annex I, resolution 12/13-q, the basic provisions of which it is my duty to read out.
106. The Conference solemnly reaffirmed that it recognized the legitimacy and just nature of the struggle being
waged by the Namibian people by all means at its disposal, including armed struggle, to free themselves from
colonial domination, racist oppression and exploitation; it
furthermore affirmed that resolution 435 (1978) of the
Security Council remained the only basis for a transitional arrangement preparatory to the independence of
Namibia; it supported the struggle of SWAP0 to achieve
national independence in that illegally occupied Territory;
it therefore requested member States to increase substantially their support for SWAPO; it strongly condemned
the South African regime for its ihegal and continued occupation of Namibia and for its repeated acts of aggression
against the front-line States; finally, it urged the Security
Council to impose wide-ranging and mandatory sanctions
against South Africa in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
107. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretafimj-onz French): The
next speaker is the representative of Chile. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
108. Mr. TRUCCO (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, I could not begins my statement without
saying how pleased my delegation felt at seeing the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zaire among us once again, presiding
over meetings of the Council. That our old and esteemed
colleague, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, should have temporarily left the tasks requiring his presence in his capital
and should have assumed personally the presidency of the
Council highlights the seriousness and importance of the
problem we are considering and gave proof anew of his
remarkable qualities as a responsible and talented leader,
once again deserving of our highest respect and admiration.
109. I wish also to congratulate Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
who conducted the proceedings of the Council during the
month of April with the intelligence and dedication for
which she is so well known.
110. A little more than two years ago the Council
resumed its consideration of the question of Namibia, for
the purpose of analysing, inter alia, the progress made
along the path to completing the implementation
of
Council resolution 435 (1978).
111. Unfortunately,
we cannot but recognize that the
results have been discouraging. Today the Council is
meeting again to take stock of the situation once more
and to adopt the measures that may be necessary.

112. When, 17 years ago, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 2145 (XXI) on 27 October 1966,
finally putting an end to the Mandate over Namibia that
the League of Nations had given to South Africa, the
United Nations simultaneously assumed full responsibility for leading the Territory swiftly to independence.
113. The creation of the United Nations Council for Namibia the following year by resolution 2248 (S-v) of 19
May 1967 reaffirmed that decision and conferred on that
body, of which my country is a member, the task of
administering
and being the legal representative of
Namibia and of co-operating with resolve and seriousness
in bringing about the independence of the Territory.
114. Since then, innumerable resolutions of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly have reiterated that
resolve. In 1971, the International
Court of Justice
declared that South Africa had no rights over the Territory of South West Africa, thus recognizing what the General Assembly had already decided.3
115. We therefore feel it necessary to reiterate what we
stated at the International Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held
in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983. Given General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), Security Council resolution
264 (1969) and, later, the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice in 1971, the continued occupation
of Namibia by South Africa is illegal and violates the
territorial integrity of Namibia.
116. Thus, almost 17 years have gone by since the Mandate of the League of Nations was ended and the United
Nations assumed responsibility for Namibia. Neither the
General Assembly nor the United Nations Council for
Namibia has been able to exercise its full powers.
117. This is therefore an urgent problem. We cannot
continue to delay the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) in its entirety without running the serious risk of
seeing the situation deteriorate throughout the region and
international peace and security seriously endangered. We
must consider without further delay and in all seriousness
the way in which to lead Namibia to sovereignty as early
as possible.
118. My delegation wishes to emphasize in the Security
Council that it is essential to intensify support for the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes and reject
the use of force as an arbitrary means of trying to put
and end to a dispute. In this regard, we wish to express
our firm support for the action taken by the SecretaryGeneral with a view to finding a solution to the problem
of Namibia.
119. In his report to the Council, the Secretary-General
points out that “progress has been made in securing a
large measure of agreement on the modalities to be
employed in implementing
resolution
435 (1978)”
[S/15776, para. IS], but with equal candour he warns us
that “the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is

having a destructive impact not only on Namibia itself
but also on the prospect of a peaceful and prosperous
future for the region as a whole.” [Ibid, puru. la.1 He
adds that “the delay also has an adverse effect on international relations in a wider sphere, adding to the prevailing sense of frustration and mistrust.” [Ibid.]

127. Mr. MAUDAVE
(Mauritius) (interpretation from
Jj-e&): Mr. President, I thank you Tor allowing ,me to
speak again. I think this will be my final statement. This
statement will allow me to sum up what has been stated
by the 50 or so previous speakers under the headings of
analogy, harmony and elegance.

120. We fully share this sombre view of the SecretaryGeneral. We believe today more than ever that the parties involved in the matter, including the Western contact
group, bear a paramount responsibility
towards the
international
community. We cannot allow frustration
and mistrust to prevail or that today, after so many
years, one of the pillars of international
coexistence,
namely, the peaceful settlement of disputes, should be
called into question.

128. First, let us take analogy. Ministers and representatives from the four comers of the earth have given their
analyses on specific topics: the illegal occupation of the
Territory, border violations, failure to respect human
rights, prevarication and the use of false pretexts, the
flouting of international opinion, and so on. Some of the
statements were so similar that they were practically identical in substance and even in form. The solutions proposed all had the same goals: decolonization,
the
finalization of the technical details of UNTAG, the ceasefire, the early establishment of a Constituent Assembly,
free and democratic elections, and an autonomous and
sovereign Government.

121. My delegation hopes that these meetings of the
Council will result in a strengthening of that basic principle. To this end, like others who have spoken before us,
we wish to support negotiations by the Secretary-General
with all the parties concerned. We firmly believe that,
above all else, they must be conducted in good faith so
that there may be no further delay in the full implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978), without any
extraneous conditions which might weaken or nullify it.

129. There was agreement that pressure of some kind
must be put on Pretoria to see reason. Some wanted to go
further than condemnation and appeals for negotiation,
whereas others were convinced that collective action here,
supplemented by an indirect approach, as indicated on 23
May, would finally overcome South Africa’s reservations.
Some who spoke see further than the present situation and
propose immediate planning of significant assistance for
the development and reconstruction of a free, independent and sovereign Namibia within secure borders. As
Andre Maurois said, there is a great intellectual pleasure
in seeing in an analogy the beginning of a law. This law is
the following: never oppose the most valuable developments of the century, which are freedom, self-determination, independence and decolonization.

122. Therefore it is essential, in order to make substantial progress in this, to bring about a climate propitious
for negotiations.
123. The United Nations bears the responsibility for
Namibia and it has assumed this responsibility until independence and the full exercise of self-determination
in
the Territory are achieved. We all share in that responsibility for the achievement of that objective. We are therefore pleased to note that the Secretary-General has taken
a clear and determined stand, for which he has had the
gratitude and unanimous praise of the delegations that
have taken part in this debate. My delegation joins in
that expression of solidarity and support.

130. However, I should like to utter a word of caution
before finishing the analogy. This concerns the contact
group. Rather than reaching a final verdict and saying
that the consultations have not led to anything, we have
agreed that some latitude should be left for indirect pressure. The future actions of the Five must make it clear
that, in the balance of priorities, the fate of Herman Toivo
languishing in a prison is more important than the wool
of the caracul sheep.

124. We welcome with satisfaction the constructive
terms of the statements of the representatives of the
United States and the United Kingdom, thier reaffhmation of their support for resolution 435 (1978) and their
determined efforts to overcome the difficulties which so
far have delayed its implementation.
We are also encouraged by the assistance that has been offered to ensure the
effectiveness of UNTAG.
We trust that the United
Nations presence and the envisaged presence of forces to
guarantee the effectiveness of the decisions adopted by the
international
community
will result in the necessary
speedy withdrawal of the foreign troops operating in the
region.

131. Secondly, I come to harmony. There has been notable harmony in the tone of the various statements.
Whatever part of the world they came from, all the
speakers except one have expressed the same feelings of
frustration, the same will to put an end to a situation that
has lasted for many decades and the same concern
regarding a possible escalation of violence, which might
engulf the whole of southern Africa. Indeed, the same
stress was put on indignation at the introduction of bargaining to prevent the accession of a people to the dignity
of freedom. Everybody has spoken with the same fervour
on the subject of human rights. The world community
has asked the Secretary-General to be the overseer of the
task of ensuring the decolonization of a country whose
future has been made the direct responsibility of the
United Nations.

125. For the foregoing reasons, my delegation agrees
with all the terms of draft resolution S/15803, which will
be put to a vote in the Council shortly.
126. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
next speaker on the list is the representative of Mauritius,
on whom I now call.
12

be failing in the discharge of its judicial functions if it
did not declare that there is an obligation, especially
upon Members of the United Nations, to bring that
situation to an end . . .

132. Finally, I would refer to elegance. This comes
from moderation of language, a sense of what is real and
possible in terms of ideas-qualities
which, in general,
the principal parties concerned have demonstrated. The
approach chosen was above all objective, and wellthought-out and dignified. When obstacles were encountered they did not seek to eliminate them verbally; they
made constructive suggestions.

“South Africa, being responsible for having
created and maintained a situation which the Court
has found to have been validly declared illegal, has
the obligation to put an end to it. It is therefore under
obligation to withdraw its administration
from the
Territory of Namibia.“3

133. The serious attitude that characterized this series
of meetings of the Council from the first day, the analogies I have cited and the harmony of tone and emphasis
will have made it easier to attain a high plateau in the
establishment of international relations, with the primary
objective of bringing about moral relations among
nations. This high plateau is that of coherence, which
requires a precise awareness of the pitfalls and an organized strategy based on what is possible or acceptable.

137. This is not the olace to give an exuosition on the
highest authority in j&isprude&e.
We are here to establish the ethical principles of international relations and, in
order to enforce them, to strengthen the authority of the
United Nations and the powers of its Secretary-General.
It would not have been right, therefore, to allow the shyster lawyer to get away with his attempt on 24 May to
blunt the impact of the opinion and the advice of our
highest tribunal.

134. Those who came before the Council to make statements succumbed neither to the logic of ndivety nor to
that of confrontation. They were hampered neither by
the dilemma of the doves nor by that of “les mains
sales”. Their aim was quite simply to try patiently, painstakingly to destroy prejudice, arrogance, racism and
unrestrained commercialism, and to protest unceasingly
against injustice and violence. The United Nations,
which is, in a way, the expression of the world’s conscience, must translate the lofty aspirations expressed in
the Council into deeds at Windhoek.

138. We seek finally to establish a climate of trust in
which the situation can develop. Creative interpretation
of statements even allows us to find some positive elements in that statement of 24 May. Mention was made
therein of a desire for peaceful coexistence with neighbouring countries, of an invitation to conclude nonaggression treaties and to discuss problems of common
interest, and even of “respect for the rights of all peoples
to self-determination**
[ibid., para. 1021. When we reread this statement carefully, we note, among all the
confident language-three
important elements: a certain
weariness; the feeling that something must be done
urgently; and, finally, fear. “No winner will emerge from
such a conflict situation”’ [ibid., para. 1001, he said,
quoting his Minister for Foreign Affairs. Does this not
mean that he admits that superiority in military equipment will not end the claims? Is it not also to confirm the
arguments of Bishop Desmond Tutu and those of the
leader of the opposition in the Pretoria Parliament, Mr.
Van Zyl, last Monday,
23 May? Regarding
the
Secretary-General’s report, it has been said that its more
constructive tone has not gone unnoticed. It amounts
almost to an invitation to board an aeroplane bound for
Pretoria,

135. Elegance also forbids us polemics, That is why it
was decided, after consideration and reflection, not to
indulge in invective or threats such as the Council heard
on the morning of Tuesday, 24 May, from the one
speaker who took a place at this table and made use of
the language of belligerency. We decided to leave that
speaker in his solitude. A concern for precision, however,
obliges us to note one statement he made. He said:
“
nor has the International
Court of Justice ever
delivered a binding judgement to the effect that South
Africa’s right to administer the Territory has been terminated”.* [244&h meeting, para. 71.1
136. I have before me the text of the advisory opinion
of 21 June 1971 of the International
Court of Justice,
which states in paragraphs 115, 117 and 118:*

139. If I had to sum up in one word the atmosphere in
which the Council has met, I should choose the word
“gravity”,
in the Latin sense of gravitas, which also
implies dignity, thoughtfulness, sobriety. Some speakers
even took on the appearance of Roman senators superbly clad in their togas to deal calmly and without haste
with the item on the Council’s agenda, conscious that
they had an international
audience, but above all
solemnly concerned with writing a new chapter in the
history of southern Africa.

“ . . . The decisions [of the Security Council] are consequently binding on all States Members of the United
Nations, which are thus under obligation to accept
and carry* them -out.
“. . .
6‘. . . A binding determination made by a competent
organ of the United Nations to the effect that a situation is illegal cannot remain without consequence.
Once the Court is faced with such a situation, it would
l

Quoted

in English

140. Africans have shown here that they have in common with the Romans of the days before the Punic wars
a sense of ceremony, of ritual, a sense which enables
them to bridge the ,gap between the aspiration to the
ideal and the practical needs of everyday life.

by the speaker.

13

141. These various statements suggest that if we were to
connect up our different weak sources of power sufficient
energy would be generated to light a beacon which would
herald at long last the emergence of a free Namibia.
142. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of .the Council have before them document
S/15803, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of consultations among members
of the Council.
143. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on that draft resolution. Accordingly, if there is no
objection, we shall now proceed to vote.
A vote was taken by show of handr.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously, [resolution 532 (1983)J.
144. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
call on the representative of the United Kingdom, who
wishes to make a statement.
145. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom):
Mr.
President, before I say a few words in explanation of the
vote I have just cast, I should like to express my delegation’s appreciation to you and to your Minister for Foreign Affairs for the skill with which you have handled this
debate. Namibia is a subject on which feelings understandably run high. Nevertheless, this debate has been conducted in a notably constructive and decorous manner
and for that much of the credit must go to you.

that would reinforce the negotiating process. The Council
has achieved what I hoped and has passed a resolution for
which the United Kingdom voted with pleasure.
148. I should like to record two points of detail which
affect my delegation. With regard to the third preambular
paragraph of the resolution, I state that the United Kingdom’s attitude to the resolutions listed therein, including
resolutions 301(1971) and 439 (1978) on which the United
Kingdom abstained, remains unchanged. Secondly, the
resolution takes note of the results of the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namjbian
People for Independence, held in Paris from 25 to 29
April 1983. My Government was represented at the Conference, has taken note of its outcome, but was not a
party to its decisions. Together with other members of the
contact group, the United Kingdom
informed the
Secretary-General before the Conference opened that we
would not participate in any decisions which the Conference might take, in the light of our special responsibilities
as a member of the contact group.
149. The resolution expresses the urgent desire of all
members of this Council-a desire shared widely throughout the United Nations, as the debate has shown+0 bring
about the rapid implementation of the United Nations settlement plan for Namibia under Council resoiution 435
(1978). It is incumbent upon us all to give the SecretaryGeneral all possible assistance in the further consultations
we have asked him to conduct. It goes without saying that
the United Kingdom stands ready to do so.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

146. I should also like to pay a tribute to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the front-line States for coming to
New York to participate in our proceedings, for the leadership they have shown and for the effective and statesmanlike way in which they have laid this subject before
the Council. Our thanks are due likewise to the other
ministers for foreign affairs who have participated.
147, At the outset of this debate I expressed the hope
that the Council would hold a constructive, not a confrontational, debate and that it would formulate a resolution

NOTES

) See Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
L4/CONF.120/13).
1 Ibid.; part

three.

’ Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.

idl

i+Ul

2

l&6

+I

+JWl

.L;i

c

J C

jilt

,tl

>,+ ,L;s;11

;I!,+

;z ,dl

&

,$a

J”LI

-I;+

4

&

.citj~,l~~~,J~I,~..u;ll-i’~:J!~,

,&

,A+

uy”Ld$

BlmkRW~~f4&lti#3

-

B~~~~~bQ~~B~~6RW~~#~~~~~~

iAkSrr;F;~l~114Mf~~3~~~E~~~

~~laeiB#5Iio
HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS-DES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
de votre
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Geni?ve.
.KAK

IlOJIYYMTb

M3nanwn
H arerrrcraax
Mara3titte
nponawte
COMO

KlilAHM5l

Opranw3anen
06aeittmerrtrbix
BO rtcex paRotrax
srlrpa.
HIIH ntrutwre
no anpecy:
tronamfft,
Hbro-r?opx
nnn
CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

NATIONS

throu_ehout
the
York or Geneva.
UNIES

dans les lihraities
et les agences
dt’positsirrs
libraire
ou adressez-vous
g : Nations
Unies.

OPTAHM3AUMM

OKbE,@lHEHHblX

HAUMjl

HauwB
ffaaonrrre
Opratit43auiia
Xeseaa.

MOXHO
xynrrrb
n tiwxiiHbIx
cnpasxir
06 tf3irattrox
a Bauekl
06bentoiemtbtx
Haunit,

xiara3unaY

DE

LAS

NACIONES

KHKKHO~I

Cekutta

no

UNIDAS

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en
a su librero
o dirl’jase
a: Naciones
Unidas.
Seccidn
de Ventas.

00400

90-60205-June

1991-2,050
