UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/665
9 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 9 JUNE 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to the attached letter dated 7 June 1999 which I
have received from the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991,
Justice Louise Arbour (see annex). I would be grateful if you could have the
present letter and its annex circulated among the members of the Security
Council.
The competence of the International Tribunal in investigating possible war
crimes in Kosovo has already been confirmed by the Security Council in four
resolutions, most significantly in resolution 1160 (1998) of 31 March 1998.
In her letter, the Prosecutor has outlined the requirements facing her
office in the light of developments in Kosovo and the need to carry out forensic
investigations as soon as international forces are allowed to enter the area.
In view of the scale of the required operations and the need to act swiftly, the
Prosecutor has concluded that the only way to allow immediate investigations is
through the use of gratis personnel. Consequently, she has asked my approval
for seeking and accepting up to 300 gratis personnel from Member States, who
would perform specialized functions relating to forensic investigations.
The Prosecutor has insisted on expeditiousness in this operation and I
believe her concerns for immediate action are fully justified. In comparison to
the investigations of the International Tribunal in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where access to crime sites was not possible until months or years after the
fact, the immediate presence of forensic investigative teams in Kosovo would put
the International Tribunal in a much better position to secure crime sites and
gather evidence before these are tainted or lost. Immediate action would
facilitate the collection of crucial evidence within a short span of time and
enable the fulfilment of the International Tribunal’s mandate in an efficient,
effective and timely way.
It is therefore my intention to approve the request of the Prosecutor of
the International Tribunal to proceed with issuing invitations to all Member
States to offer gratis personnel, and to accept experts for the specialized

99-17206 (E)

090699

/...

S/1999/665
English
Page 2

functions as identified by the Prosecutor, for a period of six months, and in
accordance with the regime for gratis personnel established by the General
Assembly.
I have also forwarded the Prosecutor’s letter to the President of the
General Assembly.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN
Secretary-General

/...

S/1999/665
English
Page 3

Annex
Letter dated 7 June 1999 from the Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the
Secretary-General

Following discussions last week between the Registrar of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, Mrs. Dorothee de Sampayo, the Deputy
Prosecutor, Mr. Graham Blewitt, and Secretariat officials in New York, I am
writing to request your assistance in the matter of carrying out forensic
investigations in Kosovo.
Four Security Council resolutions have called upon the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal to conduct investigations in Kosovo: resolutions
1160 (1998) of 31 March 1998; 1199 (1998) of 23 September 1998; 1203 (1998) of
24 October 1998; and 1207 (1998) of 17 November 1998.
However, as you know recent events have created an entirely new and
overwhelming situation, one that could not have been anticipated and one with
which the Prosecutor’s Office is unable to cope. Due to the scale of
destruction, and the widespread abuses of human rights reported in Kosovo, the
International Tribunal will have to deal with an unprecedented quantity of tasks
once it is possible to enter Kosovo. If the Tribunal is to fulfil its mandate
by any basic standards, it is anticipated that it will be necessary to undertake
and complete separate crime scene examinations at more than 16 sites in Kosovo.
I must point out, however, that this preliminary assessment is based on the
information now available. The actual size of the task before us will have to
be determined once access to the area is possible.
Moreover, the investigations will have to be carried out at very short
notice, and must commence as soon as safety permits. The main lesson that has
been learned from International Tribunal investigations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is that the Office of the Prosecutor must be in a position to
commence its on-site crime scenes investigations as soon as access is possible
and before essential evidence is lost forever. We will only have one
opportunity to complete these on-site investigations.
As I indicated, the initial aspect of this work is to undertake on-site
crime scene examinations. To do this work, multifaceted investigation teams
involving forensic and other specialists will be required to gather and record
evidence at the various crime scenes that have been prioritized by this Office.
The teams will need to contain capabilities in the areas of ballistic and
explosives assessment, weapons and munitions identification, crime scene
assessment, evidence-gathering, and ethnic cleansing assessment. It will also
be essential to maintain the integrity of any evidence available at the crime
scenes and, in this regard, it will be necessary to complete much of the
investigative work in a very short period of time, preferably before the
refugees return to their homes and villages (which, in most instances, will be
crime scenes). Finally, to ensure that it will be possible to adduce admissible
/...

S/1999/665
English
Page 4

and reliable testimony at future trials before this Tribunal, these teams must
undertake the work on the Prosecutor’s behalf and under my direction.
The Office of the Prosecutor does not have the capacity or the expertise
required for this scale of operations, nor any ability to undertake such
extensive crime scene investigations at such short notice. Neither did the
Tribunal’s budget allocation for 1999 provide for the massive level of urgent
investigative capacity that is outlined herein, particularly the level of
specialized expertise required for the task. Responding to the early
resolutions in 1998, a supplementary budget was approved to enable investigative
activity in Kosovo to begin. Although modest, the budget enabled us to
establish a team of 10 persons dedicated to Kosovo investigations. This team
comprises investigators, lawyers, analysts and translators and will continue to
work on the Kosovo investigations. However, they have no expertise in forensic
work.
We have considered this matter carefully and we believe that the immense
task with which we have so suddenly been confronted can be achieved only with
the urgent assistance from Member States. What we require is the assistance of
several national investigation teams with the capabilities outlined above, to
undertake on-site crime scene examinations in Kosovo as soon as it is possible
to gain access to the region. It is likely that forensic investigation teams
with the capabilities we require are available at the national level and can be
assembled at fairly short notice.
In order to carry out the work we have prioritized, we envisage the
formation of approximately 12 forensic investigation teams. Though at this
stage it is not possible to identify the exact number of personnel that would be
required to staff these teams, the preliminary projection is that a total of
approximately 300 experts may be needed. We estimate the work would be
completed by experts within a maximum period of six months, as the window of
opportunity is narrow: before the return of the refugees and before the onset
of winter.
We have given much thought to the question of how to link these teams to
the work of the Tribunal and a number of options have been examined. Two
prerequisites are considered essential. The first is that the forensic
investigation teams require the proper authority under which to conduct their
investigations in Kosovo and the second is that they would conduct their
investigations under the general control and direction of the Prosecutor’s
Office.
We have determined that the only viable way in which to address both
requirements would be to involve national investigation teams in this urgent
task under the gratis personnel regime of the United Nations. This regime is
specifically created to urgently provide highly specialized functions not
available within the Organization, on a temporary and exceptional basis. It
enables Member States to make expertise available to the Organization and to
link that expertise to the Organization itself. In this way, both the problem
of authority and that of control are overcome.

/...

S/1999/665
English
Page 5

I am fully aware of the fact that the quantity of the prospective personnel
involved in this urgent operation is exceptional. I am also cognizant of the
difficulties that the Tribunal has had with the gratis personnel regime.
However, we see no other way in which we can effectively and adequately conduct
the investigations required by the Security Council and the Statute of the
Tribunal. If approved, we will adhere strictly to the provisions of the General
Assembly resolution and write to all Member States requesting their assistance.
I would be most grateful if you would consider this request. I am
available at any time to discuss this matter and to provide more information, as
needed. I look forward to hearing from you at your earliest convenience.

(Signed)

-----

Louise ARBOUR
Prosecutor
