A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/236
18 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 178
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.54)]
48/236.

Emergency assistance to Uganda

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the extensive damage and devastation caused by
the major earthquake that recently struck western Uganda,
Noting with concern the urgent need to address the immediate relief
requirements of thousands of residents in the Kabarole, Bundibugyo and Kasese
districts,
Bearing in mind the negative impact of the earthquake on development
efforts and on the environment,
Recognizing the efforts of the Government and people of Uganda to
respond to the present crisis,
Conscious of the financial, organizational and technical constraints
that have hampered those efforts,
Aware of the additional pressure on the infrastructure of Uganda
resulting from increased inflows of refugees from neighbouring countries in
recent years,
1.
Declares its solidarity with the Government and people of Uganda
in their affliction;
2.
Notes with satisfaction the national efforts of Uganda to provide
assistance to the victims of the earthquake;

/...

A/RES/48/236
Page 2

3.
Commends the international community, including the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, for the measures taken thus far in
response to the disaster;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the
Government and people of Uganda in providing relief and bringing recovery
efforts to a successful conclusion;
5.
Requests all States and international organizations urgently to
provide relief assistance to the victims of the disaster and to provide
additional support to Uganda to enable the country to shoulder the additional
socio-economic and financial burden resulting from the earthquake;
6.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the Economic and
Social Council at its substantive session of 1994 on the implementation of the
present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
9 March 1994
