S/2001/363*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 April 2001
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
Attached is the addendum to the final report of the Monitoring Mechanism on
Sanctions against UNITA (see S/2000/1225, annex), which is being submitted in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1336 (2001) of 23 January 2001.

* Reissued for technical reasons.

01-33157 (E) 180401

*0133157*

S/2001/363

Annex
Letter dated 16 April 2001 from the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the addendum (see enclosure) to the
final report of the Monitoring Mechanism on Sanctions against UNITA established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1295 (2000) (see S/2000/1225, annex). The
final report was issued on 21 December 2000. The addendum, dated 11 April 2001,
is submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 1336 (2001) of
23 January 2001, by which the mandate of the Mechanism was extended for a period
of three months.
I would be grateful if the present letter and its enclosure were circulated to
members of the Security Council for their information and issued as a document of
the Council.
(Signed) Richard Ryan
Chairman
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola

2

S/2001/363

Enclosure
Addendum to the final report of the Monitoring Mechanism
on Sanctions against UNITA
11 April 2001

Contents
I.

Paragraphs

Page

1–13

4

Political and military developments in Angola in the context of the
implementation of United Nations sanctions against UNITA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6–10

4

Sanctions-busting in the areas of arms, military equipment and transport:
overview of the findings of the final report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11–12

5

Subsequent findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

6

Arms-brokering companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14–34

6

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.
B.
C.

II.

A.

Companies involved in Bulgarian exports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

6

B.

Companies involved in Romanian exports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16–21

6

C.

Establishment of the source/origin of the military equipment seized in Togo .

22–25

7

D.

Assessment of other possible sources of supply and/or arms exports . . . . . . . .

26–32

8

E.

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33–34

11

UNITA representation and travel and residence of senior UNITA officials and
their adult family members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35–51

12

A.

Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38–40

12

B.

Americas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41–42

13

C.

Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

43–47

13

D.

UNITA and the Internet: web sites and email

48

14

E.

List of senior UNITA officials and their adult family members . . . . . . . . . . . .

49–50

14

F.

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

51

16

Diamond trading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

52–107

16

A.

Current state of diamond mining in Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

52–56

16

B.

Diamond circuits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

57–78

17

C.

UNITA-related smuggling circuits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

79–106

21

D.

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

107

26

V.

Petroleum and petroleum products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

108–109

26

VI.

Measures taken by Member States of the Southern African Development
Community to strengthen the implementation of sanctions against UNITA . . . . . . .

110–115

27

Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

116–119

28

III.

IV.

VII.

3

S/2001/363

I. Introduction
1.
The present addendum to the final report of the Monitoring Mechanism on
Sanctions against UNITA (see S/2000/1225, annex) is being submitted in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1336 (2001) of 23 January 2001, by
which the Council took note of the Mechanism’s report and expressed its intention
to give full consideration to it in due course. By the same resolution, the Council
decided to extend the mandate of the Mechanism as set out in its resolution 1295
(2000), and requested it to submit a written addendum to the final report by 19 April
2001.
2.
Subsequently, the Mechanism presented its programme of work for the threemonth extension to the Committee established pursuant to Council resolution 864
(1993). In the programme of work, the Mechanism placed priority on following up
leads which could not be pursued under its earlier mandate due to time constraints
and on communications with Member States on alleged sanction violations. The
commissioning of a professional asset tracer to investigate the assets and finances of
the União Nacional para a Indepêndencia Total de Angola (UNITA) was high on the
Mechanism’s list of priorities. The Mechanism also placed emphasis on continuing
consultations with Governments, subregional, regional and international
organizations to improve the implementation of sanctions against UNITA.
3.
During the period under review, the Mechanism visited the following countries
for consultations: Angola, Namibia, Botswana, Kenya, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the Sudan, Belgium, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Italy,
France, South Africa and Côte d’Ivoire. The Mechanism also visited the
headquarters of the Southern African Development Community (Gaborone) and of
the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) in Lyon.
4.
In Angola, the Mechanism received printouts from computers captured from
UNITA at Andulo and Bailundo, revealing more about arms procurements and the
build-up of mechanized brigades by UNITA between 1997 and 1999. These
documents further reveal the duplicity of UNITA as it entered the Lusaka Process.
5.
Questionnaires were sent to Member States, seeking information on what
measures they have put in place to promote and strengthen the implementation of
sanctions against UNITA. Communications were also sent to a number of countries,
seeking more information on UNITA senior officials cited in the final report as
residing in their territories. While some countries responded promptly to the
Mechanism’s enquiries, a number of responses remain outstanding.

A.

Political and military developments in Angola in the context of the
implementation of United Nations sanctions against UNITA
6.
In its final report, the Mechanism observed that UNITA military capacity had
been significantly reduced. During the period under review, UNITA has continued to
carry out guerrilla attacks, mostly against innocent civilian targets. United Nations
sources in Luanda revealed that reports of civilians fleeing UNITA speak of acts of
terror by the rebel movement. They have also reported significant deterioration in
the physical conditions of civilians fleeing UNITA, with many claiming that they
were being used as porters for food and military equipment by UNITA.

4

S/2001/363

7.
The situation along Angola’s border with Namibia and Zambia remains
militarized and unstable. UNITA elements have occasionally raided civilians on the
Namibian and Zambian sides of the borders, and continued fighting in Moxico
province has further increased the number of refugees into western Zambia.
8.
During its visit to Angola, the Mechanism was informed by the authorities of a
tripartite agreement reached in Luanda on 10 February 2001, aimed at preventing
the illegal circulation of people and goods and the unlawful trade in diamonds and
ivory, as well as illicit arms trafficking. This is expected to strengthen the
implementation of sanctions against UNITA and improve security along the joint
borders of Angola, Namibia and Zambia.
9.
The Mechanism was also informed by the Angolan authorities that the
response to the amnesty law announced by the President in 2000 has generally been
positive, with many UNITA combatants reportedly taking advantage of the offer.
The Mechanism was also informed that the Government has established the Fund for
Peace and National Reconciliation, to be used in the integration of former UNITA
combatants back into society.
10. The Mechanism’s overall assessment is that sanctions continue to play an
important part in efforts to resolve the Angolan conflict. With no fixed arms supply
lines and diminishing revenue from diamonds, UNITA’s military capacity has been
significantly reduced. Recent and increasing calls by UNITA for the lifting of the
sanctions are indications that the sanctions are hurting. However, it is important to
point out, in view of the significant arms caches uncovered by Namibian armed
forces in southern Angola, that UNITA very probably still has vast quantities of
arms hidden in the ground all over Angola, enough for it to pursue guerrilla warfare
for a long time. In addition, recent reports that unidentified aircraft have been
spotted in eastern Angola, violating that country’s airspace, are a cause of concern
and indicate a need to strengthen the implementation of the sanctions.

B.

Sanctions-busting in the areas of arms, military equipment and
transport: overview of the findings of the final report
11. In its final report, the Mechanism revealed that between 1997 and 1998, arms
manufacturers based in Bulgaria exported significant quantities of arms on the basis
of end-user certificates featuring Togo as the country of origin. The report also
revealed that Romania-based arms manufacturers similarly exported arms, on one
occasion in 1996 and two occasions in 1999, on the basis of end-user certificates
featuring both Togo and Burkina Faso as countries of origin. The report further
underlined that whereas the end-user certificates from Togo proved to be forgeries
following forensic expertise, those from Burkina Faso proved to be authentic. The
report contained detailed information concerning the transportation logistics of the
arms shipments dominated by flights operated by Air Cess, as well as details of
flight itineraries, most of which involved transits at airports in Nairobi and
Khartoum, with final destinations given as Kindu, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Mwanza, United Republic of Tanzania.
12. The role played in brokering the arms transactions by offshore companies,
some of which are based in Gibraltar, Panama and the Bahamas, was also depicted
in detail. In its conclusion, the report underlined the high probability that the
weapons exported, in particular those exported by Bulgarian-based arms

5

S/2001/363

manufacturers, ultimately reached UNITA-controlled areas. In the same vein,
despite the control measures put in place by arms-exporting countries, some
weakness in the overall export/import process was noted.

C.

Subsequent findings
13. Following the extension of its mandate, the Mechanism has actively pursued
its investigative activities in two directions: the follow-up of the leads resulting
from the initial investigation and the assessment of other possible supply sources
and/or arms exports in violation of the sanctions imposed by the Security Council
against UNITA. These findings are set out below

II. Arms brokering companies
14. In view of the key role played by the companies which brokered the arms
transactions, the Mechanism centred its enquiries on the collection of additional
information on those networks, such as the extent of their involvement in arms and
financial transactions and the composition of their boards of directors.

A.

Companies involved in Bulgarian exports
KAS Engineering, Gibraltar
15. The company acted as a single intermediary, contractor and buyer of all the
equipment exported by Bulgarian suppliers. The Mechanism conducted a mission to
Gibraltar and was informed that KAS Engineering is administered by SKYSEC
Secretarial Limited based in Cyprus. At the request of the Mechanism, the Cyprus
authorities reported that SKYSEC is a company that provides consulting
administration and secretarial services. The same authorities indicated that the
directorate of KAS is assumed by ARMART International LT, based at 4 Athol
Street, Isle of Man, United Kingdom. The shareholder is said to be INTERCON
Nominees Ltd., based at 2nd Floor, Atlantic House, Circular Road, Douglas, Isle of
Man. SKYSEC, contacted by the Cypriot authorities, indicated that it acts as a
nominee assistant secretary and does not know about the activities of KAS.

B.

Companies involved in Romanian exports
STARCO Investments and Trade
13 Martin Bouber Street, Haifa, Israel
16. The Mechanism requested the Israeli authorities to provide information
concerning the mentioned company and its involvement in the arms transaction
which occurred in 1996 between ROMTechnica (a Romanian supplier) and
purportedly Togo. The Mechanism was informed that the enquiry conducted yielded
no information concerning STARCO.
17. However, the Mechanism’s attention was drawn to allegations published in the
Israeli daily newspaper Ha’aretz concerning an Israeli businessman, Bo’Az
Avigdon, reportedly residing in Martin Buber Street. The Israeli businessman is

6

S/2001/363

quoted to have acknowledged that he owned, with an associate, a company named
STARCON, which was closed in 1996 following the refusal of the Romanian
Government to approve an arms deal. This recent development has been referred to
the Israeli Government for the formulation of their views and observations, in
particular the likelihood that STARCO and STARCON could be one and the same
firm.
East European Shipping Cooperation
102 Uwala House, Nassau, Bahamas
18. The Mechanism has requested the authorities of the Bahamas to provide
information concerning the mentioned company, which has brokered arms deals that
took place in 1999 between SN ROM ARM SA, a Romanian supplier, and
purportedly the Togolese authorities. The Bahamas authorities have not yet
responded to the request.
Trade Investment International Limited
10 Cumberland Mansions, George Street, London, United Kingdom
19. The Mechanism is similarly awaiting a response to its request addressed to the
authorities of the United Kingdom concerning the United Kingdom-based company
Trade Investment International, said to be the representative in Europe of the
Bahamas-based company.
Armitech Company Inc.,
5 Cuba Avenue, 34 St East, Building 34-20, Panama City; head office: Cyprus
20. Armitech has featured as the broker of arms transactions between
ARSENALUL ARMATEI Romania and Burkina Faso. The Panamanian authorities
have also been requested to provide information regarding the circumstances
surrounding the company involvement in the mentioned transaction. A response is
still awaited.
21. The Cypriot authorities have, at the request of the Mechanism, informed it that
no company with the name Armitech is registered in Cyprus. However, the fax
particulars provided by the Mechanism belong to ARMINPEX Hightech Ltd.,
registered in Cyprus as an international business company dealing in army
equipment. It is not known at this stage if ARMITECH and ARMINPEX Hightech
are related. The director of the latter company from 1997 to 2000 was Ivan
Tsourkan, a Russian national, currently the main shareholder. He is reportedly
residing at Kosmodamian Skay str 46.50, Room 24, Moscow.

C.

Establishment of the source/origin of the military equipment
seized in Togo
22. The Mechanism requested and obtained from the Togolese authorities a
photograph of the Cyrillic characters mentioned on the equipment with a view to
determining its origin. These characteristics, which featured no country of
production, did not help to determine the origin of the said equipment.
23. The Mechanism is considering an alternative option through the establishment
of the flight route of the carriers which transported the equipment in order to

7

S/2001/363

determine the country of shipment. To that end, the Mechanism has requested, from
the authorities of the countries where the aircraft transporting the weapons were
purportedly in transit, information regarding the flight movement prior to transit.
Movement of military equipment from Gbadolite to Togo: establishment of
final destination
24. The Togolese authorities have provided the Mechanism with additional details
regarding the flight movement of the aircraft which transported military equipment
on 18 May 1997, the nature of which has not been specified, from Gbadolite/former
Zaire to Togo. The flight movement, as recorded by the Civil Aviation Authorities of
Togo, was as follows:
Date:
Type:
Registration:
Arrived:
From:

18 May 1997
Antonov 12
UR8206
Niamtougou, Togo
Gbadolite, former Zaire

Date:
Departed:
Destination:

18 May1997
Niamtougou, Togo
Lomé

Date:
Departed:
Destination:

19 May 1997
Lomé
Burgas, Bulgaria

It should be noted that the other aircraft type IL 76, which transported military
equipment on 17 May 1997, reportedly returned the same day to Gbadolite.
25. The Mechanism is of the view that given the circumstances under which the
flights departed from Gbadolite in the immediate aftermath of the sudden departure
of the late former President Mobutu, a return flight from Niamtougou to Gbadolite
was hardly feasible. It is equally unlikely that, on 19 May 1997, the Antonov
transporting military equipment could have headed for Burgas. The actual
destination of the military equipment moved from Gbadolite remains to be
established.

D.

Assessment of other possible sources of supply and/or
arms exports
26. In assessing the existence of other possible sources of supply for UNITA, the
Mechanism has considered the following parameters:
(a) The initial investigation disclosed 38 arms shipments from Bulgaria in
the time period July 1997 to October 1998. The breakdown per year was as follows:
(i) 1997: 29 shipments were effected in four months (July, October,
November and December);
(ii) 1998: of nine shipments, seven were effected in the month of January, the
other two in October;
(b) The three shipments from Romania followed a less frequent pattern, with
one shipment in 1996 and two in 1999;

8

S/2001/363

(c) The equipment captured by Angolan government forces entailed
categories of weapons such as the BM21 (multiple rocket launcher), BMPs
(armoured vehicle) and Uragan missiles, which did not feature in any of the exports
from Bulgaria or Romania. Similarly, the examination of the computerized military
records captured from UNITA provided to the Mechanism by the Angolan
authorities reflected the same categories of weapons. All these parameters point to
the fact that the full spectrum of sources of supply to UNITA has yet to be
established.
Establishment of the origin of UNITA equipment seized by Angolan forces
27. The Mechanism has acted on the information provided by the Angolan
Government regarding a selected sampling of equipment seized, along with their
serial numbers. The countries which featured in the list of equipment as producers,
i.e., Ukraine, the Russian Federation and China, at the request of the Mechanism,
have indicated that the specific equipment was neither produced nor exported from
these respective countries. During its visit to Angola, the Mechanism reviewed, with
the Angolan authorities, the pattern of the identified shipments and addressed the
issue of the existence of possible sources of supply and/or exports. In the absence of
immediate available data, the Mechanism is determined to pursue its close
cooperation with Angola in order to unveil the full spectrum of arms suppliers to
UNITA.
Military equipment captured by Namibian defence forces from
UNITA combatants
28. The Mechanism conducted a mission to Namibia, where it was given the
opportunity to further travel to Rundu and view the military equipment captured by
Namibian defence forces from UNITA combatants. The Mechanism has noted the
very deteriorated physical condition of this equipment, with the exception of the
rounds of ammunition. Consultations with Namibian military officers at the site
suggested that the equipment was probably hidden in buried caches, to which groups
of UNITA combatants have access. The absence of markings on a large portion of
the equipment seized makes it difficult to trace its origin. The pursuit of cooperation
with arms-producing countries is necessary to determine the origin of items of
equipment marked with serial numbers. The equipment seized between 13 January
and 14 February 2001 was as follows:
Quantity

Description

Serial No.

2

140mm fragmentation shells of G-2 guns

77-11-70

10

106mm heat shells

4-XA-70

29

81mm smoke shells R1M1

PN800

60

88mm anti-tank shells R1M1

001B/79

1 072 260

Browning machine gun ammunition

7506

7

Hand grenades

No mark

1

Rifle grenade

No mark

1

APM

No mark

8

AKM rifles

No mark

9

S/2001/363

Quantity

Description

Serial No.

127

AKM rifle rounds

No mark

1

60mm mortar

No mark

57

Armed shells of anti-tank gun

174-81-73

12

War head shells of GP rocket launcher

7-78

25

82mm mortar shells

No mark

2

B-10 shells

100-57248

2

PK barrels

No mark

3

60mm mortar shells

No mark

2

DSHK anti-aircraft machine-gun

24194

118

DSHK anti-aircraft machine-gun

No mark

48

57mm anti-tank shells

1952-1

7 632

Stick hand grenades

150-83-65

293

PK machine-gun rounds

No mark

1

RPG anti-tank rocket launcher

No mark

1

G-3 rifle, empty magazine

No mark

UNITA factor in the context of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
29. It will be recalled that the Mechanism confirmed a case of tactical cooperation
between UNITA and Rwandan forces, which occurred in northern Angola in 1998.
The participation of Ugandan forces in that operation was also mentioned. The
Mechanism duly addressed with both the Angolan and former Zairean authorities the
allegations regarding the presence of UNITA in the eastern region of former Zaire
under the control of rebel movements and their allies.
30. The Mechanism has received reports of UNITA cooperation with rebels in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It has also received allegations
concerning the presence of UNITA elements in that region. Although these
allegations have been made repeatedly, they are not yet confirmed with certainty.
The presence of UNITA in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, if
confirmed, presents a potential risk of opening up arms supply lines for the rebel
movement. The Mechanisms hold the strong opinion that this dimension remains a
cause for concern and deserves due attention.
Assessment of the extent of arms-related flights operated by Air Cess
31. The Mechanism, taking into consideration the continuous involvement of Air
Cess in activities violating the sanctions, has initiated a project to compile data
related to Air Cess-operated cargo flights destined to Africa. To that end, the
Mechanism has requested the cooperation of selected countries from various regions
to provide information regarding Air Cess operations. The responsiveness of the
countries contacted is encouraging. The Mechanism has already received significant
data from Egypt, Bulgaria, South Africa and Kenya. The cross-verification of the
movement of flights identified, the specific nature of their load and the particulars of
consignor and consignee is ongoing.

10

S/2001/363

Current status of the project on the profiling of arms dealers
32. The Mechanism has actively pursued the project on the profiling of arms
dealers and has, at this stage, collected documented information regarding the
following major arms dealers named in previous reports:
Imad Kebir
Also known as Imad Bakri; Lebanese national; uses several passports, the
particulars of which have yet to be established; well introduced at the highest
levels of the Lebanese community living in the Democratic Republic of
Congo; frequently travels in the southern African region.
Piotr Godunov
Believed to be a Ukrainian national involved in arms deals with UNITA; no
further information has been recorded by the Mechanism.
Victor Anatolyevich/Bout
Born 13 January 1967 in Dushanbe; Russian national said to be holding several
passports, including passport No. 29#0006765, issued by the Russian embassy in
the United Arab Emirates (validity already expired) and Russian passport No.
443570350, valid until 4 February 2003; graduated from the Military Institute of
Foreign Languages and served in the early 1990s in the Russian contingent of the
peacekeeping operation in Angola; former air force officer strongly suspected to
be connected to Russian organized crime; operates the biggest fleet of privately
owned Antonov aircraft in the world; representative of Antonov aircraft in Africa;
supplied military equipment and other necessities to all conflict areas in Africa;
visited in 1999 several arms manufacturers in Bulgaria; four of the manufacturers
visited featured in 1997 as exporters of arms on the basis of forged Togolese enduser certificates; his brother Sergei is reportedly responsible for the daily
operations of Air Cess, his air charter company.

E.

Conclusion
33. The central role played by the identified brokering companies in the
procurement of arms by UNITA is overwhelming and cannot be overemphasized.
The modus operandi used by these companies, acting as contractor/buyers of
military equipment, has introduced an element of diversion designed to make it
difficult to establish a direct link between suppliers and UNITA. Similarly, the
financial transactions related to arms sales have revealed a complex pattern that
needs to be exposed by the continuing investigation of UNITA financial assets.
34. In the light of these developments, the need to tighten the regulations
governing the activities and operations of arms-brokering companies has become
urgent. Similarly, the establishment of an international register of the dubious
companies involved in sanction-busting should be given due consideration. UNITA
has experienced serious military setbacks in the past which it has succeeded in
overcoming: it should not be taken for granted that all the possibilities for UNITA
rearmament have been exhausted. Therefore, the diligent implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Mechanism’s final report continues to be urgent
and necessary.

11

S/2001/363

III. UNITA representation and travel and residence of senior
UNITA officials and their adult family members
35. In its final report, the Mechanism described the UNITA structures abroad, what
their tasks are, and how and where they operate. The great importance of these
structures was underlined since they in many ways play a critical role in assuring the
continued existence of the organization. The Government of Angola confirmed this
importance, during the visit of the Mechanism to Luanda. Due to the sanctions
imposed on UNITA representation, the structures do not any longer function as
official UNITA offices. The sanctions are circumvented, however, through the use of
front offices, self styled NGOs or individuals. Jointly, the structures do ensure an
international presence of UNITA through the dissemination of political propaganda,
contacts with people of influence etc. Even more important, they are also essential
for the financial transactions, diamond dealings and strategic procurement of
UNITA.
36. The description of UNITA operations outside Angola, in which special
attention was paid to the organizational set-ups in Africa and Europe as being of
particular importance for the organization, is still valid. The analyses made and the
problems identified as impeding the implementation of the sanctions are also still
valid. The present section intends to show what changes have been reported
regarding UNITA structures, what information has been made available about the
existence of new structures in addition to the ones elaborated upon in the final
report, and what measures have been taken to improve the implementation of the
sanctions and thus impede the functioning of those structures.
37. The Mechanism also notes that the different problems related to the adoption,
circulation and updating of the list of senior UNITA officials and immediate adult
family members, which were raised in its interim report presented in October 2000
and further underlined in the final report, have yet to be resolved. In fact, the list
annexed to the final report has yet to be officially circulated by the Sanctions
Committee. The Monitoring Mechanism, however, has made an effort to update the
list and its suggestions in this regard appear below.

A.

Africa
38. No information has reached the Mechanism indicating that any major changes
in UNITA structures in Africa have taken place. Burkina Faso and Togo continue to
be important countries of residence for senior UNITA officials and their family
members. However, there are indications that some of the countries of importance to
UNITA are now re-examining their policies. The Mechanism has received
information from the Government of Côte d’Ivoire that, in connection with a general
change of passports in the country that is supposed to be finalized by 30 June 2001,
passports will no longer be issued to UNITA officials. This decision is significant,
bearing in mind that Côte d’Ivoire has been one of the main providers of passports
to UNITA over the years.
39. In addition to Côte d’Ivoire, there are also signs that some of the countries that
have been and still are providing safe havens to senior UNITA officials and their
family members are beginning to distance themselves from the organization. This, in
turn, has led to indications that UNITA is trying to gain access to neighbouring

12

S/2001/363

countries. The Mechanism feels that it is very important for this possible movement
of UNITA representatives to be closely followed, and that Governments in the
region be made aware of the possibility of such attempts being undertaken in order
to be vigilant.
40. Although certain improvements have apparently taken place or are under way,
it should however be noted that the Mechanism continues to receive information
about extensive travelling being undertaken by senior UNITA members inside and
outside of Africa. The Mechanism is actively seeking information that is specific
enough to enable Governments to take appropriate action.

B.

Americas
41. During the period since the final report, UNITA has made efforts to take
advantage of the changes in the United States Administration. The Mechanism has
received, on its email address, copies of letters from Mr. Savimbi addressed to high
officials in the new administration. The person considered by the Mechanism to be
the unofficial representative of UNITA in the United States, Jardo Muekalia, has met
with an official of the Department of Defense outside government premises.
American authorities have explained that the meeting in question was to be
considered informal and on a personal basis; it was underlined that it should not be
considered a change in American policy. According to information available to the
Mechanism, similar informal meetings occasionally also took place during the
period of the Clinton Administration. The information regarding the meeting was
provided to the press by Mr. Muekalia. This should be seen in the context of
information the Mechanism received during its visit in Luanda in November 2000
and in March 2001, that Mr. Savimbi used the “promise” of a change in American
policy towards UNITA as an important means to maintain morale among his
followers.
42. Since the final report, the Mechanism has also received information that
UNITA maintains links with certain Latin American countries, which was not
previously established. This information is being followed up.

C.

Europe
43. In addition to Africa, Europe maintains its importance to UNITA both as
regards safe havens and as a base for its operations. Since its final report,
information has reached the Mechanism that there also exists a special branch of
UNITA for Scandinavia, and that the representation in some European countries may
be of greater importance than was assumed in that report. This information was
unfortunately made available to the Mechanism too late for it to be investigated. The
Governments concerned are being contacted and asked to investigate the allegations.
44. As noted in the final report, the Schengen agreement, allowing for free travel
between its member countries, i.e., a majority of the member countries of the
European Union as well as Norway, makes it extremely difficult to implement those
parts of the so-called “people sanctions” that restrict travel of UNITA senior
officials. The Mechanism has not received any answer to its suggestions in the final
report about how to improve the implementation of the sanctions in the countries
concerned, taking into account the existence of the agreement.

13

S/2001/363

45. The use of front organizations seems to be of particular importance in Europe.
The Mechanism, in the final report, described, inter alia, the functioning of two such
organizations, the Commission for Justice, Peace and Reconciliation in Angola
(CJPRA), found to be used by important UNITA representatives, particularly in
Portugal, Italy and Ireland, and Casa Angola, the front organization used by the
UNITA “representative” in Belgium. The Mechanism has not been informed about
any action taken or efforts made to close these front organizations. Being aware that
constitutional rights in many countries strongly protect the right to association, the
Mechanism maintains that UNITA should not be allowed to abuse such rights by
transforming its official representations to non-governmental/not-for-profit
organizations, as is now the case.
46. The opinion that CJPRA functions as a front for UNITA is further strengthened
by the fact that its leadership (Adalberto Costa Junior, Joffre Justino and Leon Dias),
in a presentation on the CJPRA web site, modified as recently as 23 November
2000, define themselves as “militants of UNITA who have watched our party being
bombed by the permanent sanctions of the United Nations, for seven consecutive
years”.
47. UNITA is also alleged to be operating under the cover of an organization
called Committee for Peace and Democracy in Angola (CPDA). On its web site, the
organization is presented as an Angolan civil society organization. Judging from the
content published on the web site of CPDA, which in many respects mirrors the
content of what is being published by CJPRA, it seems likely that CPDA is used as a
UNITA front. This is reinforced by the fact that the logo used for the web site
includes a black cockerel, the traditional symbol of UNITA, also used on its flag.
The Mechanism is aware that an organization with a similar name does exist in
Angola. It has not been established, however, that this organization is the same as
the one suspected by the Mechanism of being used as a UNITA front.

D.

UNITA and the Internet: web sites and email
48. The use of the Internet, web sites and email is an important tool for UNITA in
its propaganda efforts. The web site now in active use by UNITA is at kwacha.org.
For email UNITA uses, among others, Hotmail. The domain record for the site
shows that it is registered in Ireland under the name of Colm Croasdell. An email
address used by Leon Dias, administrative contact for the web site kwacha.com, is
colmc@indigo.ie. That site was registered and has been in operation since early
1997, also from Ireland. It has not been active since 28 October 1999. Until the
middle of 1999, several other sites operated as UNITA supporters, with links to
UNITA. Most of those sites are still operational. The Mechanism has been informed
that the Government of Ireland is trying to address this problem.

E.

List of senior UNITA officials and their adult family members
49. Since the beginning of its reporting, the Mechanism has paid particular
importance to the list of senior UNITA officials and their family members,
emphasizing the imperative that such a list be kept as accurate as possible. In the
final report, the need for a regular update of the list was also pointed out, so that
persons who for whatever reason should be removed from the list could be deleted

14

S/2001/363

and also so that new names could be added, as required. It is therefore to be
regretted that the list annexed to the final report does not yet appear to have been
formally circulated. During its visits to different countries, it was on several
occasions mentioned by Governments that it was impossible to ensure the
implementation of the sanctions relating to UNITA officials in the absence of such
an updated list. The Mechanism fully concurs with that view.
50. Since its final report, the Mechanism has continued the updating of the list and
has the following suggestions to make:
Names to be deleted
No. 09. Camosso, Antonio (not UNITA official)
No. 10. Catchiungo (appears under two Nos.; see also No. 76)
No. 25. Chula, Jessey (not UNITA official)
No. 49. Grito, Morais (deceased)
No. 67. Kanganji (appears under two Nos.; see also No. 54)
No. 82. Ludevina (appears under two Nos.; see also No. 12)
No. 87. Malaquias, Isaura (not UNITA official)
No. 89. Maola, Francisco (not UNITA official)
No. 158. Timotelo, Victor (not UNITA official)
Names to be added
Dachala, Dekas; brother of “Karrica”; said to be an important UNITA official,
operating in central and eastern Africa, possibly with links to rebels in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Sachiambo, Aninhas; colonel; close to Mr. Savimbi; knowledge of UNITA
administration and finances
Prata, Jorge; director for UNITA diamond business
Other changes to be made
No. 57. Kaley, Alexandre; said to be inside Angola, not in Namibia
No. 64. Kamalata, Francisco; residence not known
No. 77. Katende, Joao; alias is not “Jo Prata”; title is not special ambassador
(official within UNITA diamond business)
No. 84. Last name should be “Lusadissu” not “Lusadiu”; place of residence is
said to be Germany
No. 162. Veneno; last name should be “Kanjungo”, first name “Fernando
Ngueve” “Sheltox” and “Silivondela” are aliases
No. 119. Sakaita, Aleluia, is a son of Mr. Savimbi not a daughter.

15

S/2001/363

The Mechanism is following up information indicating that certain persons on the
list are deceased and thus should be deleted, and that others should be added due to
involvement not previously known.

F.

Conclusion
51. In conclusion, it must again be stressed that the UNITA structures of senior
officials abroad are today essential to the survival of the organization.
Representatives carry out public relations activities and political lobbying. They are
also essential to UNITA supply lines, diamond sales and logistics. The Mechanism
believes that these structures are evolving in order to adapt to circumstances. Since
the presentation of the final report, the Mechanism has been informed about UNITA
links/branches in Scandinavia and Latin America. To a large extent, the persons
involved seem to have been linked for several years with the countries that they are
covering. In certain cases now under investigation, they have citizenship of
European countries or refugee status in a European country.

IV. Diamond trading
A.

Current state of diamond mining in Angola
52. In 2000, 69 per cent of diamonds under government control came from the
nine official mines; 31 per cent were mined by garimpeiros, according to official
figures made available to the Mechanism. Because almost a quarter of Angola’s
diamonds are mined in the lower-value Catoca kimberlite mine, the value of the
diamonds is almost equally divided between the official sector, worth $398.5
million, and the unofficial diamond sector, worth $347.6 million.
53. It has been noticeable that in the last two years official mining has begun to
outstrip the informal sector despite the war. However, there has been an increase in
non-UNITA smuggling during 2000, which clearly means that illicit Angolan
diamonds are reaching diamond markets regardless of the certificate of origin
system and which also makes the tracing of UNITA smuggling more problematic.
Several diamond dealers under investigation appear to be buying both types of illicit
Angolan diamonds. Diamond smuggling from Angola has been estimated to have
increased to $250 million in 2000 according to industry sources.
54. For this reason, it is likely that total Angolan diamond production, including
UNITA’s mining, was of the order of $1.1 billion in 2000, at a minimum. Gemstones
worth $350 million have therefore been laundered through diamond trading systems
(note that the figure of $350 million is based on smuggling of at least $250 million
from non-UNITA sources and probable UNITA smuggling of at least $100 million;
both of these figures are minimum estimates, as better data on the real situation is
awaited). We would also suggest, based on better knowledge of the diamond
production capacity of ex-UNITA mining areas, that UNITA smuggling in 1999 was
worth at least $300 million.
UNITA diamond mining and trading activities in 2001
55. During the Mechanism’s visit to Angola in February 2001 we raised the
question of the location of UNITA mines and the value of their output with the

16

S/2001/363

Ministry of Geology and Mines, the Forces Armada Angolana (FAA), United
Nations agencies who have access to the interior and a number of diamond
companies. These interviews served to confirm that the information we gave in the
previous report is still valid, and that UNITA access to diamond mines remains
unchanged at present.
56. We have not been able to obtain any estimates of the value of current UNITA
diamond production. This is likely to remain similar to 2000 since the principal
limitation on UNITA’s capacity to mine is the control of a large enough workforce,
together with the capture of at least part of its mining equipment by FAA. UNITA
typically uses one soldier to control a group of 6 to 10 diggers; therefore, controlling
a workforce of 2,000 diggers, for example, would take about 300 troops. The
investigation into sales of UNITA diamonds, which is now under way, should begin
to answer the question of the real value of UNITA’s diamond mining.

B.

The diamond circuits
57. In the December 2000 report, the Mechanism identified the role of both
diamond dealers and diamond smuggling circuits in aiding UNITA to violate United
Nations sanctions on the sale of diamonds. The report highlighted the need to follow
up these reports and allegations and to gather detailed evidence of sanctions
violations. The Mechanism also highlighted the role of the Angolan single channel
for diamonds in developing better control of the diamond circuits within Angola,
and has followed up the initial work with a visit to ASCorp buying offices to
examine the systems in more detail.
ASCorp: the Angolan single channel diamond marketing system
58. The ASCorp single channel diamond marketing system was set up with a
mandate to purchase all Angola’s diamond production and as a means to regulate the
Angolan diamond sector, both to put all certified diamonds through a single
controllable channel and to implement controls within the informal mining and
trading sector. During the period of the extension of its mandate, the Mechanism
interviewed shareholders in ASCorp, interviewed executives and visited two of its
buying offices, in Malange and Saurimo, to discuss what measures were being taken
to control the diamond buying circuits in Angola.
59. ASCorp began full operation in February 2000. It is a joint venture, in which
the Angolan Government, in the form of SODIAM, holds 51 per cent of the shares.
Between February and December 2000, ASCorp bought diamonds worth $746
million and paid taxes of $59.16 million (in 1999, Angola produced diamonds worth
$650 million; total taxes paid on the sale of diamonds amounted to only $21
million). All the diamonds, except those from Catoca, are exported directly to
Antwerp; diamonds from Catoca are exported to Tel Aviv. All these diamonds carry
a certificate of origin.
60. The new system has been widely criticized for being a monopoly and offering
lower prices for diamonds than on the Antwerp market. ASCorp acknowledges that
this is the case; tax is deducted at the point of sale for garimpeiro miners. The tax
rate is 6 per cent for small miners on the informal market (garimpeiros) and 11 per
cent for major mines, who pay 5 per cent royalties in addition. Lower prices than on
the Antwerp market are offered since ASCorp sell in Antwerp and would make no

17

S/2001/363

profit if they traded at those market prices in Angola. However, in the case of larger,
better-quality stones which would otherwise be lost to smugglers, full market price
is being offered, the Mechanism was informed.
61. After a year of operation, in which the new certificate of origin system was
started up, ASCorp has a total of 23 buying offices, principally in Lunda Norte, with
one in Lunda Sul and two buyers in Malange city. A buying office in Kuito was
briefly opened and closed because it was impossible to be certain of the sources of
the diamonds. The objective, according to Noe Balthasar, Chief Executive Officer of
ASCorp, is to create a transparent, controllable and regulated buying system, and to
bring the informal sector under control.
62. This highly problematic task is being addressed in several ways. Small miners
and the middlemen who trade the diamonds are being registered through the Guichet
Unico (see paras. 69-73 below). To date, since September 2000, just under 800
traders have been registered and about 20 per cent of applicants are turned down
after checks on their documentation. The traders are asked to register when they go
to ASCorp offices to sell diamonds. Records are kept of their names and the
quantities of diamonds traded, whether the traders register or not. At present, the
middlemen are not compelled to register except, we were told, in Malange.
63. Registration of buyers is a major key to controlling the circulation of
diamonds. The credentials issued are valid for three months only and define the area
in which the buyer can operate. It is the first time such a system has been tried out
on the ground. It is not a quick-fix solution, but if effective it will address one of the
most difficult problems in the diamond trading sector — controlling the operations
of the small traders. The effect will be to reduce the number of middlemen
operating, and also to reduce their hold over the miners. The area of sale of any
parcels of diamonds will be identifiable.
Bringing artisan miners into the State mining sector
64. The informal mining sector is also to be brought under tighter control, with
benefits being offered to miners who sell through ASCorp. The objectives are to
begin investment in social projects, to “Angolanize” the diamond circuits, to
formalize garimpeiro mining and create “diamond schools” so that Angolan miners
no longer depend on the more skilled West Africans. ASCorp has budgeted $1.1
million to begin work in the social sector in 2001.
65. One project for a group of local miners in the Saurimo area is under way.
Miners will receive mining equipment, food and fuel, and will sell their diamonds
direct to ASCorp, thus cutting out the middleman altogether. There are an estimated
100,000 plus garimpeiro miners in Angola, many of them working in remote areas,
so that the registration of garimpeiros is likely to be a long process.
66. Small-scale mining and trading is dominated by West Africans or former
Zaireans, who have remained in Angola and acquired Angolan nationality through
marriage. They also act as middlemen since they have a knowledge of diamond
trading that Angolans lack. They cannot be deported where they possess Angolan
identity papers, but will be licensed and brought into the ASCorp system and their
numbers reduced.
67. Mining concessions have been reduced by law to 3,000 square kilometres; in
principle this will enable the mining companies to control garimpeiros who move

18

S/2001/363

into their concessions, although it is a contentious policy since many mining
companies were originally awarded much larger concessions to allow for
prospecting and the opening up of new mines, and will now lose large areas of
territory.
68. The Angolan Government has been carrying out research to identify the scope
of garimpeiro mining in Angola. A survey in the Cuango region alone discovered
130 semi-industrial mines using drag-lines. These miners will be offered the
possibility of continuing to mine legally. Moving small-scale mining into the
legitimate sector will improve overall diamond production since better mining
techniques will be applied and artisan miners can work areas that would be
uneconomical for industrial-scale mines.
The Guichet Unico and the credential system
69. The Guichet Unico is the body created to investigate applicants for diamond
credentials and authorize the issue of credentials, thus controlling diamond
smuggling from Angola. The body consists of representatives of the Criminal
Police, State Security, Immigration, Customs, the Fiscal Police, the Border Police,
the Rapid Intervention Police and the Economic Police. These are carefully selected
representatives and paid accordingly. They authorize the issue of credentials to
miners and clients and work closely with ASCorp security. The credential cards,
similar in make-up to credit cards and difficult to forge, are issued by ASCorp when
the Guichet Unico has completed its investigation. Each type of card is colour-coded
and bar-coded, and eventually the bar-coding will allow computerization of the
diamond sales system.
70. There are four categories of credentials issued. Licences for clients of ASCorp
(the diamond traders) are valid for three months within the area designated on the
licence. If the middlemen do not trade with ASCorp, the licence is withdrawn on the
basis that the diamonds must be being smuggled out of Angola. It currently takes
about four weeks for a licence to be issued. The policy at present is to register as
many sellers as possible in order to track their activities since licences are only valid
for three months. Artisanal miners are licensed to mine within a region; these miners
become legitimate but must sell their diamonds direct to ASCorp. ASCorp security
and ASCorp buyers also receive credentials.
71. The Guichet Unico system is only at the beginning of what is evidently a long
process, and in the interim the problems of controlling the circulation of diamonds
also rests with ASCorp buyers and security. The buyers are able to provide
information on the output of the mines in their region, providing valuable central
data on Angola’s diamonds. Buyers informed the Mechanism that they have been
instructed not to buy diamonds they think may originate from UNITA. ASCorp
officials point out that any such trades, if discovered, would result in disaster for
ASCorp. Buyers are able to identify the origin of the diamonds they buy, and the
Mechanism was told that parcels of diamonds worth more than $100,000 are
unusual; smaller parcels are more typical, with about five clients bringing in
diamonds worth $400,000 a week (typical UNITA diamond trades involve larger
parcels, worth $1 million and upwards). In addition, the Mechanism was told that
the Guichet Unico system is a deterrent to UNITA traders in view of the possibility
of their being identified.

19

S/2001/363

72. One major issue is how to control the increasing quantities of diamonds
smuggled out of Angola by non-UNITA sources. Overall informal mining has
increased across Angola as a result of the recapture of mining areas previously held
by UNITA — quite extensive mines in Bie province, six mines in the Lundas and
mines in Kwanza Sul and parts of Malange and Kuanda Kubango that UNITA no
longer occupies. This considerable increase in diamond production should have
meant larger purchases by ASCorp than they have made this year, and their
assessment is that there has been an overall increase in smuggling this year.
73. While it is clear that this system has a very long way to go, it offers interesting
methodologies for resolving the most difficult issues in the alluvial mining sector —
controlling the garimpeiros and the buyers. ASCorp has begun to address the
underlying problems of bringing both into the system. Alluvial mining regions in
Africa have always proved difficult to control; the diamonds are spread over large
areas, and fencing off and policing these areas is not viable. Control methods have
previously relied on policing the regions, but this does not address the key questions
of the marginalization of the miners and the role of the middlemen in this trade. If
the new system is effective, it will provide a model for stabilizing alluvial mining
regions and will make it more difficult for rebel groups to control miners. It will
also make it much more difficult for illegal buyers to operate freely. The system
should be monitored to check its effectiveness in practice.
Illicit diamond trading in Luanda
74. Official diamond buying offices in Luanda have been abolished in order to
gain better control of the diamond trading circuits in Angola and identify smugglers.
Since there is now no reason for any individual to possess diamonds in Luanda, it is
easier to identify those in possession of illicit diamonds. It is also significantly
easier to identify both the diamonds and the seller if diamonds are traded in the
mining areas rather than in the capital.
75. In 2001, there have been two major arrests of illicit dealers, both caught
holding diamonds, which is necessary for an arrest for illegal diamond trading in
Angola. Antonio de Sousa, a well-connected Portuguese national resident in Angola,
was sentenced to nine years in prison in February 2001 for possession of 77
diamonds at his home in Luanda and allegedly arranging a trade of 1,600 diamonds.
76. Azet Mohammed, who holds a British protected citizen passport, was arrested
in March 2001. He was arrested for possession of a parcel of diamonds worth
$100,000. Mohammed was described as the “lieutenant” of diamond dealer Ali
Mackie Fouad Abess, of Mackie Diamonds in Antwerp, a Lebanese diamond dealer
who was also a dealer in Sierra Leonean diamonds. Mackie, who holds a United
States passport, began working in Angola in late 1999. He was deported from
Angola for possession of false papers when Mohammed was arrested. Mackie’s
activities in Angola are under investigation.
77. One Angolan large dealer is still operating in Luanda. He buys mainly higherquality goods, worth at least $250 per carat, and his turnover is said to have
increased fourfold since 2000. His smuggling operation to two diamond centres
remains an open door for sanctions violations.
78. It should be noted that, in its resolution 1173 (1998), the Security Council
decided that all States should take the necessary measures to prohibit the direct or

20

S/2001/363

indirect import from Angola to their territory of all diamonds that are not controlled
through the certificate of origin regime of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, though within the primary context of the sanctions against UNITA.
The Mechanism is therefore obliged to follow up all instances of illicit diamonds
imported from Angola. The object of dealers in these stones seems to be to obtain
these valuable Angolan gems, which position dealers in the top 20 per cent of the
diamond market, rather than to work exclusively with one side or the other. The
diamond smuggling networks also overlap considerably, as can be seen from the
account of these set out below.

C.

UNITA-related smuggling circuits
Methodology for investigating the UNITA diamond trade
79. In its final report, the Mechanism described the broader systems for
“laundering” illicit diamonds, that is, diamonds which are smuggled from the
country of origin and whose provenance is falsified, and how UNITA diamonds
move within these networks. The Mechanism noted that UNITA diamonds were sold
during 2000 through three principal means: through the auction of diamonds,
through trading in South Africa and through direct links to diamond dealers. In order
to validate reports concerning UNITA’s diamond trading and to obtain more
evidence, the Mechanism has launched an investigation of the detailed allegations it
has received concerning sanctions violations. Although the Mechanism has heard
many allegations concerning UNITA’s diamond trading, it is only able to follow up
those which are sufficiently detailed to be both very credible and traceable.
80. Evidence-gathering in the world of diamond dealing is made especially
difficult by the relative absence of documentation of the kind that one might expect
from more normal trading channels, and because of the complexity of diamond
trading networks. In the first place, information comes from individuals, usually
diamond industry sources, who tend to be well aware of what is going on in the
industry but whose information by itself is insufficient as evidence, even from
multiple sources. In one case, we have the same detailed allegation from three
sources, but naming this company without further evidence runs the risk of being
misled by rumour.
81. There are additional problems of evidence-gathering as well. Evidence is only
rarely available from eyewitnesses to diamond deals. It is very easy for diamonds to
acquire false documentation and difficult to trace the movements of diamond
dealers, who may hold several passports. Parcels of diamonds are likely to pass
through several countries and be mixed with other diamonds en route. And lastly, it
has always been relatively easy to smuggle diamonds and sell illicit diamonds, and
those who are willing to buy such diamonds are prepared to cover their tracks.
82.

Other problems that investigators in this field face are:

(a) The existence of “shell” companies, whose only reason for existence is to
process paperwork for diamond deals that took place elsewhere;
(b)

Forged invoices;

(c) False declaration of the value of a consignment of diamonds from a
country of provenance;

21

S/2001/363

(d)

Misdeclaration of the country of origin;

(e) The movement of diamonds through tax havens that do not keep records
of this, and probably an increase in this trade;
(f)
centres.
83.

Increasingly complex import routes for suspect diamonds into diamond

Verification of information, therefore, means:

(a)
sources;

Gathering all available information from as wide as possible a range of

(b) Searching for any existing paper trails, which are likely to cross three or
four countries, possibly including tax havens;
(c)
ground;
(d)

Travelling to the site of suspected deals to verify information on the
Interviewing dealers about their diamond buying activities.

84. Despite the difficulty of gathering hard evidence in this field, if no attempt is
made to gather what is available it will not be possible to prove the activities of
diamond dealers in breaking United Nations sanctions. This investigation will also
clearly expose the problems and weaknesses of documentation in the world of
diamond trading.
85. During the time available, the Mechanism has launched an initial check into
the feasibility of detailed investigation, with Interpol and other relevant experts, and
it is of the opinion that results can be reached by these means provided that the
investigation is carefully targeted. Investigations into eight diamond dealers have
been launched, although the first phase of the inquiries has not yet been completed.
Further inquiries into the allegations have also been made, which have so far tended
to confirm the information held by the Mechanism, and to suggest that most if not
all of the routes and players referred to in our report are still actively used by
UNITA. It would, however, be premature to publish the details while the
investigation is still under way.
86. It is essential that any successor to the Mechanism continue with this inquiry
or that an international body such as Interpol do so. In addition to the activities of
diamond dealers, diamond circuits are used to launder the diamond deals of arms
traders linked to UNITA and hence to launder dirty money. It is precisely these
weaknesses in diamond trading systems, allied to the ease of smuggling diamonds,
that permit diamond trading, specifically, to be used by UNITA and these are issues
that need addressing.
Putative diamond auctions in Gabon
87. The Mechanism visited Gabon to follow up reports that UNITA held a tender
for diamonds during October 2000. It was said to be the third tender held in 2000,
but the Mechanism has no substantive information on the first two. On the third, the
Mechanism has information concerning the destination of the parcel, which it has
provided to the Government.
88. The Government of Gabon had no knowledge of any of these tenders, and
agreed to follow up the information provided by the Mechanism on the export of the

22

S/2001/363

parcel to see whether this information can be validated. It should be noted that any
such tender would be held only to sell a valuable parcel of diamonds to the highest
bidder, and that a country with no obvious links to diamonds but with good air
transport links and banking system makes for a safer place for this type of activity.
Smuggling through the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Congo Brazzaville
89. The Mechanism visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo to begin the
process of verifying reports of UNITA diamond trades through the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the role of dealers. As noted above, the activities of
diamond dealers who were working in the Democratic Republic of the Congo prior
to the company International Diamond Industries (IDI-Congo) receiving the
monopoly rights to purchase diamonds in September 2000, are under investigation.
The Mechanism interviewed IDI-Congo and others operating in the diamond sector
to obtain information about the situation.
90. However, there are other links between the diamonds of Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which need examination. The diamond industry
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is one of the most complex to analyse
because of the very high level of diamond smuggling from and through the country,
and because of the previous use of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a
country of provenance for illicit Angolan diamonds, regardless of whether these
diamonds have even transited the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Diamonds
from Angola are known to be mixed with diamonds from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by dealers who buy illicit Angolan diamonds, including UNITA
diamonds, and dealers who have worked with UNITA have admitted this practice.
This makes judging the provenance of diamonds from the region extremely difficult.
91. There are two main areas of continuity of diamonds between Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo: the Chicapa region and the northern Cuango
River, which forms part of the border between the two countries. There are historical
region and kinship ties across these virtually open borders, and trading across them
is a long-established activity. Diamonds are said to flow in both directions across the
border; Angolan diamonds flow into the Democratic Republic of the Congo through
either smaller local trades or from diamond buyers who enter Angola to find betterquality gems. Diamonds from the Democratic Republic of the Congo also moved
into Angola, at least during the period in which diamond trading in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo took place in local currency, a factor which greatly increased
diamond smuggling from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
92. Inside Angola, the Cuango region, north of Luremo, is mined in the upper
reaches by UNITA. On the Democratic Republic of the Congo bank of the river, in
the province of Bandunda, the region is a zone reserved for national defence, in
which alluvial diamond mining is being developed under control of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo military, according to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
93. While there are evident possibilities for laundering both UNITA and nonUNITA illicit diamonds, the Mechanism has also learned that most of the betterquality diamonds that are either mined in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or
pass through that country from Angola are now smuggled out.

23

S/2001/363

94. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo carried out an
exercise to discover the extent of diamond smuggling from the country during 2000,
and has established that many Democratic Republic of the Congo — and potentially
Angolan — diamonds now reach Congo Brazzaville. The Mechanism had previously
heard that Angolan diamonds do in fact reach Congo Brazzaville through the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, though the exact source and quantities have not
been determined.
95. The Government of Congo Brazzaville was approached for information on the
illicit trade, and has acknowledged that there is a major problem of smuggling.
There are currently approximately five licensed comptoirs d’achat (diamond buying
offices) and a total of 30 dealers in the country, many of whom moved there when
IDI-Congo gained monopoly rights in the neighbouring Democratic Republic of the
Congo, according to industry sources. The Government of Congo Brazzaville is of
the opinion that Angolan diamonds do not enter the country directly from Angola
due to border controls between the two countries. Diamonds leaving CongoBrazzaville through legal routes are “expertised” — checked to ensure that packages
of diamonds conform to their stated contents. However, the international smuggling
circuits in operation bypass normal controls.
96. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is to institute a
certificate of origin scheme in the near future, following discussions with the
Diamond High Council in Belgium. This is one step towards control of a complex
diamond circuit, through which many illegal gems are “laundered”, but trilateral
initiatives to control the diamond circuits between Angola, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Congo Brazzaville should be considered, possibly with
international guarantees. Addressing these issues would resolve one of the most
difficult questions in diamond control.
97. The Mechanism has learned that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is planning a joint venture diamond-cutting factory in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with a Belgian-based company, TOP International, to cut and
polish diamonds from the majority State-owned Minière de Bakwanga mines and
then sell them, in addition to providing training and “expertising” Democratic
Republic of the Congo diamonds. The accord was signed in March 2000 and the
modalities for its implementation are still under discussion. It could be considered
premature to open a diamond-cutting factory while the complex smuggling situation
remains unresolved.
South Africa
98. The Government of South Africa is investigating the trade said to originate
from the “Présidence du Togo” in the Mechanism’s report. The diamonds were sold
to a South African jeweller by an intermediary, who held the invoice, and the
paperwork is said not to conform to South African regulations. The question has
now been handed to the South African police force for further investigation.
99. During the Mechanism’s visit to South Africa, extensive discussions were held
on the smuggling of UNITA and other Angolan diamonds into South Africa, and are
part of the investigations in progress as part of the wide-ranging cooperation being
developed in several sectors.

24

S/2001/363

100. The South African Government is in the process of implementing new controls
on the import of diamonds into South Africa through the Mineral Development Bill,
which it is hoped will be passed into law in June 2002, subject to parliamentary
process. The Diamond Act of 1986, which makes little provision for diamond
imports, governs imports until that date, supported by Diamond Board regulations.
Information-gathering from other States
101. The Mechanism also continued a process of information-gathering from both
African diamond-producing countries and major trading centres, so as to compare
official records of imports and exports of diamonds and verify information held by
the Mechanism. The Mechanism also wished to discover which countries related
directly or in some cases very indirectly to the investigations into UNITA diamond
trading had implemented Security Council resolution 1173 (1998).
102. The Mechanism requested the following information:
(a) Whether Security Council resolution 1173 (1998) has been enacted into
national law;
(b) Copies of regulations governing the sale of diamonds, the names and
contact details of bodies responsible for overseeing diamond sales, and sample
copies of the documents needed to trade in and export diamonds;
(c) Information on any procedures implemented to control diamond
smuggling and conflict diamonds;
(d)

An official list of licensed diamond dealers, where relevant;

(e)

Diamond production and export figures for the period 1998 to 2000.

103. Several diamond-trading countries were approached by letter for information.
The Government of Israel was asked what measures had been taken to ensure that
embargoed diamonds are not reaching the market since the Government has enacted
the Security Council resolution. The Ministry of Trade and Industry was requested
to provide the figures for imports from all African countries during the year 2000, as
well as imports of rough diamonds from Cyprus (if any) and Switzerland, and to
inform us of the procedures followed when a parcel of rough diamonds enters the
country. The Mechanism was not able to visit Israel during the short period allowed
for travel and received no reply to its written request.
104. The Central African Republic and Zambia have not yet responded to the
Mechanism’s request for further information on the diamond trade and diamond
exports from those countries. Nor has the Government of Mali responded to a
request to provide any available information on the activities of Malian nationals
who are known to be buyers of illicit diamonds in Angola and to clarify whether
there is any diamond market, legal or otherwise, known to the Government, which
might provide an outlet for rough diamonds if other UNITA trading routes are
blocked.
105. The Government of Rwanda wrote to the Mechanism, in response to questions
raised in the report, informing them that Mr. Victor Bout and his associates have not
approached the Rwandan Government to set up a diamond-cutting factory in
Rwanda. The Government acknowledges that small quantities of diamonds pass
through Rwanda to Belgium from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, describing

25

S/2001/363

this as a traditional route for diamonds, although it was not reported in Belgium
import statistics until 1998. Diamonds pass through Rwanda tax-free. There was no
comment on the import of high-value diamonds into South Africa said to originate
from Rwanda.
106. The Government of Uganda has informed the Mechanism that no export
permits were issued for the 9,387.51 carats of diamonds reported as exported from
Uganda into Antwerp, and offered its cooperation in an investigation into these
reports.

D.

Conclusion
107. The effectiveness of Security Council resolution 1173 (1998) on UNITA
diamond trading may be assessed as follows:
(a) Many countries have not passed national laws enacting the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1173 (1998). Several States claim
that existing national laws are sufficient for this purpose. This is patently not the
case, although the problem may lie more in flouting of local controls than in the
laws themselves (the Mechanism has set out to gain this information from all
countries in any way related to the conflict in Angola and through which UNITA
diamonds might pass; there is no existing exhaustive list of countries who have
enacted the sanctions);
(b) In cases where Governments have both enacted laws and strengthened
diamond-trading controls, illicit diamonds are still reaching the market. There are
clear and major weaknesses in systems for controlling diamond trading, which no
single country can effectively address because of the many alternative routes
available to traders in illicit diamonds. UNITA gems will find a market as long as
illicit diamonds can be traded and until those involved in this trade are exposed and
penalized, thus making UNITA diamonds a less attractive proposition;
(c) The sanctions have driven UNITA diamond trading deeper underground
and have made UNITA seek new routes for diamond trading;
(d) The sanctions have brought about reform of official Angolan diamondtrading structures, producing a novel approach to resolving problems on the ground,
which should be considered as an option for application in other African diamondmining countries;
(e) Finally, United Nations sanctions have provided the impetus for
worldwide controls on diamonds — the certificate of origin scheme. However, this
scheme is unlikely to reach the implementation stage before the end of 2001.

V. Petroleum and petroleum products
108. The Mechanism was informed by the Namibian authorities that their forces had
unearthed 32 full 5,000-litre petroleum containers in southern Angola during their
aggressive pursuit operations in February 2001. It is not known when they were
delivered and where they came from. The Mechanism was also informed that
although UNITA demand for fuel has been greatly reduced since the end of its
offensive, small UNITA guerrilla groups still occasionally use trucks for rapid

26

S/2001/363

deployment. This information once again brings to the fore the need for continued
vigilance on the part of the Government of Angola, as well as the countries in the
subregion, to ensure that fuel is not smuggled to UNITA.
109. The Mechanism was briefed by the Government of Namibia about the strong
measures it had put in place to monitor the movement of petroleum along its
common border with Angola. It was also informed that the Energy Sector
Committee of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) was studying
the recommendations concerning the need for the subregion to carry out a detailed
analysis of fuel samples obtained from petroleum industry suppliers in the area so as
to create a database for the purpose of evaluating fuel obtained or captured from
UNITA.

VI. Measures taken by member States of the Southern African
Development Community to strengthen the implementation
of sanctions against UNITA
110. The success of the implementation of sanctions depends on the commitment of
the international community as much as that of the southern African subregion
itself. Indeed, in its resolution 1295 (2000), the Security Council recognizes the
special role of SADC in the strengthening of the implementation of sanctions
against UNITA. The period under review has seen the countries in the southern
African subregion continue to take measures to strengthen the implementation of
sanctions against UNITA. The measures taken by these countries have been mainly
at three levels — national, bilateral and subregional.
111. As noted above, on 10 February 2001 a tripartite agreement was reached
between Angola, Namibia and Zambia, under which all sides will improve security
along their common borders and will also improve the implementation of sanctions
against UNITA.
112. In December 2000, a special meeting of the Southern African Regional Police
Chiefs Organization was held at the chief of police level in Luanda, at which
country papers on the implementation of sanctions against UNITA were presented
and an exchange of intelligence information was held on the matter. The police
chiefs decided to designate the Interpol subregional office in Harare as a centre for
the exchange of intelligence information among countries in the subregion.
113. At the level of SADC, intersectoral committees of the organization are
currently studying recommendations contained in Security Council resolution 1295
(2000) that are specific to SADC in the areas of petroleum and transport. During its
visit to SADC headquarters in Gaborone, the Mechanism was informed by the
SADC Executive Secretary, Prega Ramsamy, that the results of these studies should
among other things be able to help the organization to identify the particular areas
for which SADC should seek external financial and technical assistance.
114. SADC representatives have also been part of the expanded Kimberly process,
working towards devising effective and pragmatic measures to address the issue of
conflict diamonds, including the creation and implementation of a simple and
workable international scheme for rough diamonds. To work towards this goal, the
Kimberly process participants have agreed on a schedule of expert meetings in
Belgium (April 2001), the Russian Federation (June 2001), the United Kingdom

27

S/2001/363

(September 2001) and Angola (October 2001), culminating in a possible ministerial
meeting in Botswana (November 2001).
115. At its extraordinary summit, held in Windhoek on 9 March 2001, SADC
reaffirmed its moral and material support for the people of Angola, and urged all
SADC member States to tighten the United Nations sanctions against UNITA,
particularly in the area of illicit diamond trading. The SADC Inter-State Defence
and Security Committee has also addressed the issue of strengthening sanctions
against UNITA under its various subcommittees, especially its Ad Hoc Committee
on Cross-border Crime.

VII. Concluding remarks
116. UNITA is still very active, conducting guerrilla warfare, attacking mostly
civilian targets, destroying infrastructure, killing innocent people and laying
landmines. Peace is not yet at hand. This is why the Angolan Government has
officially requested the maintenance of sanctions and vigilance in monitoring
compliance as the only effective way to force UNITA to return to the peace process
that it has betrayed.
117. In terms of the work of the Mechanism that has been mandated, there is still a
lot to be done in connection with the ongoing investigations, analysis of the
information that is being gathered and continuing consultations with the
Governments and organizations concerned. Another very important task is to
monitor the different measures and initiatives adopted by countries in order to
comply with the sanctions and implement the recommendations of the report of the
Mechanism, as well as the investigation into UNITA finances.
118. The Security Council’s firm commitment to monitoring sanctions has
undoubtedly had a positive effect on thwarting the military lifelines that UNITA
requires. As a result of the high level of vigilance and systematic investigations
recently undertaken by the Mechanism, Governments who in the past violated
sanctions are now distancing themselves from UNITA and taking measures to
implement the sanctions. In the case of companies and individuals, they are today
under pressure and constant scrutiny.
119. However, although the attitude of impunity may have lessened, the intentions
of sanctions busters to continue to derive profit from this cruel war remains firmly
intact. UNITA and its suppliers are simply hoping that the Security Council’s
commitment to actively pursuing them will soon end. The Mechanism strongly
believes that, at this juncture, it would send a very bad signal to leave its work
unfinished, when all available indications show that UNITA is finally being hurt by
the sanctions even if it has not given up.

28
