A /74/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

60th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 3 March 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Announcement of precautionary measures against
the coronavirus outbreak
The President: Before proceeding to the items on
our agenda, as members of the General Assembly are
aware, the World Health Organization has declared
the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak as a public health
emergency of international concern. While the emphasis
of that decision is on global measures to control the
outbreak, individuals can contribute by following the
advice “think global, act local”. I urge all participants
to follow the guidance provided by the Secretariat,
including the following: to strictly not attend a meeting
if one is unwell or has a fever, cough or respiratory
symptoms; to contact the Medical Service here at
Headquarters by telephone if one is unwell and has
been to an at-risk location for coronavirus in the past
14 days; and to undertake regular preventive measures
such as cough etiquette and regular handwashing. Those
measures are for members’ safety and to safeguard the
well-being of us all.
Agenda item 30
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Note verbale dated 2 January 2020
from the Permanent Mission of India
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (A/74/637)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.39)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India to introduce draft resolution
A/74/L.39.

Mr. Swain (India): On behalf of India, Chair of the
Kimberley Process for 2019, I have the great pleasure
of introducing draft resolution A/74/L.39, entitled “The
role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the
link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention
and settlement of conflicts”. The draft resolution
welcomes the progress made by the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme in severing the links between the
illicit diamond trade and armed conflict.
India is one of the founding members of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and, since
the Scheme’s inception, has played an active role in
the progress and advancement of this unique tripartite
structure recognized by the United Nations. The
Kimberley Process continues to be an important and
unique instrument for conflict prevention. Since the
inception of the Kimberley Process, in 2003, this was
the second time that India carried out the responsibility
of being the Kimberley Process Chair. We see that
as a testimony to India’s continuing commitment to
the Process.
The year 2019 was a special year, as we celebrated
the one-hundred-fiftieth anniversary of the birth of
Mahatma Gandhi, the global icon of non-violence.
Mahatma Gandhi was a great believer in the potential
of diverse communities to come together in a positive
spirit to foster cooperation and find solutions to
common challenges. The draft resolution recalls the
spirit of mutual cooperation and unity in diversity that
guided India in the course of its chairmanship of the
Kimberley Process in 2019.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-05656 (E)

*2005656*

A/74/PV.60

Draft resolution A/74/L.39 welcomes India’s
commitment to the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme. During its chairmanship, India worked closely
with Kimberley Process Vice-Chair, the Russian
Federation, Chairs of the Kimberley Process working
groups and all Kimberley Process participants and
observers to make the Kimberley Process stronger
in terms of overseeing the administration and
implementation process and making the Process
more efficient.
The draft resolution is an important step forward
for the Kimberley Process. It contributes to the broader
Kimberley Process agenda for regional cooperation.
During 2019, India continued with this endeavour and
upheld the Kimberley Process tradition of supporting
regional cooperation in Central Africa. One of the key
objectives of supporting regional cooperation was to
identify the challenges and opportunities in enhancing
the implementation of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme in Central Africa, essentially
focusing on five countries, namely, Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and Cameroon.
The draft resolution recalls India’s commitment
as Chair of the Kimberley Process in 2019. India
worked to ensure that the Kimberley Process would
remain relevant to addressing the emerging challenges
encountered by the stakeholders. In July 2019, India
introduced an amendment to create a separate eightdigit code for laboratory-grown rock diamonds,
thereby becoming one of the early adopters of distinct
Harmonized System codes for both rough and polished
synthetic diamonds.
The draft resolution welcomes the work done by
India as the Chair of Kimberley Process in 2019. Under
India’s chairmanship, the Kimberley Process made
commendable progress on several fronts, including
the finalization of terms of reference for establishing
a permanent secretariat, the adoption of the draft
administration decision on a peer-review mechanism,
the development of a set of guidelines for the collection
of Kimberley Process statistics, and reporting of data
for additional mining production. Significant progress
was also made on the proposal for the introduction of
new independent observers, the consolidation of the
core document and setting up a multi-donor fund.
While we are proud of what has been achieved so
far, we also acknowledge that challenges lie ahead of
2/9

03/03/2020

us. The entire Kimberley Process fraternity, consisting
of the participants and observers, has worked hard to
move the Kimberley Process forward. The continued
success of the Process remains an important goal and
commitment for us. India will continue to actively
participate in the work on various fronts and pursue
the collective goals of the Kimberley Process. India
is a participant, and as the Chair of the Committee on
Participation and Chairmanship for 2020, looks forward
to working with all participants and observers to ensure
that the Kimberley Process continues to be inclusive
and remains capable of facing the emerging challenges.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our commitment
to the Kimberley Process. We look forward to working
closely with the Russian Federation, the Kimberley
Process Chair for 2020, and with Botswana, the 2020
Vice-Chair. The draft resolution recalls that under
the Indian chairmanship the Kimberley Process has
delivered progress on multiple fronts, as highlighted
previously, and has contributed to further reinforcing
the Kimberley Process with a view to increasing its
effectiveness. I recommend that the members of the
General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/74/L39,
which underlines the progress made under the Indian
chairmanship, by consensus.
Mr. Moiseev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today we will adopt a draft resolution on the
role of diamonds in fuelling conflict (A/74/L.39). The
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, which was
adopted in Interlaken in 2002, had only 37 participants.
Since then, the goal of the Kimberley Process has been
to eliminate from international trade channels conflict
diamonds that are used in the arms trade and to support
anti-Government organizations.
The import-export operations we are monitoring
through the Kimberly Process today account for 99 per
cent of the total volume of the global diamond trade.
The Kimberley Process is becoming not only a platform
to ensure compliance with the requirements of the
Certification Scheme, but also a platform to determine
and facilitate the development of the market for rough
diamonds. The diamond trade is the most regulated
sphere of mineral raw-materials trade in the world. The
Certification Scheme sets forth minimum requirements
for countries to monitor the origin of diamonds and
establishes rules for the trade in rough diamonds.
The Kimberley Process has greatly contributed to
restoring peace, including by supporting the legitimate
20-05656

03/03/2020

trade in diamonds in Angola, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia
and Sierra Leone. In addition, thanks to its tripartite
structure, comprising the State, the diamond-mining
industry and civil society as observers of the Process,
the international community as a whole is interested
in its work. Thanks to the Kimberley Process, we have
fundamentally changed approaches to the trade in
rough diamonds.
The Kimberley Process today includes 55 participants
from 82 countries, and every year new countries show
interest and want to join. However, we are seeing an
overall change in essential ideas and life principles in
today’s society in general, and specifically the change
in the major consumers of diamonds, including the
new generation of consumers, which have become the
main driving force in the market. Consumers have new
requirements for our products: maximum transparency,
responsible delivery chains and the principled conduct
of business, including respect for human rights, labour
rights, combating money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism, minimizing the impact on and protecting
the environment, and the socioeconomic development
of the regions of origin. Therefore, as it reaffirms the
dominant role of the United Nations, the Kimberley
Process must strengthen its mandate to control the
trade in rough diamonds, which does not mean that we
will be seeking to establish additional obligations for
all participants. We wish only to enlist support from the
Kimberley Process family to establish new objectives
of the Process for the near future.
From 2017 to 2019, we undertook a three-year
review of the Kimberley Process core document — the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. Unfortunately,
we have not yet been able to complete the process.
Thanks to the adoption of draft resolution A/74/L.39,
therefore, we will have an opportunity to win the
significant support of our entire Organization, to
pursue our work on this process and to continue our
discussions.
The Russian proposals are based on the need
to comply with international humanitarian law as
the only international instrument to determine the
extent of compliance with labour, environmental and
humanitarian norms. We actively participated in the
negotiations on the draft resolution, which will allow
us to continue working on key areas in developing the
Kimberley Process. Among our proposals, which elicited
response from our partners and were incorporated in the
draft resolution, were continuing the work on the term,

A/74/PV.60

engaging new countries as members of the Kimberley
Process, calling for assistance for the return of the
Central African Republic to the Kimberley Process,
and support for industry initiatives for responsible
business conduct.
As Chair of the Kimberley Process in 2020, the
Russian Federation will prioritize continuing the
work on defining the term “conflict diamonds” to
meet today’s challenges, developing and adopting a
framework of principles for the responsible supply of
rough natural diamonds that meets the current realities
of the changing diamond market, developing a road map
for the reintegration of the Central African Republic
into the Kimberley Process, involving new countries
in the Kimberley Process, establishing a permanent
secretariat, converting Kimberley Process certificates
into digital format and separating the natural and
synthetic diamond markets.
As part of the proposed draft administrative
decision on guidelines, we studied these industry
initiatives and, based on internal industry documents,
we propose supporting seven principles of responsible
business conduct: labour rights, human rights,
environmental protection, community development,
the separation of natural and synthetic diamonds,
combating corruption and opposing the legalization
of proceeds from diamond sales. The essence of the
draft administrative decision is the declared support of
States for universally recognized standards of business
conduct in our industry.
We support the adoption of the current version of
the draft resolution A/74/L.39, entitled “The role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
We are happy to join consensus on draft resolution
A/74/L.39 today. The EU and its member States
would like to thank India for the excellent manner of
conducting the negotiations on the draft resolution
and the transparent and inclusive manner in which
consultations were held.
The European Union and its member States, which
act as a single participant in the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, would like to thank India for its
chairmanship of the Process and welcome the results

20-056563/9

A/74/PV.60

achieved in addressing broader matters pertinent to
the diamond trade. Furthermore, the EU welcomes the
Russian Federation as the current Chair and Botswana
as the current Vice-Chair and Chair for 2021.
The EU is proud of what the Kimberley Process has
achieved since the Certification Scheme entered into
force in 2003. This joint initiative of Governments, civil
society and the industry has reinforced the message that
diamonds belong to the communities that mine them,
not to militias. For several countries and communities,
the Kimberley Process has made the difference between
war and peace.
One of the unique, defining features of the
Kimberley Process is its tripartite structure. Both
industry and civil society are essential elements of
the Process. They have greatly contributed to its
establishment and operation.
The EU has been at the forefront of this unique
global partnership, grounded in the United Nations,
since the very beginning. It has worked, and will
continue to work, to advance the objectives of the
Kimberley Process, with a view to ensuring that all
participants meet the minimum requirements.
In line with the rotation of Chairs of the Kimberley
Process working bodies, the EU would like to
congratulate South Africa on its able leadership of
the Kimberley Process Working Group on Monitoring
and Botswana as the newly selected Chair, thanking it
for its leadership and vision. As the newly appointed
Vice-Chair of that Working Group, the EU looks
forward to working closely together with Botswana
in giving impetus to this work so as to further
strengthen the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme.
The EU congratulates Angola and Canada on their
leadership as Chair and Vice-Chair of the Ad Hoc
Committee on Review and Reform, which completed
its work in 2019. The European Union welcomes the
progress made towards the establishment of a permanent
secretariat. In that context, we welcome the expression
of interest from Austria, a European Union member
State, to host the secretariat in Vienna. The EU also
welcomes the strengthened peer review mechanism and
encourages participants to continue to commit to peer
review visits on a regular basis.
The EU would like to thank participants in and
observers of the Process for their active engagement
4/9

03/03/2020

in the discussions on strengthening the scope of the
Kimberley Process, which it had the honour to lead.
Those discussions demonstrated the importance that
participants and observers attach to capturing the
changing nature of conflict and actors involved and
to linking the Kimberley Process with the Sustainable
Development Goals. We regret that consensus on an
updated definition of conflict diamonds, while within
reach, could not be achieved at the 2019 Kimberley
Process plenary. The EU strongly supports the calls
on the Kimberley Process to evolve and adapt to meet
future challenges in the global diamond supply chain
and to provide assurance that diamonds are not tainted
by violence. We strongly believe in transparency and
accountability in the rough diamond supply chain to
ensure a responsible and diligent approach to rough
diamond sourcing.
The EU continues to place artisanal mining
communities at the core of its work, in line with the
Brussels Declaration on Internal Controls of Participants
with Rough Diamond Trading and Manufacturing, the
Moscow Declaration on Improving Internal Controls
over Alluvial Diamond Production, the Washington
Declaration on Integrating Development of Artisanal
and Small-Scale Diamond Mining with Kimberley
Process Implementation and the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals, in order to promote economic and
social development and prosperity. The EU therefore
continues to encourage and support cooperation on
the implementation of the Process with a regional
dimension to address common challenges, building on
the experience of the Mano River Union.
We welcome the continuing commitment of the
Government of the Central African Republic to work
collaboratively with the Kimberley Process monitoring
team in order to ensure the traceability of rough
diamond shipments and to promote legitimate trade
from compliant zones. As a member of the Central
African Republic monitoring team, the EU is strongly
committed to seeing the operational framework in place
duly implemented as a crucial element for the integrity
of the Kimberley Process.
The Kimberley Process stands out as an example
of the positive change that the international community
can bring about when we work together towards a
common objective. It stands out as a practical example
of rules-based multilateralism that has had a real
impact on the lives of people and communities across
the globe.
20-05656

03/03/2020

The EU remains committed to ensuring that
the Kimberley Process continues to fulfil its role as
a unique tool for conflict prevention, a catalyst for
good governance and transparency in natural resource
management and an instrument for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. We look forward to working closely
and constructively in that regard with the Russian
Federation as Chair, Botswana as Vice-Chair and all
participants and observers in the year ahead.
Mr. Bastaki (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I take this opportunity to thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening this plenary
meeting on agenda item 30, “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict”.
At the outset, I would like to express my appreciation
to India, the outgoing Chair of the Kimberley Process,
for its distinguished leadership and hard work in
facilitating and coordinating the negotiations on draft
resolution A/74/L.39, which we will adopt today.
The Kimberley Process is one of the most successful
partnerships between Governments, the private sector
and civil society to ensure that diamonds used to
finance conflicts do not enter the legitimate diamond
trade. The challenges are not limited to stopping the
blood diamond trade but include making the diamond
trade more sustainable.
In that regard, during its chairmanship in 2016,
my country initiated a discussion on establishing a
permanent secretariat for the Kimberley Process,
among other initiatives. We are pleased to see the
commitment among the members of the group to
establishing a permanent secretariat, equipped with
professional skills and resources, which will be a major
source of support to the group, improve its work and
assist the Chair in achieving the desired goals. We look
forward to continuing to discuss this issue.
Moreover, the Dubai Diamond Exchange looks
forward to receiving the final version of the updated
System of Warranties of the World Diamond Council.
We expect to receive the toolkit over the next 12 months.
We are also very grateful for the draft resolution,
which continues to address the initiative to establish a
permanent secretariat.
Finally, on behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
would like to congratulate the Russian Federation as
Chair of Kimberly Process for 2020, and Botswana as
Vice-Chair for the same year.

A/74/PV.60

Mr. Masire (Botswana): At the outset, our
delegation joins others in thanking you, Sir, for
convening this annual briefing on the Kimberley
Process and draft resolution A/74/L.39, entitled “The
role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link
between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and
armed conflict as a contribution to the prevention and
settlement of conflicts”.
We express our sincere appreciation to the
delegation of India for its able stewardship of the
Kimberley Process throughout 2019. My delegation is
grateful for the hospitality they afforded us and the 84
Kimberly Process members, as well as the leadership
role they played. During India’s tenure, the Kimberley
Process managed to hold its two main meetings — the
intersessional and plenary sessions — successfully, a
process that led to the adoption of the 2019 Kimberly
Process final communiqué and culminated in our
gathering here today. In adopting today’s draft
resolution, the 193 States Members of the United
Nations will once again reaffirm our support to the
Kimberley Process. We therefore welcome the report
just delivered by the representative of India as 2019
Chair of the Kimberly Process, as well as the draft
resolution itself.
As both the report and the draft resolution
emphasize, the Kimberley Process has over the past
17 years made great strides in combating the illicit
flow of conflict diamonds from the mainstream
diamond market. Today, as the 2019 Kimberly Process
communiqué reiterates, 99.9 per cent of the world’s
rough diamonds are from legitimate sources, as
compared to where we were before the establishment
of the Kimberly Process Certification Scheme. In
adopting today’s draft resolution, we will reconfirm the
resolve of the United Nations to continue supporting
the mandate of the Kimberly Process as per resolution
55/56 of 2003.
As a founding member of the Kimberly Process
and a co-sponsor of pertinent resolutions for the past
17 years, Botswana continues to place a very high
premium on the ethical exploitation, sale and trade
of rough diamonds, with the sole aim of protecting
both the integrity and reputation of this most soughtafter jewel. Diamonds have played an important part
in transforming the lives of our people and their
communities; they have put food on the table of every
Motswana; sent the young to school; provided free

20-056565/9

A/74/PV.60

health care; and enabled us to build the infrastructure
of modern Botswana.
As a member of this body and the largest producer
of diamonds by value, Botswana values its membership
in the Kimberly Process both to safeguard the integrity
and reputation of the diamond industry and to enable the
world to see this commodity called diamonds through
our eyes. For Botswana diamonds always have been and
will be for development. The good that we have brought
about by the prudent use of our natural resources, in
this case diamonds, is unquestionable.
For the past 54 years, the proceeds we have
obtained from diamond sales have contributed to the
implementation of our national development plans and
strategies. Informed by our long-term national interests
and an overall strategic vision to harness natural capital,
Botswana is committed to doing good with diamonds
and using the industry to invest in its people, as
outlined in our current National Development Plan 11,
Vision 2036, as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063,
all of which Botswana subscribes to. Therefore, the
continued usage of the Kimberly Process Certification
Scheme to eliminate illicit and conflict diamonds from
the world diamond market is, in Botswana’s view, of
paramount importance and great necessity.
Given its contributions to humankind to date, the
Kimberley Process remains relevant in contributing to
sustainable development, peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. It is in that regard that Botswana supports
continued discussion in the Ad Hoc Committee on
Review and Reform on the areas of consolidation
of the core document, the strengthening of the peerreview mechanism, the establishment of a permanent
secretariat and a multi-donor fund and ways to
strengthen the scope of the Kimberley Process.
The collective efforts of the Kimberley Process and
the United Nations have seen the settlement of conflicts
and the consolidation of peace in several African
countries. The last standing member of the Kimberly
Process whom we want to see declared a full green
zone exporting State is the Central African Republic.
Botswana makes itself available to the Central African
Republic and its neighbours for continued assistance in
that regard.
Further efforts are needed to enhance cooperation
with, and assistance to, diamond-producing countries
with regard to best practices, capacity-building
6/9

03/03/2020

and compliance with Kimberly Process minimum
requirements, rules and procedures and certification.
In this light, Botswana stands ready to share lessons,
experiences and best practices with other diamondproducing countries, especially those emerging from
conflict situations so as to assist them in avoiding
relapse into conflict.
From national legislation and competent institutions
to stringent internal and border controls, responsible
diamond sourcing and mining should be vigorously
promoted. Botswana stands ready to discuss this at
forthcoming Kimberley Process meetings.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our strong
support for and faith in the Kimberley Process and its
Certification Scheme, and their contributions to the
2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals,
as well as Africa’s Agenda 2063. The Kimberley
Process has been instrumental in saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. The mechanism
has further been instrumental in helping implement
Security Council measures targeting the illicit trade in
rough diamonds, for the good of humankind.
We therefore reaffirm Botswana’s commitment
to the Kimberly Process initiative and welcome the
selection of the Russian Federation as Chair of the
Kimberley Process for 2020. As incoming Vice-Chair,
my delegation stands ready to serve the Chair. We assure
the Russian Federation of our continued cooperation,
support and goodwill during its tenure.
Ms. Makwabe (South Africa): Let me start by
thanking the Republic of India for the work done in
steering the Kimberley Process during 2019. I also
welcome the Russian Federation as Chair and Botswana
as Vice-Chair of the Process and Certification Scheme
and assure them of South Africa’s support during their
terms in office.
South Africa remains committed to upholding the
integrity and credibility of the Kimberly Process and
ensuring that it remains relevant. While the reform
and review process that began in 2016 has formally
concluded in line with the set time frames and cycle,
many issues still remain. We believe that the Chair
will pave the best way forward to tackle these ongoing
issues in the optimum way without diverting from the
core business of the Kimberley Process, which is a
strengthened framework with more robust processes,
mechanisms and working groups.
20-05656

03/03/2020

Undertaking any reform process is always
challenging but also very necessary. In that regard,
the approach adopted by the Ad Hoc Committee on
Review and Reform allowed for open discussions
and negotiations, whose aim should be the
continued improvement of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme.
Over the 17 years of the Kimberley Process’s
existence, producing countries have put in place
legislation and systems to curb the flow of conflict
diamonds. It is South Africa’s considered opinion that
any deliberation on the changing nature of conflicts
must be able to identify the actors in conflict diamonds,
the beneficiaries of such diamonds and where those
actors are operating.
South Africa also welcomes the resumption of
exports of rough diamonds from the Central African
Republic and the terms of reference for the monitoring
team with the objective of increasing legal exports and
maintaining safeguards to prevent conflict diamonds
from entering the legitimate supply chain. Efforts
to assist the Central African Republic to achieve
compliance with the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme are welcome and must continue.
In that regard, the Kimberly Process Certification
Scheme, with its unique tripartite nature, remains
crucial to giving practical expression to the aspirations
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
Mr. Muyumba (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): On behalf of my delegation and in
my own capacity, we would like to sincerely thank the
Republic of India as Chair of the Kimberley Process in
2019. India carried out outstanding work and we have
followed the discussions leading up to the adoption of
draft resolution A/74/L.39 very closely. In that regard,
we would like once again to congratulate the Republic
of India on its chairmanship of the Kimberley Process
in 2019. We take this opportunity also to congratulate
the Russian Federation, which has assumed the
chairmanship of the Kimberley Process for 2020,
together with our brother Botswana, as Vice-Chair. We
congratulate Botswana too.
The Democratic Republic of Congo reiterates its
resolve to support the Kimberley Process and to remain
involved in it for a number of reasons. If members
have not seen war in their countries, they cannot fully
understand the impact and relevance of the Process. For

A/74/PV.60

us in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Kimberley
Process is a tool to combat belligerents and the
bloodshed of an entire people, not only in our country
but in Africa.
Thanks to the Kimberley Process, we have seen
a significant improvement in Central Africa, and
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with regard to military operations that in the past were
carried out by armed groups profiting from selling
blood diamonds. Today, those sites exploited by armed
groups have become schools for children thanks the
Kimberley Process. We have seen armed groups,
prevented from exporting their illegal blood diamond
exports because of the effective mechanisms put in place
by the Kimberley Process, lay down their weapons and
become farmers, again thanks to the Process. Today,
the Kimberley Process has helped us to transform areas
where there were no roads by building roads, bringing
a new life to our people simply because mechanisms
for traceability and responsible supply chains were
also implemented by the Congolese State, thanks to the
Kimberley Process.
Seeing the Kimberley Process solely as a
mechanism for the diamond trade completely overlooks
the peace and security aspect of the producers, who
suffered the exploitation of armed groups first-hand, as
at the time of Savimbi and Foday Sankoh. But today, if
people go to the areas that were exploited by the armed
groups, they will see that there are schools and children
playing, just like those who live here, thanks to the
Kimberley Process.
For us, the Process is also a tool of war in the
sense that it maximizes our revenue. When the export
mechanism respects the responsible supply chain in
terms of the flow not only of goods but also of finance,
the Democratic Republic of Congo fully benefits from
the revenue of diamond exports because the Kimberley
Process has restored the responsible supply of diamonds
in the world.
The Democratic Republic of Congo, my country,
reiterates its resolve to contribute to the Kimberley
Process as a founding member of the Process. In that
regard, we would like to draw a distinction between
fraudulent diamonds and conflict diamonds. That
distinction should ensure that the measures to be
adopted and the review process to be undertaken
incorporate that perspective, which we recommend

20-056567/9

A/74/PV.60

03/03/2020

to the Russian Federation as it guides the Kimberley
Process in 2020.
We would also like to request the Assembly that
members of the Process that accept in their countries
diamonds that are not certified under the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme return to the producer
countries diamonds that they have received without
certificates and that have not followed the appropriate
standards so as to discourage fraudsters in the context
of the Kimberley Process. Allowing such diamonds
to enter the country without Kimberley Process
certification shows that we encourage fraud in our
countries despite our resolve to combat the sale of
fraudulent and conflict diamonds in the world.
For that reason, while congratulating the Russian
Federation, which has just assumed the chairmanship
of the Kimberley Process for 2020, my country, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, looks forward to the
innovations and reforms that Russia will bring about
within the Process and will support them based on
our experience as a country that has known war and
has also experienced the Kimberley Process in peace.
We have those two assets to support the efforts of the
Russian Federation in 2020.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/74/L.39, entitled “The
role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the
link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/74/L.39, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Australia, Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Namibia, North Macedonia,
Panama, Poland, Romania, the Russian Federation,
Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
8/9

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.39?
Draft resolution A/74/L.39
(resolution 74/268).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 30?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Letter dated 5 February 2020 from the Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the General
Assembly (A/74/690)
The President: In the letter before the General
Assembly, the Chair of the Committee, referring to
the decision of the Government of Ukraine to cease
its membership in the Committee as from 1 January
2020, informs me that, at the 399th meeting of the
Committee, on 4 February 2020, the issue was brought
to the attention of the Committee members, who took
note of the information. The Chair further suggests that
the Assembly be informed, at a suitable time, about the
change in the membership of the Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of the information contained in document A/74/690?
It was so decided (decision 74/415).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 35.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/74/673)
The President: As indicated in document A/74/673,
as a result of the expiration of the terms of office on
31 December 2020 of Ms. Aicha Afifi (Morocco),
Mr. Petru Dumitriu (Romania), Mr. Jeremiah Kramer
20-05656

03/03/2020

(Canada) and Ms. Gönke Roscher (Germany), the
General Assembly is required, during its current
session, to appoint members to fill the vacancies in the
Joint Inspection Unit.
In accordance with the procedures described in
article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit and in resolution 61/238, of 22 December 2006,
and having held the necessary consultations with the
regional groups concerned, the President of the General
Assembly requested Eritrea, Germany, the Republic of
Moldova and Spain to propose candidates to serve for a
period of five years beginning on 1 January 2021.
As indicated in document A/74/673, and in
accordance with resolution 59/267, of 23 December
2004, the candidates should have experience in at
least one of the following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring and/or programme performance, in addition
to knowledge of the United Nations system and its role
in international relations.
As further indicated in document A/74/673, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with article

A/74/PV.60

3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit, including consultations with the President of the
Economic and Social Council and with the SecretaryGeneral, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination,
the President of the General Assembly submits to the
Assembly the candidatures of Mr. Tesfa Alem Seyoum
(Eritrea), Ms. Gönke Roscher (Germany), Mr. Victor
Moraru (Republic of Moldova) and Mr. Jesús Miranda
Hita (Spain) for appointment as members of the Joint
Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2021 and expiring on 31 December 2025.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint those candidates as members of
the Joint Inspection Unit?
It was so decided (decision 74/416).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(g) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

20-056569/9
