S/2015/177

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 March 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
20 November 2014 to 3 March 2015
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended by
subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2192 (2014).

II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic generally was maintained, albeit in a continuously volatile environment
attributable to the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and despite a
number of significant violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement of 1974
by Israeli and Syrian forces, which are set out below. The Syrian armed forces
carried out military activities and security operations against armed groups, often in
response to offensives carried out by the armed groups. Inside the area of
separation, the presence of the Syrian armed forces and military equipment, as well
as any other armed personnel and military equipment, other than that of UNDOF, is
in violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. As underscored by the
Security Council in its resolution 2192 (2014), there should be no military activity
of any kind in the area of separation.
3.
A number of significant incidents occurred on 7 December 2014 and 18 and
27 January 2015 across the ceasefire line in violation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. On 7 December, UNDOF personnel observed two aircraft flying
from the Alpha side into the area of separation and further into the area of
limitation, before losing sight of the aircraft. On 18 January, UNDOF personnel on
the Alpha side observed two unmanned aerial vehicles crossing the ceasefire line
from the Alpha to the Bravo side approximately 1.5 km from United Nations outpost
37B in the general direction of United Nations position 30. UNDOF personnel
observed the unmanned aerial vehicles until they disappeared from their sight.
Several minutes later, UNDOF observed smoke from the general direction of
position 30. The UNDOF personnel could not determine the origin of the smoke, as
it was on low ground relative to their location. Shortly thereafter, two unmanned
15-03258 (E)

130315

*1503258*

S/2015/177

aerial vehicles appeared in sight of the UNDOF personnel, flying westward from the
general direction of position 30 and crossing the ceasefire line south of outpost 37B.
Later the same day, Hizbullah alleged that Israel had conducted an airstrike on the
Golan on 18 January, which killed several Hizbullah members and an Iranian
military officer.
4.
On 27 January, UNDOF observed one incident of firing from the Bravo side
across the ceasefire line. United Nations personnel at a temporary observation post
close to Camp Ziouani heard two large explosions and saw two impacts
approximately 4 km west of the ceasefire line and 5 km north-west of Camp
Ziouani. Several minutes later, they observed a third impact, in the Mount Hermon
area, approximately 2 km south of United Nations position Hermon South in the
area of limitation. United Nations personnel were approximately 400 m from the
location where the rocket landed and had to evacuate the area. The point of origin of
the fire could not be seen. Subsequently, United Nations personnel at United
Nations observation post 73 observed the firing of 18 artillery rounds from an Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) battery of 155 mm artillery deployed south of the observation
post. IDF informed UNDOF that the point of origin of the fire had been a position
north of Camp Faoaur and that IDF had directed its fire at this location. UNDOF
restricted its movements at Camp Ziouani to a minimum and stopped all movements
north of the camp in the direction of Majdal Shams. The Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate informed UNDOF that “terrorists” had fired several rockets from an area
west of Harfa, a village approximately 3 km north of Camp Faouar, into the
occupied Golan, intending to cause further deterioration of the situation on the
Golan. He indicated that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic was planning
to strike against the “terrorists” and emphasized that they were the only target. The
acting UNDOF Force Commander conveyed this information to IDF and urged
utmost restraint in order not to escalate the situation further. On 28 January, after
midnight, IDF carried out an airstrike on two Syrian armed forces locations in the
area of limitation, one in Al Wisyah, approximately 3 km south of Camp Faouar,
and a second east of the village of Jaba, destroying two artillery positions. UNDOF
personnel observed heavy anti-aircraft fire from areas east and north of Khan
Arnabeh. The acting Force Commander once more urged IDF to use utmost restraint
to prevent the situation from escalating further. No injuries or damage was reported
to UNDOF from the impacts on the Alpha side or from the subsequent artillery fire
onto the Bravo side.
5.
Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, was observed
by United Nations personnel on an almost daily basis. After the issuance of my
previous report, UNDOF observed one occasion in November and several in
January and February when armed individuals crossed the ceasefire line,
approached the technical fence and at times interacted with IDF across the ceasefire
line in the vicinity of United Nations observation posts 51 and 54. In some
instances, wounded individuals were handed over from the Bravo side to the Alpha
side. During the evening of 20 January, in the area north of observation post 54,
UNDOF observed two trucks crossing from the Bravo side to the Alpha side, where
they were received by IDF personnel. The trucks were loaded with sacks before
returning to the Bravo side. On at least four occasions in February, United Nations
personnel at observation post 54 saw vehicles, including small trucks, crossing the
ceasefire line from the Bravo side and approaching the technical fence. On one such
occasion, several vehicles, including some with anti-aircraft guns mounted on the

2/8

15-03258

S/2015/177

back, were seen parked next to the technical fence. Owing to the terrain, UNDOF
could not observe whether interaction between individuals on the Alpha and the
Bravo sides took place.
6.
UNDOF protested all firing across the ceasefire line to the Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate and IDF. All incidents of firing into the area of separation and across the
ceasefire line, as well as the crossing by individuals of the ceasefire line, are
violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
7.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed by the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line. During the incident of 27 January
and the immediate aftermath, the acting Force Commander was in ongoing close
contact with both parties to the Disengagement Agreement to prevent an escalation
of the situation across the ceasefire line.
8.
UNDOF observed and reported instances of transborder movements of
unidentified individuals between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic in the
northern part of the area of separation.
9.
In the context of the Syrian internal conflict, the areas of Jabbata, Trunje and
Ufaniyah in the northern part of the area of separation remained relatively quiet,
despite the end late in August of a local truce arrangement when extremist armed
groups from the southern part of the area of separation had linked up with armed
members of the opposition in Jabbata. In the central part of the area of separation,
the situation remained largely unchanged. Heavy fighting took place between Syrian
armed forces and armed groups in the area south of Al Baath and Khan Arnabeh on
24 and 25 December when the Syrian armed forces repelled an attack by the armed
groups. In the course of the fighting on 24 and 25 December, UNDOF observed
43 artillery impacts in the area of United Nations observation post 56. Syrian armed
forces continued to fire on armed members of the opposition in the areas of Jaba and
Um Batinah, adjacent to the area of separation. Small-scale attacks by the Syrian
armed forces against areas controlled by armed groups took place on several
occasions during the second half of January in the general area of Masharah in the
area of limitation. Armed groups continued to exercise control of most of the
southern parts of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side. The
Syrian armed forces targeted these areas with direct fire. Late in November and
towards the end of January, the Syrian armed forces also used airstrikes in the
southern part of the area of limitation; in the latter instance, this occurred during an
attack by armed groups in areas east of the UNDOF area of operations, around Ash
Sheikh Maskeen.
10. Starting on 8 February, the Syrian armed forces launched a large-scale
operation against armed groups in an area east and north-east of Khan Arnabeh and
south of the main road to Damascus, gaining control of several villages and hilltops
that had been controlled by the armed groups during the past months. The operation
extended to the areas along two main roads linking Damascus with Quneitra and
Dara’a. Syrian authorities acknowledged to UNDOF that the operation by the Syrian
armed forces was carried out with “Syria’s allies”. After a lull in the fighting, most
probably due to adverse weather conditions, the Syrian armed forces resumed their
offensive on 22 February. That day, UNDOF observed 15 airstrikes conducted by
the Syrian armed forces in the UNDOF area of operations east of United Nations
position 80. Throughout the day, UNDOF observed approximately 300 civilians in

15-03258

3/8

S/2015/177

total, mostly women and children, from the areas affected by the airstrikes move
farther west into the area of separation in the vicinity of United Nations positions
and the Israeli technical fence. After the air campaign ended, the individuals moved
back east in the direction of their villages. The following day, while shelling
continued, around 150 civilians, mostly women and children, moved into the
vicinity of position 80.
11. Several incidents that jeopardized United Nations personnel and positions
occurred. On 24 November, an exchange of fire took place between members of
different armed groups in the vicinity of United Nations position 80. Several stray
bullets passed over the position. On 27 November, United Nations personnel at
position 80 once again observed an exchange of fire between members of different
armed groups approximately 1 km from the position. On 24 December, United
Nations personnel at observation post 54 observed approximately 35 armed persons
waving weapons in front of the observation post and firing shots into the air. On
23 January, personnel at United Nations observation post 51 went into the shelter
after an artillery shell landed approximately 500 m from the observation post.
12. On 18 and 22 December and 23 January, United Nations personnel at
observation post 51 observed a white armoured vehicle with United Nations
markings moving in the area of Al Qahtaniyah. On 22 December, personnel at
observation post 54 observed a white pickup truck with an anti-aircraft gun mounted
on the back that is likely to have been a stolen United Nations vehicle. As also
reported in my 22 January 2015 report on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/48), on 7 December
2014 a stolen UNDOF vehicle was used in Dar`a as a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device.
13. During the reporting period, the Syrian armed forces maintained their
positions in the area of separation, in particular in the urban centres of Al Baath and
Khan Arnabeh and along the main road connecting Quneitra to Damascus, where
they reinforced their presence with tanks, armoured vehicles and artillery weapons,
in addition to some locations in the area of limitation. The Syrian armed forces
generally deployed three tanks in the area of separation, including at their position
at Tal al-Kurum, and several others in locations in the area of limitation adjacent to
the area of separation. On various occasions, UNDOF observed a total of three tanks
in the areas of Tal al-Garbi and Al Qahtaniyah, which were controlled by armed
groups.
14. UNDOF protested the presence of Syrian armed forces and equipment in the
area of separation, and the firing into and inside the area of separation. The Force
Commander reiterated to the Syrian authorities the obligation of the Syrian armed
forces to halt military operations in the area of separation and to cease firing from
the area of limitation, stressing the importance of abiding by the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground. Senior United Nations officials have conveyed
similar messages to the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the United Nations.
15. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed three tented camps housing
internally displaced persons, two camps in the vicinity of United Nations position 80
and one in a wooded area in the vicinity of Kudnaa in the area of limitation.
Approximately 1 km north of the position, in the vicinity of Al Aishah village,

4/8

15-03258

S/2015/177

UNDOF observed 26 tents housing approximately 150 persons. In a second location
north-west of Al Aishah village, straddling the ceasefire line, UNDOF observed
20 large and 15 smaller tents housing approximately 180 individuals. Two tents
were observed in the vicinity of Kudnaa; the number of individuals staying there is
not known. Owing to the continued closure of the established crossing between the
Alpha and Bravo sides late in August, UNDOF is currently not in a position to
facilitate, in cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross,
humanitarian crossings, including for students, between the Alpha and the Bravo
sides.
16. Since the temporary relocation of UNDOF from a number of its positions on
the Bravo side in mid-September, and as mentioned in my previous report
(S/2014/859), UNDOF, in consultation with the parties, continued to review the
situation in the area of separation. The ultimate goal for UNDOF is to return fully to
the area of separation when the situation permits. In this connection, UNDOF
assessed the prevailing security situation in the area of separation and determined
that the conditions are not conducive to a return of the Force to the positions it
vacated.
17. In its current configuration, UNDOF has continued to carry out its mandate by
maintaining the visibility of the area of separation and the ceasefire line, albeit
limited, from a number of positions it continues to hold in the area of separation. The
Force continued to maintain four positions on Mount Hermon in the northern part of
the area of separation and position 80 in the southern part, as well as position 22 on
the Alpha side. On Mount Hermon, UNDOF conducts foot and vehicle patrols twice
daily. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO) military observers in Observer Group Golan,
who maintained five fixed and four temporary observation posts on the Alpha side.
The focus of Observer Group Golan activities remained on around-the-clock static
observation, investigations and situational analysis. Through Observer Group
Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly inspections of equipment and
force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side. Liaison officers from the
Alpha side accompanied Observer Group Golan inspection teams. Inspections and
mobile operations in the area of limitation on the Bravo side remained suspended
because of the security situation. As in the past, the Force faced restrictions on
freedom of movement, and its inspection teams were denied access to some
positions on the Alpha side. Observer Group Golan members continued to
experience restrictions of movement on the Alpha side when entering and exiting
United Nations observation post 73, which is located east of the Israeli technical
fence. UNDOF peacekeepers remained deployed at observation posts 54 and 73 to
enhance protection of the military observers.
18. During the reporting period, IDF deployed the Iron Dome defence system
between 3 and 10 February and on one occasion a multiple-launch rocket system, in
addition to maintaining the intermittent presence of 155 mm artillery on the Alpha
side within 10 km of the ceasefire line.
19. In its efforts to ensure that it continues to implement its mandate effectively,
UNDOF continued to engage the parties on the practical arrangements to be put in
place to establish an interim configuration that will allow it to maintain the
ceasefire, continue to monitor, verify and report on violations of the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement, and exercise its critical liaison functions with the parties,

15-03258

5/8

S/2015/177

particularly with a view to preventing an escalation of incidents. The mission
headquarters, comprising the Office of the Head of Mission and Force Commander
with his advisory staff and security detail as well as some mission support functions,
has been established in Damascus. A suitable logistics site has been identified in a
location near Damascus and discussions with the Syrian authorities are in progress
for UNDOF to gain use of the facility.
20. Discussions with the parties continue with respect to procedures for crossing
between the Alpha and the Bravo sides in the absence of the established crossing at
Quneitra. UNDOF continues to engage with the parties on the use of technology to
offset the loss of situational awareness in the area of separation. In addition,
discussions with the Alpha side continue with respect to additional locations
required to establish temporary United Nations positions for observing the ceasefire
line from the Alpha side.
21. UNDOF continued to focus on contingency planning for the reinforcement and
evacuation of United Nations positions and observation posts. UNDOF, through its
Force reserve company, also conducted regular exercises and training. The company
remains in two UNDOF locations, Camp Ziouani and position 80. UNDOF
strengthened the Mount Hermon positions by augmenting the troop strength and
force protection. In addition, the mission has identified the need to reinforce
position 12 in the Mount Hermon area and to strengthen the UNDOF presence in
that location.
22. Movement of UNDOF personnel on the Bravo side remains limited. UNDOF
continues to resupply the positions on Mount Hermon from Damascus. Convoys
between Damascus and the Mount Hermon positions to ensure the resupply as well
as maintenance of the positions are conducted several times per week in armoured
vehicles and with UNDOF security escort.
23. As at 22 February, UNDOF comprised 789 troops, including 32 women, from
Fiji (301), India (190), Ireland (138), Nepal (158) and the Netherlands (2). In
addition, 67 military observers from UNTSO, including one woman, assisted the
Force in carrying out its tasks. On 9 February, as part of the reconfiguration of the
Force, 146 troops of the Fijian contingent redeployed to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
24. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 2131 (2013) to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2014,
called upon the parties concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338
(1973) and requested the Secretary-General to submit, at the end of the period, a
report on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that
resolution. The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the
efforts made at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in
my report on the situation in the Middle East (A/69/341), submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 69/24 on Jerusalem and 69/25 on the Syrian Golan.
25. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and progress towards peace between Israel and the

6/8

15-03258

S/2015/177

Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Observations
26. I note with concern the serious violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that have taken place. The firing from the Bravo side across the
ceasefire line as well as IDF responses with artillery fire and airstrikes jeopardize
the long-term ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. It remains
critical that both sides maintain liaison with UNDOF in the first instance to prevent
any escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. The mission’s liaison with
the parties contributed to the de-escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line
on 27 and 28 January. The mandate of UNDOF remains an important element in
ensuring the stability of the region. For its part, the United Nations will spare no
effort in ensuring that the long-held ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic continues to hold.
27. I remain deeply concerned about the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and its
potential implications for the stability of the region. The presence of the Syrian
armed forces and unauthorized military equipment in the area of separation are
grave violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The increased use of
heavy weapons by both the Syrian armed forces and armed groups in the continuing
Syrian conflict, including air power by Government forces in the area of limitation
on the Bravo side, including in the vicinity of the area of separation, is disturbing.
There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of
UNDOF. I note with concern the presence and use of tanks by the Syrian armed
forces and, in increasing number, by the armed groups in the area of separation. I
call upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions throughout the
country, including in the UNDOF area of operations. I call upon all parties to take
all measures necessary to protect civilians. I also urge the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to stop the use of airstrikes, which cause suffering to the civilian
population and destroy its livelihoods. I reiterate that all military activities in the
area of separation conducted by any actor pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the
local civilian population, in addition to the United Nations personnel on the ground.
28. The situation has continued to significantly affect the UNDOF area of
operations. Armed opposition groups and other armed groups continue to maintain
control over significant sections of the area of separation and remain present along
the section of the main road connecting the two UNDOF camps. The established
crossing between the Alpha and the Bravo sides remains closed. It is critical that
countries with influence continue to strongly convey to the armed groups in the
UNDOF area of operations the need to cease any actions that jeopardize the safety
and security of United Nations personnel and to accord United Nations personnel
the freedom to carry out their mandate safely and securely. Any hostile act against
United Nations personnel, including threatening their physical safety, restricting
their movement and direct and indirect firing at United Nations personnel and
facilities by anyone, is unacceptable.

15-03258

7/8

S/2015/177

29. The primary responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations
personnel in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side rests with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. The safety and security of United Nations
personnel must be ensured.
30. Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued
commitment to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and the presence of
UNDOF. I call on both parties to continue to assist UNDOF in achieving its interim
configuration in structure and deployment to ensure that the mission is in a position
to effectively implement its mandate, until such time as the security situation allows
the Force to return fully to the area of separation. I note the assistance provided by
Israel and the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in facilitating the provision
of essential supplies in support of the Force.
31. It is equally critical that the Security Council continue to bring its influence to
bear on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate freely. It is essential that UNDOF continue to have at its disposal all
necessary means and resources that will allow it to return to the area of separation
as the situation permits.
32. UNDOF also needs to retain the confidence and commitment of troopcontributing countries. I am grateful to the Governments of Fiji, India, Ireland,
Nepal and the Netherlands for their contributions to UNDOF and for staying the
course under these extremely trying circumstances. In addition, I am grateful to the
Member States contributing military observers to UNTSO. The continued credible
presence of UNDOF remains an important element in ensuring stability on the
Golan and in the region.
33. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to Lieutenant General Iqbal
Singh Singha, who completed his tour of duty on 2 January, for his dedication and
leadership of UNDOF over the past two and half years, during a difficult period for
the mission. I also wish to express appreciation to the military and civilian
personnel serving in UNDOF and the military observers in Observer Group Golan,
who continue to perform with efficiency and commitment, under extremely
challenging circumstances, the important tasks assigned to them by the Security
Council. I have full confidence that UNDOF will continue to use its best efforts to
carry out its mandate under the leadership of Major General Purna Chandra Thapa.

8/8

15-03258
