S/PV.8324

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8324th meeting

Wednesday, 8 August 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2367 (2017) (S/2018/677)
Nineteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2018/683)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-25356 (E)
*1825356*

S/PV.8324

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

needs of the people and social justice, expressing their
deep and growing frustration with old political leaders
and the political system, based on sectarian quotas
they deem corrupt, dysfunctional and stagnant, and
deploring foreign interference in the internal matters of
Iraq. It is to be noted that many of their demands echo
demands made in the demonstrations that engulfed
predominantly Sunni governorates several years ago.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 2367 (2017) (S/2018/677)
Nineteenth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2018/683)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq;
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Head of the International Committee
of the Red Cross Delegation to the United Nations;
and Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof, Women Empowerment
Organization in Iraq.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/677, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2367 (2017), as well as to document
S/2018/683, which contains the nineteenth report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Following the parliamentary elections
held on 12 May, complaints and allegations of electoral
fraud and mismanagement resulted in the decision to
conduct a partial manual ballot recount. The situation
has been further complicated by public demonstrations,
which started on 8 July in Basra governorate and spread
to other predominantly Shi’a southern governorates and
Baghdad. The protesters are mainly young people with
complaints over the lack of delivery of basic services,
shortages of electricity, lack of jobs and pervasive
corruption. However, their messages have swiftly
become increasingly politicized, criticizing national
leaders and successive Governments for ignoring the
2/11

08/08/2018

The leader of the Fatah Alliance, Hadi Al-Ameri,
publicly acknowledged that politicians had failed the
people, reconfirming the need to reform the political
process and to establish a Government of services and
not of privileges for political parties. The head of the
Sa’iroun Alliance, cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, who himself
led massive public protests in Baghdad as recently as
2016, with similar demands as today’s demonstrations,
urged the suspension of Government-formation talks
until the legitimate demands of protesters were met.
The historically low voter turnout witnessed during the
12 May parliamentary elections, when sapproximately
60 per cent of eligible voters did not participate, had
already delivered a strong message of dissatisfaction
with the current state of management of public affairs.
In his Friday sermon on 27 July, the Supreme
Religious Authority, Grand Ayatollah Ali Al-Sistani,
called for the early formation of a future Government
comprising competent, honest members and a Prime
Minister who should be decisive and courageous enough
to fight the financial and administrative corruption that is
the root cause of most of Iraq’s problems. The new Prime
Minister should have authority and take responsibility
for his Cabinet. The new Council of Representatives
should abolish privileges and amend laws that do not
achieve justice and equality for the people. Al-Sistani
warned that if the new Government failed to abide by its
commitments and deliver on its reform programme or if
the new Council of Representatives or the Judiciary did
not act appropriately, the people, supported by all forces
of good in the country, would have no other option but
to develop other ways to impose their will on officials.
On 30 July, Prime Minister Al Abadi met in
Baghdad with Kurdistan Regional Government Prime
Minister Nechirvan Barzani. They also underlined the
need to expedite formation of the new Government and
to resolve all issues between Erbil and Baghdad based
on the Iraqi Constitution.
I note with appreciation that Prime Minister Al
Abadi has made major efforts to provide swift and
18-25356

08/08/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

tailored responses to legitimate popular demands,
bringing temporary relief to people living under
arduous conditions. However, these measures remain
insufficient to address the depth of people’s needs
and concerns.
I urge political leaders to listen to the voice of
the people and accelerate the process of formation of
a patriotic, inclusive and non-sectarian Government,
with a strong and empowered Prime Minister, which
will give priority to political, economic and social
reforms, investments, creation of jobs, reconciliation,
justice, equality, accountability and good governance,
including the fight against corruption; which will
put all armed formations under strict control of the
State and resolutely act against insubordinate militias
and criminal gangs; and which will ensure the full
sovereignty and real independence of Iraq, free from
foreign interference.
Based on the election law amended on 6 June, the
board of judges that was assigned to supervise the
electoral process adopted modalities for the recounting
of ballots that were subject to complaints or allegations
of fraud, in line with the Federal Supreme Court ruling
of 21 June. On 6 August, the board of judges announced
that the manual recount had been completed. The process
then moved on to results-tabulation to generate the
provisional election results. Throughout the recounting
process, an electoral monitoring team from the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
complemented by experts of the United Nations
Development Programme, provided oversight, advice
and assistance. I welcome the orderly, transparent,
credible and well-organized conduct of the recount. I
commend the board of judges for its hands-on impartial
work. I applaud the dedication and professionalism of
all recounting staff, both Independent High Electoral
Commission and judiciary personnel. The recounting
increased public confidence in the electoral process
and election results.
The Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Political Affairs and Electoral
Assistance, Alice Walpole, and I met with numerous
political leaders, women, minority and civil society
actors to promote the meaningful participation of
women in political, economic and social life, including
their representation at the highest levels in political
and decision-making structures, including in the
future Government and Council of Representatives. On
31 July, UNAMI met with members of the national team

S/PV. 8324

to discuss progress and challenges in implementing the
Iraqi National action plan on resolution 1325 (2000),
including the lack of a dedicated budget to support
activities under the plan. I am very pleased to note
that Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof, who is seated next to me,
participated actively in that meeting.
Last week UNAMI facilitated a meeting with women
leaders, civil society activists and elected women, which
adopted a consolidated vision of women’s demands for
the inclusion of gender perspectives and gender equality
considerations in the Government’s programme. The
recommendations are attached to my briefing notes.
This week Deputy Special Representative Walpole
chaired a United Nations meeting with Iraqi women
expected to sit on the next Council of Representatives.
Iraqi women politicians undertook to work across the
party divide — for example, to establish a women’s
parliamentary caucus, for the first time, and women’s
platforms to develop Government policies and strategies
to increase women’s participation and representation
in politics, and foster gender mainstreaming in all
parliamentary processes.
On 19 July, Deputy Special Representative for
Humanitarian Affairs and Development Coordinator,
Ms. Marta Ruedas, convened a meeting of the
Development Cooperation Forum in Baghdad, where
more than 20 international partners were presented
with 61 United Nations country team projects that are
ready for funding through the $1 billion Recovery and
Resilience Programme. I urge Member States to support
Iraq by accelerating delivery on the commitments made
in Kuwait in February.
One year after the liberation of Mosul, United
Nations Mine Action Service clearance teams have
removed 43,700 explosive hazards in the city, including
1,000 improvised explosive devices. The United
Nations Development Programme’s Funding Facility
for Stabilization has continued to support 2,361
projects, with the successful completion of more than
1,000 in five governorates. Since January, more than
684,000 displaced people have returned, while, as of
15 July, just under 2 million Iraqis remain displaced.
The security and protection environment remains
volatile, posing serious protection risks to Iraqi civilians.
Abductions, disappearances, detention, increased risks
of sexual and gender-based violence and violations of
child rights continue. For many, a combination of such
factors has led to secondary or repeated displacement.

18-253563/11

S/PV.8324

The situation concerning Iraq

As of 24 July, donors had contributed $324 million
to the humanitarian response plan, which is 57 per
cent of the plan’s requirements. In order to ensure
that critical assistance to vulnerable communities is
available, I appeal to the donor community to continue
its generous funding.
The ongoing demonstrations in southern
governorates have brought to the fore their longneglected social, economic and development needs.
The United Nations country team in Iraq is developing
a strategy and programmes to scale up assistance.
Furthermore, it is expected that water scarcity in the
five southern governorates will increase in the coming
months, putting about 25 per cent of a population of
2 million at risk of water shortages, water borne-related
diseases and possible displacement. Since the peoples
of Iraq, Turkey, Syria and Iran all share water resources,
I urge them to enhance their cooperation in the efficient
management of water resources.
Although tangible results in the search for Kuwaiti
missing persons have yet to be achieved, the Iraqi
Ministry of Defence continues to carry out excavation
and exploration missions, as well as efforts to identify
new witnesses. On 25 July another session of the
tripartite mechanism took place in Kuwait. Repeated
calls to the international community have prompted
Member States in possession of satellite imagery from
1990-1991 to come forward with information that could
assist in identifying burial locations. Nevertheless,
the procurement of field equipment, the provision of
forensic DNA, anthropological training courses and
capacity-building for Iraqi and Kuwaiti technical teams
remain a major challenge and require further assistance
from the international community. I am also pleased to
report that the two sides are close to setting a date for
the official transfer of a considerable consignment of
Kuwaiti property.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his very
informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Spoerri.
Mr. Spoerri: I thank you, Madam President, for
giving the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) the opportunity to address the Security Council
today on a topic that is at the heart of the ICRC’s mission
and mandate and at the centre of all aspects of our daily
work in armed conflicts around the world. My briefing
will focus exclusively on the topic of missing persons
4/11

08/08/2018

from the 1991 Gulf War and the work of the so-called
tripartite mechanism, which is chaired by the ICRC.
Under international humanitarian law, parties to the
conflict must both prevent people from going missing
and clarify the fate of those who do. In armed conflicts
people go missing for a variety of reasons, and their
families are left waiting. The plight of missing persons
and the agony of their families often continue long after
conflicts end. The tripartite mechanism was born as a
result of the international armed conflict of the Gulf
War, which began with the invasion of Kuwait by Iraqi
troops on 2 August 1990. Shortly after the conflict,
Iraq, Kuwait and members of the coalition — Saudi
Arabia, France, the United Kingdom and the United
States — met in Riyadh, under the auspices of the ICRC,
and signed an agreement establishing the Tripartite
Commission on missing persons in April 1991.
The Tripartite Commission, which is composed of
members of the coalition, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq as an observer and the ICRC as Chair
of the Commission, set up the Technical Subcommittee,
in December 1994, in order to expedite the search
process. Tripartite Commission meetings continue to
be held twice a year, while the Technical Subcommittee
meetings are held five times a year. It has been 27 years
since the end of the Gulf war, 27 years since the first
session of the Tripartite Commission and 24 years
since the setting up of the Technical Subcommittee.
To date, 46 Tripartite Commission sessions and 104
Technical Sub-committee sessions have been held with
one aim — to trace persons still unaccounted for as a
result of the conflict and to provide answers to their
families. Shortly after the withdrawal of Iraqi forces
from Kuwait, the parties to the conflict met and agreed
to repatriate prisoners of war (POWs) and civilian
internees captured or arrested during the Gulf War.
In accordance with its mandate and with resolution
686 (1991), the ICRC made arrangements for the general
repatriation of more than 70,000 Iraqis from Saudi
Arabia to Iraq. It was also arranged for the repatriation
of 4,000 Kuwaiti and allied forces POWs and over 1,300
civilian internees and detained civilians of Kuwaiti
nationality, or civilians of third countries, from Iraq
to Kuwait.
After the successful completion of that phase, the
focus shifted to determining the whereabouts and fate
of military and civilian persons still missing. The aim
was to resolve individual cases through an exchange
18-25356

08/08/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

of information among the Tripartite Commission
members. However, it was only in 2003 that the search
for burial sites, in an attempt to locate, recover and
repatriate the remains of those still missing, began in
Iraq, and followed suit in Kuwait.
Since 2003, the remains of 373 persons have been
recovered: 275 persons in Iraq — in Amarah, Karbala,
Ramadi and Samawah — and 98 in Kuwait. Those
efforts were supported by additional information
that the United States and the United Kingdom made
available in 2010. Excavation missions also took place in
Al-Habbaniyah, Muhammad Sakran, Najaf, other sites
in Ramadi and, finally, Khamisiyah, in Nasiriyah, in
Iraq, but, unfortunately, no human remains were found.
A total of 1,080 cases of missing persons remain
open today within the framework of the mechanism,
including 371 reported missing by Kuwait and 700 cases
by Iraq. In addition to that, 336 other documented cases
of Iraqi missing persons, known as out-of-tripartite
cases, remain unresolved. It should be noted that those
cases do not constitute the entirety of missing persons
cases, but those documented by the mechanism.
Despite continued search efforts, it has been 14 years
since human remains belonging to a Kuwaiti missing
person have been recovered, and seven years since
remains of an Iraqi have been found. The tremendous
efforts, and the commitment of all the members, did
not yield tangible results. Hundreds of families are still
desperately awaiting answers.
The tripartite mechanism experienced several
challenges. The most notable being the elapse of time
since the cessation of the conflict. The passage of
time made finding and contacting, or re-contacting,
witnesses difficult. Changes in the topology of the
landscape affected the ability to recognize and locate
burial sites. The mechanism suffered from the loss of
archive material, as well as the lack of the centralization
of information, with data dispersed among the various
members. Additionally, the lack of availability of the
appropriate equipment and machinery proved to be a
major challenge for the mechanism.
In response to those major challenges, the ICRC
undertook an extensive analysis of all available
information, involved various experts and forensic
specialists, took stock of the situation in detail and
proposed recommendations for future work. In 2017,
the ICRC finalized a draft of those findings in its report
entitled “The Review Project”, which outlines a set of

S/PV. 8324

recommendations to move forward, streamlines the
search and recovery processes and emphasizes forensic
best practices.
Based on those new recommendations, field work
and excavation missions will continue on 27 August
2018 in Samawah, which is considered a promising
site. The important recommendations of the report,
including the correct utilization of satellite imagery, are
guiding the optimal implementation of those missions.
Despite the fact that no positive exhumation occurred
in recent years, there is a newly rejuvenated positive
energy and commitment to the revitalization of the
Tripartite Commission from all parties.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
Technical Subcommittee and Tripartite Commission
members, along with UNAMI, for taking upon
themselves the task of elucidating the fate of those
missing persons and for their cooperation and
commitment to the tripartite mechanism and its
humanitarian mission. The ICRC was and remains
committed to the mechanism and shall spare no effort
in the search and recovery of human remains in order
to provide answers to the families of missing persons,
ensuring their right to know the fate of their missing
loved ones.
The President: I thank Mr. Spoerri for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Araf Maroof.
Ms. Araf Maroof: I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for providing me with this opportunity
to represent the Iraq Cross Sector Task Force for
the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) as its coordinator at this very important
meeting. We are a cross-sector body that developed
the first national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) between 2012-2014, and that has
been responsible for its implementation, monitoring,
evaluation and reporting. I would also like to thank
the Netherlands and Euromed Feminist Initiative for
supporting my presence here.
Today, I would like to draw the attention of members
of the Security Council to how several crises experienced
in Iraq have impacted women, how we have addressed
the situation by mobilizing State and non-State actors
in the national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) process and, finally, emphasize
how much remains to be done and highlight the need for
international support and coordination.

18-253565/11

S/PV.8324

The situation concerning Iraq

From internally displaced people to returnees
and Syrian refugees, figures indicate that up to
8.2 million Iraqis require immediate protection and
assistance — most of them are women who are denied
access to their basic rights and security and lack
protection and access to facilities, clean water and
sanitation. Ninety one per cent of the camps across
Iraq sill include no women in their management, which
prevents their needs from being addressed adequately.
Sexual and gender-based violence continues at
alarming rates. Women and girls living in areas under
the control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
have been exposed to the most extreme forms of
violence as a way to subjugate the whole community,
namely, kidnapping for sexual slavery and exploitation,
rape and forced marriages. Due to the strong patriarchal
culture and tradition, victims are forced to bear social
stigma and shame, in addition to the assault itself,
and continue to be marginalized by their families and
communities upon their return.
Furthermore, even if a great amount of work has
been done by the women’s movement, there are still
discriminatory laws in place that impact women’s
security and the full enjoyment of their rights.
Protection services are offered to women, including in
refugee camps, mostly through local and international
organizations. While organizations do their best with
few resources, there is still a huge need for protection
and psychosocial services to reach the most vulnerable,
in particular women and girls.
The collapse of the social security network has
further impacted the social and economic status of
women, and made the face of poverty predominantly
female. Female heads of households, the poor, the
unemployed, widows and the internally displaced lack
access to financial resources and public social benefits,
such as social security, pensions and food programming.
Women’s security and rights are closely linked
to their participation and role in decision-making. In
spite of a 25 per cent quota in the Parliament and public
institutions, women remain underrepresented or absent
in decision-making, including in political parties, as
there is a general lack of acceptance of the importance
of women’s role in decision-making. That is due to the
weight of tradition, the economic dependence of women
on men, the unequal sharing of family responsibilities
and the influence of religious extremism on society.
6/11

08/08/2018

To address the security needs of the most
vulnerable women and girls, in 2012 women’s civil
society organizations and representatives from 23
ministries and institutions — 15 in federal Iraq and 8
in Kurdistan — as well as legal experts and members
of Parliament, formed the Iraqi Cross Sector Task
Force, which developed the national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2014, Iraq
became the first country in the Middle East and North
Africa to have adopted a national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and now it
is the first country in the region to have reported on its
implementation of the national action plan.
Iraq is also probably the first country where civil
society has been structurally included in the whole
process, enabling the voices of diverse women’s civilsociety organizations from across Iraq and the Kurdistan
region to be heard through the Cross Sector Task Force.
That broad involvement of authorities, together with
civil society, in work on the women’s security agenda
serves as an example of collaboration and demonstrates
their understanding that women cannot be left aside
and considered as only victims and that women’s needs
should be addressed in a comprehensive manner, which
is an approach that the national action plan has adopted.
What are the urgent security priorities today that
we need the Security Council to work on with the
Iraqi Government?
The first is social protection. We need to establish
a system to widen women’s access to comprehensive
specialized services — services related to genderbased violence and free psychosocial and legal
support services.
The second is legislation. To ensure protection
and enable participation, active work is required to
change and annul all laws that discriminate against
women. A comprehensive law on violence against
women is a priority in order to criminalize all forms of
violence against women and girls and end the impunity
of perpetrators.
The third is stabilization. Despite huge efforts,
the stabilization of Iraq cannot be achieved without
drawing attention to and linking it with the women and
peace and security agenda, including by allocating a
budget for stabilization and resources to that goal.
The fourth is livelihoods. Women, including those
who are refugees, internally displaced persons and
18-25356

08/08/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

residing in host communities, must have access to
empowerment programmes and work opportunities,
such as vocational training and literacy programmes to
end illiteracy, while bearing in mind the double burden
and social stigma they carry.
Fifthly, the participation of women must be
supported — from high-level political decision-making
to local governance — in reconciliation and
peacebuilding. Opportunities must be provided for
national and local women leaders to participate in
peacebuilding and facilitate community cohesion.
Sixthly, last but not least, this year the Task Force
is developing the second national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to address
those gaps and priorities.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that Iraq has made
tremendous and unique efforts on the women and peace
and security agenda through the Cross Sector Task
Force on its national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). However, in this challenging
context, in order to efficiently respond to the multiple
needs of women and support their equal participation
in peacebuilding and society at large, the Security
Council, as well as the broader international community,
must ensure greater coordination, demonstrate greater
commitment to women’s rights, and provide financial
and technical support to the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. We look to the Security Council to
strengthen its work and coordination on the women and
peace and security agenda in Iraq.
The President: I thank Ms. Maroof for her very
helpful briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
meeting. I also thank the briefers, Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI); Mr. Philip Spoerri, Head of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC);
and Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof.
A few days ago, we marked the twenty-eighth
anniversary of Iraq’s invasion and occupation of
Kuwait. That was indeed a very sad and painful
anniversary. Since then, the Security Council has been
working on addressing the effects and repercussions of

S/PV. 8324

that invasion. It has adopted dozens of resolutions and
many obligations have already been fulfilled. However,
the issue of Kuwaiti prisoners, missing Kuwaiti citizens
and third-country nationals remains one of the most
important humanitarian issues. It has been addressed
in a number of Security Council resolutions, notably
resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and 2107 (2013).
The issue remains an open wound and the families of
the missing persons are still suffering. We have learned
of the fate of only 236 out of 605 missing individuals.
We have not discovered the fate of any prisoner or
missing person since 2004, and unfortunately we have
achieved no progress in that regard.
We value and appreciate the efforts of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which
heads the meetings of the tripartite mechanims and
its Technical Subcommittee. We express our gratitude
and appreciation to the Iraqi Government, represented
by the Ministry of Defence, which has been making
great efforts in that regard. We hope that those efforts
will be pursued and redoubled in order to close this
humanitarian file and put an end to the suffering of the
families of the missing persons. For its part, Kuwait has
spared no effort to support those endeavours.
We call on UNAMI to continue implementing its
mandate with regard to the issue of Kuwaiti prisoners,
missing persons and the return of Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, according to resolution
2107 (2013). In that context, we support the Special
Representative in implementing his mandate and the
task of the Mission pertaining to providing advice and
assistance to the Iraqi Government and support for the
political process and reconstruction efforts. We are
aware of the magnitude of the challenges that Iraq is
facing and that it needs international support to ensure
its security and economic and political stability.
We commend the achievements of the Iraqi
Government and its liberation and recovery of territories
that were under the control of Da’esh. We welcome the
recent holding of parliamentary elections, and hope that
the ongoing consultations among the different political
parties will be successful so that Iraq is able to form
a Government of national accord that encompasses all
sectors of Iraq’s population.
Kuwait, as a neighbouring country, is committed
to providing support and assistance to the new Iraq
and strengthening our relations in all areas in order
to overcome the disastrous consequences of the

18-253567/11

S/PV.8324

The situation concerning Iraq

08/08/2018

actions of the previous regime, which destabilized the
whole region.

as well as the process of rebuilding trust, in particular
with the Kurdistan region.

Kuwait has done its utmost to assist Iraq in
overcoming challenges and threats to its security. We
provided logistical support to the international coalition
against Da’esh and helped to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering of Iraqi internally displaced persons. We
have cooperated with Iraq, the United Nations, the
European Union and the World Bank in hosting, in
Kuwait last February, the International Conference for
the Reconstruction of Iraq and the rebuilding of areas
liberated from Da’esh. We decided to provide urgent
assistance, in line with the directives of His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, to meet
the needs of the Iraqi brotherly people and to improve
services in some of the southern governorates where
demonstrations have taken place recently. We trust that
Iraq will overcome such difficult circumstances.

We look forward to progress on establishing the
investigative team on the atrocity crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, particularly
since there continue to be attacks on and the killings of
civilians by the remaining terrorist elements.

We would like once again to thank Special
Representative Mr. Jan Kubiš for his efforts despite the
immense difficulties and challenges which he faced
during his mandate.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the convening of this meeting, and we thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof and Mr. Philip
Spoerri for their briefings.
We note with concern the protests in various Iraqi
cities, some of which are violent, and the consequent
climate of distrust and instability to which they give
rise. We are particularly concerned about the possibility
of new outbreaks of extremism and violent insurgency
at a time when, following the important elections held
in May, a new Government must be established in order
to meet the legitimate demands of citizens and to deal
with the significant challenges facing the country.
We commend the progress made towards the
prompt conclusion of the electoral process following
the complaints submitted and the end of the manual
recounting of votes, as well as the establishment and
underpinning of a Government capable of leading the
country towards a sustainable peace. We underline the
importance of the international community continuing
to support and to assist the Iraqi reconstruction process.
In line with the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/677), we underline the importance of
the full participation of women and young people in
the formation and the political life of the Government,
8/11

We underline that, in order to effectively deal with
that threat, it is necessary to address its root causes by
promoting justice, the rule of law and the inclusive and
sustainable development of the country. Peace should
serve to improve the quality of life of the population.
In that regard, we highlight the national and regional
efforts, supported by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the United Nations
Development Programme, to establish assistance,
reconstruction and development programmes. We
also highlight the development of the national poverty
reduction strategy and the 2018-2022 development plan
geared towards a fairer and more efficient distribution
of oil resources in the various regions of the country.
We also look forward to the development of a United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, in line
with the recovery and resilience programme proposed by
the Secretary-General at the International Conference
for the Reconstruction of Iraq held in Kuwait.
We believe the efforts to promote the return of a
large number of refugees to their places of origin in safe
conditions to be important. However, we believe that it
is also necessary to promote conditions to ensure their
livelihood and well-being. The severe water shortage is
therefore of great concern, given its impact on health,
the desertification of cultivated land and security,
which is particularly critical in the Basra region. It is
necessary to prevent the emergence of conflicts owing
to such a situation by adopting effective measures to
protect the population, especially the most vulnerable.
It is important to prevent their difficult situation from
being exploited by violent extremists. We also hope
for an early resolution of the pending issue of Kuwaiti
prisoners and the disappeared.
In conclusion, I once again highlight the work of
Mr. Ján Kubiš and UNAMI, in particular with regard
to the new and essential roles to promote spaces for
inclusive political dialogue and internal reconciliation.
We believe that they are key to promoting a democratic,
just and fair Iraqi society.
18-25356

08/08/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the United Kingdom
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I would also like to
thank Sweden for its efforts during its presidency of the
Council last month.
I welcome the briefing by Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), and thank his team for its hard work and
tireless efforts. I would also like to thank Mr. Spoerri,
Permanent Observer and Head of the International
Committee of the Red Cross Delegation to the United
Nations; and Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof, coordinator of
the national team for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We also congratulate all civil society
groups on their actions as part of the national team
for the implementation of the resolution. That is a true
expression of our determination to bring about change
and to meet the challenges facing us following decades
of disasters experienced by Iraqi society.
My Government welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2421 (2018), extending the mandate of
UNAMI. We are grateful for the support of all Security
Council members in establishing a new mandate that is
unique among its kind in the past 11 years. The mandate
calls for supporting Iraq so as to meet the needs of all
components of the Iraqi people, including women and
young people. It calls also for achieving sustainable
development and addressing climate change. We are
fully confident that UNAMI will work with the Iraqi
Government to respond to those needs. We encourage
UNAMI to coordinate closely with the other United
Nations agencies in Iraq in order to ensuring continuity
in the efforts undertaken, building on the progress
made in the humanitarian area and rebuilding and
development of local communities, the Government
and the country.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Karim Khan
as Special Adviser of the Secretary-General and head of
the international investigative team on the war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide perpetrated in
Iraq by Da’esh, the terrorist organization. We wish
him every success in his tasks, which he took up in
Iraq on 6 August in accordance with resolution 2379
(2017), adopted to support Iraq’s national efforts to

S/PV. 8324

ensure accountability among the elements of terrorist
Da’esh. This would be done by collecting, preserving
and storing evidence in Iraq to further promote
accountability throughout the world consistent with
relevant national laws. We underscore our support for
Mr. Khan’s efforts and our commitment to providing
him with all the facilities necessary to ensure his
success. We also look forward to the international
community’s support for him and his team.
Despite the definitive military victories over
the Da’esh terrorist gangs, we cannot say that they
and other terrorist networks have been defeated. The
propagation of takfiri and extremist ideology has
been the driving force behind terrorism in Iraq and
represents the greatest threat to national security in the
post-victory period. We must adapt our anti-terrorist
strategy to combat extremism and address the growing
decentralization of such groups, which are seeking
to expand their territory and increase their numbers.
Further international efforts will be needed to help
Iraq devise genuine and realistic strategies targeting
the expansion of these groups. We must move from
military confrontation to a national and global fight
at the individual, society and State levels, nationally,
regionally and internationally, so as to prevent these
groups from extending their influence or regrouping
once again.
Landmines and explosive remnants of war have
consequences for the Iraqi people, preventing them
from accessing basic services. Such devices maim,
paralyse and even kill them, and that is why we will
address all challenges that prevent us from meeting our
commitments in terms of our technical and medical
capacity to help victims and ensure their medical
rehabilitation. We need additional financial resources
to meet our urgent and growing needs, given our very
difficult economic situation. We welcome the efforts of
all international partners and donors, and we call on
the international community to step up its efforts in
this area.
My Government, having rid our territory of the
Da’esh terrorist groups with the support of the United
States and the other countries of the international
coalition, as well as that of friendly and sisterly
countries, has announced that it intends to implement
a reconstruction plan in areas affected by Da’esh and
those that experienced an interruption of economic
development and construction throughout Iraq.

18-253569/11

S/PV.8324

The situation concerning Iraq

We are striving to boost economic development
and have enacted policies aimed at strengthening food
stability and security in order to reduce the poverty rate
in the country and provide job opportunities for young
people as part of future programmes aimed at achieving
development and reforms. These include the 10-year
plan and the five-year plan for development 2018-2022,
as well as our poverty-reduction strategy. Our goal is
to boost the private sector through the adoption of a
policy aimed at strengthening the industry sector, in
order to create jobs and encourage the export of locally
made products in the framework of the Sustainable
Development Goals as set out in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We are following up on the conclusions of the
Kuwait International Conference for Reconstruction of
Iraq. Reconstruction is no less important than fighting
terrorism. Iraq looks forward to enjoying the support
of friendly countries in order to finance the recovery
programme launched by the Secretary-General at the
Kuwait conference, aimed at addressing crises and the
causes for the resurgence of terrorist organizations.
My Government is keen to implement the principle
of peaceful alternation of political power. We were
determined to hold parliamentary elections as
scheduled on 12 May. The Iraqi people have learned
many lessons from the elections. They hope to form
a fully representative Government that focuses on
promoting justice and strengthens democracy and
good governance, free of nepotism or corruption.
Following the official validation of the results by the
Federal Supreme Court, the winning political blocs will
strive quickly to form a new national Government that
will implement reforms in order to use the abundant
resources of the country to benefit our people.
My Government supports freedom of expression
and popular demands made through peaceful and legal
demonstrations without fear. The Government has
issued clear instructions to the security forces on the
protection of civilian demonstrators, so that legitimate
demonstrations are not exploited for political purposes
and create discord in Iraq. The Prime Minister, Haider
Al Abadi, has established a crisis unit on security
and services aimed at implementing the development
measures adopted by the Government in response to the
demands of those who demonstrated on 14 July. These
include the allocation of financial resources and job
creation in the provinces of Iraq.
10/11

08/08/2018

The people of Iraq need sustainable stability. This
can be done only through the efforts of all actors to
find solutions to the problems and challenges facing the
country. Some Iraqi women and children continue to
suffer the impact of the negative effects of terrorism,
especially those who live in regions that were previously
under the control of Da’esh terrorist gangs. Their
suffering persists as a result of the security challenges.
My Government is working hard to reintegrate
persecuted women and children into society and to
repatriate children who fought with Da’esh to their
countries so that they are not subjected to extremism
and trafficking.
My country hopes that the United Nations will
support it in implementing the joint communiqué signed
between the two parties in 2016, aimed at preventing
and addressing conflict-related sexual violence. This
would provide a platform for collective work among
religious and tribal leaders and civil society.
I would also like to mention that work is being
done between the Iraqi side, represented by the High
Commission to investigate reports of violations
of children’s rights in armed conflict, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNAMI and UNICEF in order to
establish a joint action plan to address any violations
regarding child recruitment.
The Government of Iraq has gone a long way in
preparing its national report on the implementation
of the national plan pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). We are about to start working on the second
national plan. We hope that UNAMI will provide us
with the necessary support and advice in completing the
first national report and in ironing out any difficulties
that may prevent the implementation of the first plan.
Iraq has been seeking to resolve all pending issues
with neighbouring countries and is eager to establish
balanced diplomatic relations with the international
community. We hope that Iraq will be a key factor in
achieving economic prosperity in the region, given
its various natural resources and strategic location.
Since 2003, successive Iraqi Governments have
respected the principle of good-neighbourly relations
and non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries, while seeking to resolve disputes peacefully
and establish relations of mutual respect.
My Government wants to fulfil its commitments
under resolution 2107 (2013). It is trying hard to
18-25356

08/08/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

investigate the fate of prisoners and those who
disappeared and are citizens of the sisterly State of
Kuwait and of other third-country nationals. We are
striving to repatriate Kuwait’s national archives and
assets. My Government has made progress and is in
the course of preparing a new set of Kuwaiti property,
including television broadcasts, books, a sword and a
very valuable painting.
On behalf of my Government and the people of
Iraq, I would like in particular to thank Mr. Kubiš, who
has led UNAMI for the past three years and helped Iraq
through a challenging time. We reiterate our thanks
to his team in Iraq and New York for their efforts
to help my country. We also thank all the friendly
countries that have pledged additional funds in order
to implement projects to improve the living conditions
and security of the Iraqi people. This demonstrates the
interest and belief of the international community in
the humanitarian efforts and in achieving stability in

S/PV. 8324

Iraq, while benefiting the displaced persons and the
host communities inland, in addition to supporting
efforts to achieve development in the country.
The President: I again thank our three briefers very
much. It was extremely useful to hear about progress on
the women and peace and security agenda in Iraq. Iraq
is something of a regional leader in this, but obviously
there are many challenges. We thank the International
Committee of the Red Cross for all the important
work it is doing with respect to missing persons. I also
extend a huge thank you to the Special Representative
and his team in the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq for all their efforts in helping to stabilize Iraq
still further.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

18-2535611/11
