TWENTY-FOURTIf

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 4 AUGUST 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 493) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . , .
Adoption of the agenda

. .. ,... ,...... ..,........... ..........

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey,
Yugoslavia and. Zambia addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9359)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I....

1

S/PV. 1493

UNDRED
Held in New York

AND NINETY-THIRD

MEETING

on Monday, 41August 1969, at 3 p.m.

President: Mr. Jaime DE PINIES (Spain).

Council, I shall now invite the representative of Chile to
take a place at the Council table.

&sent:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Pifiera (Chile)
took a place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
Council will now continue its consideration of the question
of Namibia. In this connexion, I wish to announce that I
have received a communication dated 1 August 1969 from
forty-six Member States, which has been circulated to the
members of the Council in document S/9372. In addition, I
have just been informed that the representative of Ghana is
also a signatory of that document.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l493)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359).

5. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Algeria, whom I now call.
6. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated porn French):
Mr. President, first of all I wish, on behalf of my delegation,
to tell you how pleased we are to see you presiding over our
work for the month of August. It is hardly necessary to
recall the many links between our two countries, Spain and
Algeria, not the least being the Mediterranean Sea, the
cradle of civilization.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
1. The PRESIDENT (translatedfiom Spanish): During the
month of July, the Security Council was particularly active.
It is therefore only just that we should pay a tribute of
admiration to the outgoing President, Ambassador Boye,
who displayed great competence in the discharge of his
functions. Speaking for myself and interpreting, I believe,
the feelings of all the members of the Council, I should like
to express our gratitude to him.

7. Needless to say, we also wish to offer our compliments
to His Excellency the Ambassador of Senegal, Mr. Ibrahima
Boye, who guided our work last month with courtesy and
efficiency.

2. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (translated from French):
Mr.President, I should like to thank you on behalf of my
delegation for your very kind words about Ambassador
Boye. As you undoubtedly know, Ambassador Boye is at
present serving the international community on a mission
which will take him to Europe and then to the Middle East.
YOU may rest assured that, upon his return, I shall not fail
to transmit to him the tribute you have just paid him.

8. During the past week, the Security Council has considered the dangerous situation prevailing in southern
Africa. Portugal’s stubborn refusal to abide by the decisions
of our Organization and its wish to perpetuate its colonial
domination over the peoples of Angola and Mozambique
create a permanent threat to the free States of Africa.
9. Today we have before us a similar problem. The
Pretoria-Lisbon-Salisbury
alliance intends to use every
possible means to impose the law of apartheid and
exploitation on all southern Africa. Not content with
imposing the system of apartheid on the indigenous people,
the racist authorities of Pretoria mean to perpetuate their
colonial domination over the territory of Namibia and to
extend that system of apartheid.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia and
Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359)

10. Despite resolution 2145 (XXI) of the General Assembly, which terminated Pretoria’s Mandate over Namibia,
and resolutions 24.5 (1968), 246 (1968) and 264 (1969)
adopted by this Council itself, the racist authorities of
South Africa continue to scorn all these decisions.

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with the decision previously taken by the Security
1

lg. What could these decisions be? In the view of my
delegation, they could be the following:

11, South Africa’s categorical refusal to comply with
Security Council resolution 264 (1969), adopted on 20
March 1969 should, however, meet with an unambiguous
response from this Council. In the view of the Algerian
delegation, the provisions of this resolution are of paramount importance. Operative paragraph 2 states that the
occupation of Namibia is not only illegal but is actually
detrimental to the interests of the population of the
Territory and those of the international community.
Consequently, the Government of South Africa has been
asked to withdraw its administration from that Territory.

20. First, solemn confirmation of the legitimate right of
the Narnibian people to carry on their liberation struggle;
21. Second, provision of concrete moral and material
assistance to this movement;
22. Third, formal notice to South Africa to leave the
territory by a certain date;

12. In the event of refusal on the part of South Africa to
comply with the provisions of that resolution, our Council
had decided to meet at once to determine the necessary
measures to be taken in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

23. Fourth, an invitation to all States to challenge any
claim by South Africa to speak on behalf of Namibia;
24. Fifth, an invitation to the de facto authorities ‘in
Namibia to refrain from hampering the implementation by
the United Nations of the Council’s decisions on this
subject.

13. The Members of the United Nations and in particular
the members of this Council are witnessing a new phenomenon. Certain colonial Powers, which are Members of this
Organization, consider that their accession to the United
Nations Charter entails no obligation. Moreover, they
intend to act within the framework of the old colonialist
concepts from which they persist in drawing their fallacious
pseudo-legal arguments. In doing so, they are directly
violating the spirit of the San Francisco Charter, which is
based on the equality of peoples and the right to
self-determination and freedom.

25. We hope that this Organization will at last decide to
assume its full responsibilities in this matter and realize that
the absence of a firm attitude towards South Africa and
that country’s policy undermines its international authority
and may ultimately deprive it of its reputation as the last
refuge of oppressed peoples.
26. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Spanish): I thank
the representative of Algeria for the kind words he
addressed to me at the beginning of his statement.

14. Thus South Africa, running counter to the unanimous
will of the Members of the United Nations and to the
principles of international law, continues to occupy a
foreign territory. Assisted in that undertaking by the
international monopolies, it persists in exploiting the
mineral wealth of that territory, reducing the people of
Namibia to slavery.

27. Mr. KI-IATRI (Nepal): Mr. President, may I, first of
all, express my admiration and gratitude to the Ambassador
of Senegal for the effective manner in which he guided our
work during the month of July.
28. I am happy, too, to see you as our President for this
month. Although formal diplomatic relations between
Spain and Nepal were established only recently, our people
have long held the Spanish people in deep affection. It will
indeed be a pleasure to’work under your guidance. Please
be assured of the whole-hearted co-operation of my
delegation in your tasks.

15. In the face of this danger, the people of Namibia have
been forced to wage an unequal struggle against the
occupants. It is true that, on many occasions, the international community has solemnly recognized the right of
this people to freedom and national independence. This will
continue to be insufficient as long as we do not commit
ourselves to give moral and, above all, material support to
the struggle for national liberation undertaken by the
Namibian people. The African States and the anticolonialist peoples have already enlisted on the side of the
Namibians, to free them from the yoke of the champions of
racism and discrimination.

29. At our last meeting on the situation in Namibia
[1465th meeting], the Security Council adopted resolution
264 (1969) on 20 March 1969, by which the Council,
reaffirming its special responsibility towards the people of
the Territory of Namibia, recognized the termination of the
Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and the assumption
of direct responsibility for the Territory by the General
Assembly in accordance with its resolution 2145 (xX1).
Considering that the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia was illegal and contrary to the principles of the
Charter and previous decisions of the United Nations, the
Security Council, furthermore, called upon the Government
of South Africa immediately to withdraw its administration
from the Territory.

16. AS for the Security Council, it is today confronted by
a grave challenge from South Africa. Pretoria is questioning
even the legal basis of the decisions of the Council.
17. In the face of this senseless challenge, the Security
Council, which has on several occasions declared its
responsibility towards the people of Namibia, must take all
appropriate measures to put an end to the military and
civilian occupation of Namibia by the Pretoria authorities,

But, true to its policy of defiance of all United
Nations decisions,the Government of SouthAfrica hasnot
complied with resolution 264 (1969) of the Security
Council. On the very day the ,Council adopted that
resolution, the Foreign Minister of South Africa madea
30.

18. The flagrant violation of Article 25 of the United
Nations Charter must be met by clear decisions from this
Council, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and particularly of Chapter VII.
2

the many flagrant violations of the obligationsof membership committed by South Africa subsequentto the adoption of that resolution.

lengthy statement on the subject before the South African
parliament. In that statement the Foreign Minister labelled
all United Nations actions in respect of Namibia as illegal
andhe accused the Organization generally, including the big
powers, of being a promoter of anarchy, international
gangsterism and lawlessness. TMS view was reinforced the
next day, on 21 March, by the Prime Minister of South
Africa himself, in a public address.
31, Those two statements, which are contained in the
report by the Secretary-General in document S/9204,1 have
made it clear that South Africa does not intend to
withdraw its administration from South West Africa. We
hew this. What makes those statements remarkable,
however, is the fact that the Government of South Africa
not only has expressed its contempt for the United Nations,
hut has also arrogated to itseIf the right to put the
Organization on trial and pass judgement on its conduct.
32. This attitude-defiant, arrogant and contemptuous-on
the part of South Africa has further aggravated a situation
which was iilready serious. The Government of South
Africa has continued to occupy a Territory which has been
declared to come under direct United Nations responsibility. Not content with occupation, it has consistently
introduced the policies of apartheid into Namibia. Those
policies,if I may recall, have been brandedby resolutions
of ,this Organization as a crime against humanity. The
declaredpolicy of South Africa is the establishmentof
Bantustansin Namibia, That policy is aimed at the
destructionof the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibiaand, as such,hasnot only beencondemnedby the
GeneralAssemblyin numerousresolutionsbut alsorejected
by the Security Council, which declared, in its resolution
264(1969), that the actions of South Africa designedto
destroy the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia through the establishment of Bantustans are
contrary to the provisionsof the United Nations Charter.
33. Recent reports concerning the indictment of eight
Namibiansin South Africa under the so-calledTerrorism
Act indicated further defiance of the authority of the
UnitedNations by the Government of Pretoria. I neednot
remin$the Council that the so-calledTerrorism Act has
beencondemnedby the international community of jurists
asa violation of every norm of law in civilized society. The
GeneralAssembly and the Security Council have rejected
the competenceclaimed by South Africa to try Namibian
nationalsunder that barbarousact. Both GeneralAssembly
resolution 2324 (XXII) and Security Council resolution
245(1968) condemnedthe action of the Government of
South Africa as a flagrant violation of the rights of the
Namibiansand of the international status of Namibia.
Security Council resolution 246 (1968), in its first operative paragraph,censuredthe Government of South Africa
for its flagrant defiance of resolution 245 (1968) aswell as
of the authority of the United Nations, of which South
Africa is a Member. The reference to South Africa’s
membershipwas intended to remind South Africa of its
obligationsas a Member of the United Nations. The
Security Council hasnot, up till now, taken serioushate of
1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth
for April, May and’June 1969.

34. The United Nations,in its dealingswith South Africa
over more than two decades,
hasexhaustedthe possibilities
of persuasion.South Africa has proved itself to be a
consistently delinquent Member of the Organization. No
amount of persuasionthat could be brought to bear on
South Africa would causeit to changeits premeditated
policy of defiancetowardsthe United Nations.Much aswe
may deplorethis policy, by its refusal to withdraw from
Namibiathe Governmentof South Africa hasgoneconsiderably beyond the stageof defianceand hasnow set foot
on a path of active belligerencyagainstthe United Nations.
Occupation of a Territory which is under the direct
responsibilityof the United Nationsamountsto an act of
aggressionperpetrated against this Organization. South
Africa has been called upon to withdraw, not only
repeatedly by the General Assembly but also by the
Security Council.
35. South Africa’s refusal to withdraw is compounding
this serioussituation. The aggrievedparty in this situation
createdby the policy of belligerencyof the Governmentof
South Africa is not just another Governmentor two, but
the whole United Nations.
36. In this connexion I may recall that in its resolution
264 (1969) the Security Council decidedthat in the event
of failure on the part of the Governmentof South Africa to
comply with the provisionsof that resolution, it would
meet immediately to determine upon necessarystepsor
measures
in accordancewith the relevantprovisionsof the
Charter of the United Nations.
37. This forms the basisfor the requestsubmitted by
eleven Member Statesand containedin documentS/9359
for the conveningof the Security Council in order that it
may considerthe situation resultingfrom South Africa’s
further defiance of the decisionof the United Nations.
Those eleven Member States, in requesting an urgent
meeting of the Security Council, have acted in their
capacitiesas membersof the United Nations Conncil for
Namibia, and in pursuanceof their unanimousconclusion,
referred to in documentS/9352, that the Security Cbuncil
should take urgent measuresto secure the speediest
implementationof resolution264 (1969).
38. In a letter, circulated as document S/9372, AfricanAsian Member Stateshave associatedthemselveswith the
membersof the Council for Namibiain their unanimous
conclusionand their legitimaterequestfor urgentaction by
the Security Councilto dealwith the dangerous
situation in
Namibia.
39. As evidenced by document S/9352, the United
NationsCouncil for Namibia,which,bearsresponsibilityfor
administration of the Territory until independence,has
found itself unable to dischargeits functions under the
terms of General Assembly resolutions2145 (XXI) and
2248 (S-V), becauseof the attitude of the Governmentof
South Africa.

Year,

SuPPlement

3

40. The near-unanimous decision of the General Assembly
to terminate the Mandate was reinforced by resolution
2248 (S-V). That resolution was a most logical follow-up to
resolution 2145 (XXI) and constituted an effective answer
by the Assembly to the problem resulting from the
termination of the Mandate. That decision by the Assembly
lacks the support of all four permanent members of the
Security Council, which have, nevertheless, failed to come
forward with a viable solution of their own. The Foreign
Minister of South Africa has accused the United Nations of
being unable to act in.conformity with its responsibilities.

the excellent attitude they reflect with
resPect
t0 rf21atians
with Spain, which my delegation wishes to
reciprocate

41. The Charter vests special power and responsibility in
the permanent members of the Security Council. It is their
special authority to determine whether or n’ot any given
situation constitutes a threat to peace or a breach of peace.
The Council is powerless to act in this respect without the
concurrence of the permanent members. As far as we are
concerned, there is no doubt whatever in our minds that
the continued occupation of Namibia constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. The situation in
southern Africa-apartheid,
Southern Rhodesia, Namibia
and Portuguese colonialism-is indeed very serious. It is
difficult to see why this situation has not yet resulted in an
open racial and colonial war.

47. I shyuld also like most sincerely to pay a tribute
to the
manner m which Mr. Boye of Senegal presided Over our
deliberations last mpnth. The Security Council was indeed
very active, and it gves me ,great pleasure to pay tibute to
the fact that It was due to his skill and good judgement that
we were able to arrive at many Conclusions
and
that
the
Council was able to make positive contributions
in its
deliberations last month.

46. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, let me begin b
extending to you the warmest congratulations
of
Y
delegation and my own on your assumption
of x
presidency of the Security Council for tl-,is month y
belong to a great Country
which has left a grent herit;geyu
mankind. I have no .doubt that, with your grcat experience0
and expertise in United Nations matters, you
will Conduct
our deIiberations with outstanding success.

48. The Security Council is seized for the fourth time in
two years of the question of Namibia. This meeting comes
in the wake of eighty-five resolutions
of the General
Assembly and three of the Security CounciI, every one of
which has been rejected and indeed flagrantly
flouted by
South Africa. For twenty-three
years. South Africa has
frustrated all United Nations efforts towards
enabling the
Namibian people to accede to sovereignty
and independence. This illustrates graphically the enormity
of the
conduct of the Pretoria r&ime. Its posture is contrary to
world public opinion and militates against international law
and order, against the progress of peoples to independence
and against all principles of justice, human
rights and
human dignity.

42. Solution of this problem depends generally on timely
action by the Security Council, and particularly on action
by its permanent members. The Afro-Asian States have
nothing further to offer by way of solution. It is up to the
permanent members now. Let South Africa not receive
ftlrther aid and comfort from some of those Powers and
their allies. It is high time those Powers explored all
possibilities provided by the Charter to deal effectively with
this situation. As I have already stated, the situation has
gone beyond the stage of mere defiancp of the authority of
the United Nations by South Africa. It is a question of
South Africa versus the entire membership of the Organiz&ion, in a state of active belligerency.

49. The Security Council has already dealt three times
with the question of Namibia. On the first two occasions, in
1968, the Council was concerned with a single important
issue, namely, the detention, trial and sentence of thirtyseven Namibians by the South African authorities.
On both
those occasions the Council adopted resoWions-nameLY~
resolutions 245 (1968) and 246 (1968)-unanimouslyThe
latter resolution condemned South Africa for its flagrant
violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
earlier
resolution
its rejection of the Council’s
(245 (1968)].

43. The question of punishment of S&th Africa is not our
primary concern, As a law-abiding Member State, whose
faith in the effectiveness of the United Nations is absolute,
we feel particularly hurt to have the authority of the
United Nations defied in this way. In the words of
Ambassador Turbay Ayala, who was the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia for July:
“ . the United Nations would very soon find itself
heading towards a serious crisis of authority which would
destroy all the hopes placed in the system’ pf collective
security, erected on the basis of discipline and obedience
to common principles of harmonious international coexistence.” (1492nd meeting, para. 21.1

50. Resolution 245 (1968) marked the first time the
Security Council took cognizance of the Namibian Problem
ad, viewed in this fight, it was indicative of Some positive
action. ‘Resolution 246 (1968) WAS nokworthy
because
it
declared in its operative paragraph 5 :

44. Mbtivated by our deep concern for averting this crisis
of United Nations authority, we appeal to the permanent
members of the Security Council to do all in their power to
compel South Africa to conform with the discipline of the
Organization.

“that in the event of failure on the part Of the
Government of South Africa t0 comply with tl1ePro:;
sions of the present resolution, tile Security
cour’c’l w
meet hme&ately to determine upon effective steos of
Or
measures in conformity
with the relevant provisions
the Charter of the United+Nations”.

45. The PRESIDENT (translated fvom Spanish): I wish to
thank the representative of Nepal for the kind words he
addressed to me at the beginning of his statement and for

51. The third occasion on which the Security
Counci’aS
categorid
deliberated the question of Namibia has been e the COllnCil
becaus
one of historic importance-histor$
4

was seized for the first time of the substantive and
fundamental issue of South Africa’s unlawful presence in
Namibia and was not confined t0 CtXtaifl
oppressive acts
,.encering the so-called trial of Namibian patriots. Consequently resolution 264 (1969) of 20 March 1969 constituted a major step forward, inasmuch as the Security
Council recognized its own responsibility in the question of
Namibia.
Furthermore, that resolution considered that the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia was illegal
ad detrimental to the interests of the population of the
Territory and those of the international community.
Therefore it called upon
the Government of South Africa
immediately to withdraw
its administration from the
Territory. As the Security Council is aware, that call has
also been ignored-in fact rejected-by
South Africa.
Therefore the United Nations Council for Namibja has
requested this Council urgently to consider the situation
resulting from the wholly negative reaction of South Africa
to resoldtion 264 (1969).

Assemblyand the Security Council. South Africa hasbeen
repeatedly condemnedfor its defiance of all those resolutions, but it is impenitent and continuesto maintain its
obduratecourse.
60. In document S/9204 the Secretary-Generalhascirculated the text of a statementniadeby the ForeignMinister
of South Africa in the Senate on 20 March 1969. That
statement speaksfor itself. It makesit clear beyond any
shadowof doubt that South Africa will not alter its defiant
attitude towards the resolutionsof the GeneralAssembly
and the Security Council. The South African Foreign
Minister has,indeed,madean attempt to justify the policy
of dismembermentof the Territory of Namibia,with the
plea that Namibiahasnever formed a homogeneous
entity
and that the Namibian people theyselves wish to retain
their tribal identities. To assertthat the existenceof tribes
negatesthe concept of nationhoodis indeedan extraordinary argument. No nation consistsof a singletribe or a
singleethnic group. Most nations are congeriesof various
tribal, ethnic andlinguisticgroupsunited by a commonwill
to nationhood. If the ForeignMinister of South Africa does
indeed believe that there can be no unity by government
fiat between the peoplesof what he callsEasternCaprivi
and the RehobothBastersor betweenthe Bushmenandthe
Herero or between the Ovambo and the Nama,could we
not ask why should there be unity through a common
government between the Afrikaaner and English ethnic
groups
in South Africa? Would hebe preparedto break up
his country into Afrikaaner-and English-speaking
Bantustans? After all, it is only a little more than half a century
ago that those two ethnic groups were at war with one
anotherandlocked in a strugglefor domination.

52. The continuing measurestaken by South Africa in

defianceof the authority of the Security Council and the
recommendations
of the General Assembly are well known
to all of us. What is intolerable is that the Pretoria
authorities
refuseto hold themselvesaccountableto anyone
ia the world in respect of their actions relating to a
Territory the international status of which is beyond
question.The case of the international community-not
only the people of Namibia but the international community-againstthe South African Government constitutes
a longlist of acts in the nature of grave transgressions
of
internationallaw, including violations of humanrights.
53. First, South Africa categorically refusedto honour the
obligationsentrusted to it under the Mandate and to
recognizethat the United Nations had supervisorypowers
iarespectof Namibia.

61. In my statementin the Security Councilon 20 March
of this year, I madethe following plea:
“A warning wasgiven last year. The warningwasnot
heeded. Surely it must now be followed by effective
action and not by yet another warning.” (1464th
meeting,para.123.1

54. Second, South Africa rejected the demand of the
United Nations to withdraw its authority and adqinistration from the Territory in consequenceof the terminationof the Mandate andto transfer it to the United Nations
Councilfor Namibia,

Surely that plea is even more relevant and carriesgreater
force today. Given the outrageousrecord of South Africa
for morethan twenty yearsand giventhe fact that repeated
warningsof effective stepsor measures
in conformity with
the relevantprovisionsof the Charterof the United Nations
have not beenheededby South ,Africa in the slightestand
that that racistandcolonialPoweris seton pursuingits evil
and illegal coursein Namibia,surely the time hascomefor
passingfrom warningsto deeds,from wordsto action-and
action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

55. Third, despitethe clear call of the GeneralAssembly
act to alter the international status of the Territory, the
Pretoriaregimecontinues to adopt measuresto incorporate
Namibiaasan integral part of South Africa, in violation of
thefight to self-determinationof the Namibianpeople.
56. Fourth, South Africa persistsin policiescalculatedto
destroy the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibiathrough the establishmentof Bantustans.
57. Fifth, South Africa is illegally extending the odious
sYStemof apartheid to a Territory over which it has no
lawfulauthority.
58. Sixth, South Africa is continuing to imposeoppressive
measures
against the people of Namibia, in violation of
theirfundamentalhumanrights.
59. Thoseare grave findings, eachof which hasbeengiven
repeatedexpression in the resolutions of the General
5

62.’ We would appealto the permanentmembersof the
Security Council to ponder the situation seriouslyand to
lend their active co-operationand supportto a resolution
which would not merely repeatresolution264 (1969), but
would go further, to induce South Africa to ceaseand
desistfrom its colonialpolicies.
63. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):Again, I
wish to thank the representativeof Pakistanfor the kind
words he has spoken about my country and about me
personally.

64. 1 have just received a letter from the representative of
India asking to participate in this debate. If I hear no
objection, 1 intend to invite the representative of India to
take a place at the Council table.

March of this i/ear. when it adopted resolution264 (19691
by a very la&e majority. Wie the provisions of tha;’
resolution fell far short of the aimsand aspirationsof th,
Afro-Asian States, it still did mark a certain definite
advancein what the international community as a whole
waspreparedto acceptasa basisfbr future action in regard
to Namibia. By that resolution the Security Council took
four important steps. First, it reaffirmed the inalienabl,
right of the people of Namibia to freedom and independence. Secondly, it recognizedthat the GeneralAssembly
had terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibiaand
had assumed
direct responsibilityfor the Territory until it-s
independence.Thirdly, it recognizedthe illegality and grave
consequences
of South Africa’s continued occupation of
the Territory, which it consideredto be detrimentalto the
interestsof both the population of the Territory and the
international community. And, fourthly, it decidedthat in
the event of failure on the part of the Governmentof South
Africa to comply with that resolution,the Security Council
would meetimmediatelyto determineupon necessarysteps
or measures
in accordancewith the relevant provisionsof
the Charter.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. ,?en (India) took
a PhTe at the Council table.
65. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of India, on whom I
now call.
66. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, I should like at the
outset to thank you and through you the members of the
Council for this opportunity to address the Security
Council on the question of Namibia, which is currently on
the agenda of the Council. I should like to make it clear
that though I happen to occupy the post of President of the
Council for Namibia for the month of August, it is not
really in that capacity that I wish to take the floor. That
function was carried out by my colleague, Ambassador
Turbay Ayala of Colombia, with his characteristic lucidity
and eloquence at the 1492nd meeting of the Security
Council on 30 July. I have asked to participate in this
debate principally in view of the abiding concern of my
Government with a problem which we were the first to
raise in the forum of the United Nations, as far back as
1946, when we took the initiative of introducing a draft
resolution which sought to place South West Africa under
the International Trusteeship Sys+em.

70. The significanceof the resolution, as Ambassador
Jakobsonof Finland pointed out in his statement at the
1465th meetingof thk Council on 20 March 1969, wasthat
the power and authority of the Security Council wasfor
the first time fully engagedin the task of translatinginto
reality the decisionconcerningassumptionby the United
Nations of direct responsibility for the Territory until its
independence.

67. I need hardly recall that that effort and all subsequent
ones by the international community to secure. South
Africa’s withdrawal
from the Territory have met with
shameful failure. However, despite the frustrations of the
long history of the bitter struggle of the Namibian people
for their freedom and independence, there have been two
constitutional
developments which, though of limited
importance in themselves, can be considered to have
pointed to the possible path for future action.

71. The only reaction of the Governmentof South Africa
to Security Council resolution 264 (1969) is contained in
statementsmadeby the South African ForeignMinister and
the South African Prime Minister which wereforwarded to
the Secretary-Generaland are reproduced in document
S/9204. These arrogant and patently unreasonablestatements seek to deny the legal basisof United Nations
decisions concerning the Territory and amount to a
categoricalrefusalto comply with thesedecisions.

68. The first of these was the decision adopted by the
General Assembly three years ago, by which it decided2 by
an overwhelming majority that South Africa had forfeited
the right to administer the Territory
and that South
Africa’s Mandate over the Territory should accordingly be
terminated.’ As a logical sequence to that decision, in the
following year the General Assembly formally set June
1968 as the date for the independence of the Territory. In
the face of South Africa’s blatant and bruta1 refusal to
comply with the solemn decisions of the United Nations,
the international community felt compelled to have recourse to the Security Council to achieve the objective of
the withdrawal of South Afri$a’s administration from the
Territory.

72. The Security Council is now faced with a situation in
which a Member State has defiantly, almost sneeringly,
refused to fulfti its obligations under Article 25 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Security Council is
accordingly duty bound to honour the commitment it
entered into under the provisionsof operative paragraph8
of resolution 264 (1969) and to determineupon effective
stepsor measurescalculated to put an immediateend to
South Africa’s persistentdefiance of the authority of the
United Nations. As AmbassadorTurbay Ayala put it in his
statementlast Friday [1492nd meeting], the elevenStates
membersof the Council for Namibia have requestedan
urgent meeting of the Security Council in the firm belief
that some effective stepsmust be taken ,to reverse the
unjustifiable refusal of South Africa to comply with the
resolutions of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly.

69. The second constitutional development Of note Was
the recognition by the Security Council, when it adopted
resolution 246 (1968), of its special responsibility towards
the people and the Territory of Namibia. The Security
Couricil first met for the discharge of that responsibility in

73. The question with which we are now faced is what
those effective steps should be. The Afro-Asian States
which have submitted a letter [S/9372] in support of the
requestfor anurgent meetingof the Security Councilmade

2 scc Goneral Assembly resolution2145(XXI).

6

by the member States of the Council for Namibia have
stated:

through the full power and authority of the Security
Council. Such implementationis urgently requiredin view
of the massiverepressionof the liberationmovementwithin
Namibia. We could alsoinvestigate.the possibility of the
United Nations, as the legally appointed Administering
Authority, claimingthe revenuedtie to it from the mining
and other enterprises
in Namibia.Another possibilityliesin
the United Nations claiming indemnitiesand reparations
from South Africa on account of the deprivationsand
dispossessions
of the Namibianpopulation. Theseare all
proposalsaction on which is within our capacity and on
which we shouldbe able to reachagreementif we are at all
seriousabout honouring our commitment to bring the
people of Namibia to freedom and independence.We
shouldperhapsalsoconsiderif a Governmentin exiIe could
not justly be establishedfor Namibiaand be permitted to
be seatedin the United Nations as representingNamibia.
We should further enquirewhat hasbeenachievedby the
intervention of Powerswhich are supposedto have influence on the South African Government.That wasone of
the elementsof the Council’sresolutionof 20 March 1969.

“The inescapable conclusion is that it is only resolute
action by the Security Council under the provisions of
Chapter VII. of the United Nations Charter which can
achieve the objective of securing the immediate withdrawal of South Africa from the Territory.” [S/9372.]
That statement fully reflects the views of the Government
ef India-views which it has held for some considerable
period of time. Regrettably, we are only too familiar with
the pretexts-which
,are neither honourable nor responsible-put forward by certain States, some of which are
permanent members of the Security Council, for refusing to
consider the only effective action this Council can and
should take. Like my colleague Ambassador Mwaanga of
Zambia, I should like to be informed what more attractive
alternative they can offer which would ensure immediate
compliance by South Africa with decisions of the United
Nations.
74. I cannot but refer here in passing to the equally supine
and helpless attitude the Council demonstrated in its
handling of the question of Rhodesia and to the way in
which speaker after speaker emphasized the danger which
the United Nations faces in not standing up to the challenge
posed by the triumvirate of South Africa, Portugal and the
Ian Smith regime in Zimbabwe. I hasten to add that the
palliatives suggested so far for our consideration in respect
of Namibia are so puerile and inadequate as to suggest a
withdrawal from solemn commitments and a distressing
failure to heed either realism or conscience.

77. I have refrainedfrom dealingin my statementto the
deteriorating situation in Namibia becausethe facts are
known to all and other speakershave dealt with them
during this debate and our earliermeetingsin March. The
South African authorities have proceeded, in blatant
defianceof Security Council resolution264 (1969) and all
previous resolutionsof the GeneralAssemblyand of the
Security Council, to acceleratethe processof destroying
the national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia.The
representativesof Afro-Asian Stateswho have addressed’a
letter to the Presidentof the Security Council/S/9372],
associatingthemselves
with the requestmadeby the eleven
States membersof the Council for Namibia for urgent
action to deal with the dangeroussituation in Namibia,
havewarnedin their letter that:

75. We were advised during our meetings in March that we
should act in agreement and within our clear capacity. It
was further suggested that only such a course would fail to
give encouragement to the South African Government in
the pursuit of its evil policies and would prevent the people
of Namibia from losing hope in our authority. The
Afro-Asian world may not have any disagreement in
principle with such an approach. However, when we are
told that action within the framework of such a policy
mustbe limited to contributions to the United Nations
Educationand Training Programmeor the implementation
Ofa plan for a comprehensivesurvey of the situation in the
Territory, it becomesdismally clear that our so-called
capacityis determinedby a total lack of political will, and
cur professionsof concern for the liberation of the
oppressed
Namibianpeople cannot but soundas hollow as
theyarehypocritical.

“Failure to find an early solution to this burning
problem will inevitably result in the outbreak of racial
conflict on an unprecedentedscalein the Territory and
the region as a whole which will only aggravatethe
already seriousthreat to international peaceand security
in the area.” [s/9373.]
78. I would submitin all seriousness
that this isno empty
warning. The persistentattempt on the part of certain
States to deny that the situation in Namibia and in
southern Africa as a whole is a seriousthreat to international peace and security is in our view basedon a
political refusal to take remedialaction inimical to their
narrow national, mainly financial, interestsrather than on
an objective appraisalof the situation. In our view this
policy not only makesnonsenseof the commitment of
these Statesto securefreedom and independencefor the
people of Namibia but is at the sametime extremely
short-sighted.The threat of the outbreak of racial conflict
is a very real one andthosewho chooseto ignoreit do SO at
their own risk. Theseare the dimensionsof the problem
which we have before us today. Failure on our part to
tackle it resolutely and without delay is fraught with the
most seriousconsequences
for the internationalcommunity
as a whole. It is our earnesthope that the Governments
which have continuedto offer direct or indirect support, if

76. It is obvious that we have to shift our sightsto more
meaningfulsolutions,We have no fixed or dogmaticideas
aboutwhat those solutionsshould be, but we believe that
someof them should be explored carefully. A decision
prohibitingall dealingswith South Africa in so far asthey
relateto Namibiawould appearto be a logical stepflowing
from recognitionthat South Africa hasceasedto enjoy any
legalright to administerthe Territory. A ban on the saleof
armsto South Africa has been the subject of several
resohrtions
adopted by the General Assemblyand hasbeen
endorsedby the Security Council. A reaffirmation of that
decisionand its effective implementation can be secured
7

representative of his country but those of US who are
members of the Council for Namibia recognize him as
President of that Council for this month of August.

not encouragement, to the racist authorities in South Africa
will find it possible to act with courage and sincerity for the
fulfilment of objectives to which they claim to subscribe
and in the long-term interest of peace, which should be as
necessary to them as to the unfortunate victims of,racial
domination and racial injustice.

83. If Chile wishes to participate today, after all the
simple yet profound statements which have been made on
this case-perhaps the noblest that can be defended in the
United Nations-it is because of a moral duty. Ever since
the problem of apartheid was discussed in the United
Nations, Chile has been present. From the very outset one
of its men, Mr. Herndn Santa Cruz, played an outstanding
part in all the commissions in which man’s freedom has
been defended and apartheid has been combated. Unfortunately, this system has had its philosophers and theoreticians, such as Gobineau in France, and also some followers.

79. On many occasions these days, with the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations taking place next year,
we speak about the importance of youth and its idealism
and of its contribution to the great adventure of man.
Unless we are totally hypocritical, how can we expect these
young men and women to support and sustain us when we
not only fail them so consistently but cannot even live up
to the standards our own parents and grandparents have set
for us. We were cowardly for years towards Hitler and
Mussolini-and what a penalty we paid for it. If nearly
thirty years after the war we refuse through fear and greed
to demolish utterly the pernicious doctrine of ‘Mein
Kampf, ” then there is little hope for peace with justice, for
which this Organization stands and for which most people
of the world pine. In human history it is often necessary to
take risks in order to secure worthy objectives. And it is the
hope of my Government that even at this stage the Council
will take energetic and effective action and frustrate the evil
designs of evil men. Alternatively, we shall be guilty in the
eyes of God and man alike for the catastrophe which our
lack of action may bring upon the world-and perhaps in
not too distant a future.

84. Chile is participating because almost three years ago,
at the 1966 session of the General Assembly, we fought far
resolution 2145 (XXI), to which we attach exceptional
importance. For the first time the Utited Nations General
Assembly adopted (with two negative votes-South Africa
and Portugal-and two abstentions-the
United Kingdom
and France) a resolution which placed the problem of
Namibia in its proper perspective and recognizcd Namibia’s
right to independence and the responsibility of the United
Nations in this problem. This was an extremely important
resolution which, among the eighty-five resolutions mentioned by Ambassador Shahi, stood out as a basic turning.
point in the position of the General Assembly, which is
today the best embodiment of the international community. Since my country participated very actively in the
drafting of this resolution, I remember all the efforts which
were made in that direction even by the great Powers which
abstained in the vote. Subsequently, my country was a
member of the so-called Committee of Fourteen, which was
the preparatory committee set up to seek ways and means
of putting the Assembly’s resolution in practice. Many ideas
were discussed and it was decided to establish a Council for
Namibia. Perhaps that was not the best of ideas; it was only
a means to an end. What counted was resolution
2145 (XXI), with which th.e General Assembly-in other
words, the international community-is
confronted. There
is resolution 2145 (XXI); here is the international community. It is a challenge to this international community.

80. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Chile, on whom I
now call.
81. Mr. PInERA (Chile) (translated from Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all I should like, through you, to
thank the members of the Security Council-the organ with
the greatest powers in the United Nations-for allowing the
Permanent Representative of Chile to participate in this
debate, without the right to vote. I should, however, be
remiss in my duty of friendship if I failed to offer very
special greetings to the President, the distinguished Ambassador of Spain and a great firend, Jaime de Pin&%. The
friendship between Spain and Chile is one of equals. We
have received proof of this friendship from Spain and we
have also given it proof of our friendship. I should like to
add a very personal note here, The President of the Security
Council has done many good things in his life and one in
particular-he married a Chilean. Once again, I thank the
President and all the members of the Council.

85. I hope that, at its next session, the General Assembly
will take up the challenge of a resolution which is now
three years old and has still not been implemented. Later
Chile, aware of its slight weight ,in international affairs, WBS
willing to serve on the Council for Namibia, together with
African and Asian countries, Yugoslavia and Turkey. That
is why-let this be the justification-Chile
asked to participate in the debate today. The reason why it did not do SO
earlier was that it wished to hear the voice of Africa, Asia
and Latin America, which it has heard at the last two
meetings.

82. Why has the Permanent Representative of Chile asked
to participate in the debate today, when a large number of
African, Asian and Latin American representatives have
already done so? At last week’s meeting, we heard the clear
statements of Ambassador Turbay Ayala of Colombia, who
was President of the United Nations Council for Namibia
during July. We also heard the lucid statement of the
Ambassador of Zambia, a country to which we are bound
by very close friendship. Today, we have heard the
representative of Algeria who made ‘a short but very
important statement, and the representatives of Pakistan,
Nepal and, a few minutes ago, of India; the latter made a
special point of saying that he was speaking as the

86. It also wished, out of elementary respect and friendship, to hear first the representative of India, Ambassador
Sen, who is President of the Council for Namibia for this
month.
87. I am we that at the coming meetings we shall hear
the voice of the countries of Western and Eastern Europe.
8

caky of them participated in the drafting of the General
Assembly resolution and many of them-almost all the
Council members, with two abstentions-voted in favour of
resolution 264 (1969) last March, four months ago.

grief and sorrow-contributed
to this moral progress,
because of the existence there of masters and slaves,
privileged and those who not only have no privileges but are
subjected to punishment. For what are they punished? For
their race, for their skin, for their origin?

88, Allow me to say here once again with the greatest
modesty, that, just as the forthcoming General Assembly
will in a few weeks have before it resolution 2145 (XXI) for
the third time, so this Council and its members-the
representatives of Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, the United Kingdom, the
Soviet Union, the United States of America, Zambia,
Algeria, China and Colombia-are
now confronted by
resolution 264 (1969). That resolution is before you and, in
the opinion of my delegation, it is the Security Council and
especially its permanent members who must, in the full
sense of the word, face up to resolution 264 (1969), which
was adopted in this very room barely four months ago.

93. Injustice has always existed in the world but no
attempt has been made to vindicate it by philosophy. What
is surprising and shocking is that in South Africa this
discrimination is being vindicated by philosophy and even
in the case of some poor wretches by religious ideas. Is God
white, perchance? There are some small local churches
which are trying to prove that He is, No words can express
our view of those who are making these efforts-only
profound contempt.
94. In conclusion, I wish to repeat two points I made
earlier: the General Assembly is face to face with resolution
2145 (XXI) of 1966 and the Security Council, a sovereign
and independent body, is face to face with resolution
264 (1969). That is the challenge before the Security
Council, as it will be the challenge which the Members.of
the General Assembly will have to face in another five. or
six weeks. Shall we meet it or shall we fail to meet it?
There are these two alternatives; but if we fail to rise to the
challenge, we shall have been instrumental in making the
men and women of the world postpone, for who knows
how long, the one thing for which all of us in this world,
whatever our religious or philosophical beliefs, are striving:
to ensure that all men and women in the world have their
share of happiness.

89. I do not wish to speak at great length but the question
with which we are dealing is so important and my country
attaches so much significance to the problems of human
dignity that I should like to make some remarks, which will
be as brief as possible. Today an example of brevity was
given to me by all the members of the Council who spoke
in the discussion and by the representative of India.
9b. Now, Mr. President, what are we dealing with? We are
dealing with South Africa, which is a great country, which
is highly advanced in the realms of industry, agriculture and
mining, remarkably advanced in transport&ion and communications, and amazingly advanced’ also in the field of
power production. It is a country which has solved health
problems in certain sectors, performing what some term
virtual miracles; it has solved the problem of education in
some sectors, providing a very high standard of education
for a certain proportion of the bopulation; it has done the
same in so far as housing is concerned, It is an extraordinary country whose industrial and material develop
ment make it worthy of the last third of the twentieth
century, Yet, by some inexplibable paradox, in the matter
of moral development-to
us& a simple term-that same
country does not belong to the third part of the twentieth
century,

95. Having listened to the representative of India, I should
like to take up two concepts expressed in his statement.
One is that political will is indispensable if the situation is
to change. This is a concept which the countries of the
Third World have propounded many times but it is no less
valid for being repeated. Only political will is capable of
making the world’s great decisions. Technical reports,
which are supplementary, cannot do that, They may be
very useful but it is political will which determines what
position is to be taken regarding Namibia.
96. The representative of India also mentioned youth. We
know what youth is. In my country, in the countries of the
Third World, it constitutes over half the population. Youth,
which is the ‘concern of many technical reports of
UNESCO, the Commission for Social Development and the
General Assembly and which, at least in the world of the
poorer peoples, makes up over half the population, also
expects from the mature men of the United Nations a
justification for its own existence.

91. We should perhaps go back to the history of the
Patricians and the plebeians. There were patricians-and it
was very pleasant to be one; it was not pleasant to be a
plebeian. There were masters and slaves in this country not
many years ago; and it was better to be a master than a
slave. There were once lords and serfi; and it was better to
be a lord than a serf. There were also those who are called
caballeros in Spanish, because they rode on horseback,
while those who travelled only on fpot were called infuntes;
and it was better to be a cabalZero than an infante.

97. Therefore, the challenge does not only concern resolution 2145 (XXI) and resolution 264 (1969). It is a challenge from the world’s youth who are watching us from
beyond these doors and whom we are going to invite next
year to celebrate the first twenty-five years of the United
Nations. And what are we going to invite them for? To see
that we have sanctioned apartheid? Or are we going to
invite them to see the new world, the world of this ,third
part of the twentieth century, the world of outer space, of
the sea-bed and, basically, of this earth which is our own?

92. But what has been the outcome of’all the efforts of
mankind in these last twenty-five years since the Second
World War? It has been this: together with amazing
material progress, w&h has enabled representatives of the
United States to reach the mobn as citiiens of the world,
we have also achieved genuine moral progress. Yet that
great country, South Africa, has not-and we say this with
9

98. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I thank
the representative of ChiIe. I particularly wish to thank him
for his kind words about our-two countries and I can only
say, in exercise of the right of concurrence, that I am in
complete agreement with him about the important decision
which I had to make at a certain point in my Iife.

to the sponsors of the document circulated under the
svmbol S/9372.
100. 1 have no more speakers on my list. If no other
representative wishes to speak at this stage, I propose to
adjourn the meeting. Following informal consultations with
the members of the Council, it has been agreed that the
next meeting will take place on Wednesday, 6 August, at
3 p.m.

99. I wish to inform the members of the Council that just
a few minutes ago I received a communication from the
representative of&n, who wishes his country to be added

The meeting rose at 5.5 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50

(or

equivalentin other

currenciesl

82 150-November

1972-2,050
