asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6881

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6881st meeting
Friday, 7 December 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Sun Xiaobo
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-63345 (E)

*1263345*

S/PV.6881

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council in order of the year of adoption of
the related resolutions: Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri, Chair
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea;
Mr. Peter Wittig, Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), and Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Arms Conflict; Mr. Néstor Osorio, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, and Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006); Mr. José Filipe Moraes Cabral, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions; and Mr. Baso Sangqu,
Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Puri.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): The Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea is the oldest Sanctions
Committee among the Council’s subsidiary bodies and
has completed two decades of existence. The Committee
is unique in that it is mandated to cover two countries
in the Horn of Africa, namely, Somalia and Eritrea.
Resolution 751 (1992), imposed an arms embargo on
Somalia and established a Sanctions Committee to
oversee its implementation.
The mandate of the Committee has since been
expanded to include new provisions for arms embargoes,
assets freezes and travel bans through resolution

2

1844 (2008). In 2010, the Committee was mandated
by resolution 1916 (2010) to oversee the provisions
connected with the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to Somalia. Resolution 2036 (2012) also imposed a ban
on exports of charcoal and mandated the Committee to
monitor its implementation.
With respect to Eritrea, the Committee is mandated
to oversee the implementation of targeted measures
imposed by resolution 1907 (2009). The mandate was
expanded to include new provisions under resolution
2023 (2011). Given that background, the work of the
Committee is complex in terms of mandate and political
sensitivity.
During my two years as Chairman, the Sanctions
Committee pursued its mandate with the full
cooperation of Council member. The Committee,
however, continues to face significant challenges in
overseeing the sanctions regimes concerning both
Somalia and Eritrea. These include issues related to
technical violations of the arms embargo, objections
by humanitarian partners to the reporting requirement,
questions about the working of the Monitoring Group,
and in some cases non-cooperation by Member States
with the Monitoring Group.
In view of these issues, I made a sincere effort
to promote transparency and equity in Committee’s
decision-making. I convened regular meetings with
the Special Representative for Somalia, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and
representatives of the World Food Programme and
UNICEF. I also encouraged Somalia, Eritrea and
interested States members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to participate in Committee
meetings, to interact with the members and to express
their views over the monitoring of the sanctions regime.
My effort was always towards building consensus with
utmost transparency.
Both in 2011 and this year, the Sanctions Committee
invited Somalia and Eritrea to interact with the
Committee immediately after the submission of the final
reports of the Monitoring Group. Also, I encouraged free
and frank discussions in the Committee over the reports
and recommendations of the Monitoring Group. I held
several meetings with the Member States, including the
Permanent Representatives of Somalia and Eritrea. In
these meetings, I emphasized the implementation of the
sanctions regimes and cooperation with the Sanctions
Committee.

12-63345

S/PV.6881

During the past two years, the Committee met
18 times in informal consultations. It approved
25 requests for exemptions to the arms embargo,
pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 1356 (2001),
and 26 requests for exemptions to the arms embargo
pursuant to paragraph 11 (b) of resolution 1772 (2007).
It approved two travel ban exemptions to the same
person in 2012. I must also state here that the work of the
Committee has increased exponentially in comparison
to that of the two years prior to my chairmanship.
During the course of the past two years, there has
been remarkable progress in the process of stabilization
of political, security and humanitarian situations in
Somalia. This has created a historic opportunity that
must be seized for the full restoration of peace, security
and stability in Somalia. In addition, the overall
political and security situation in the Horn of Africa
continues to improve, with increasing cooperation and
reconciliation among Member States.
In this context, the next Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on Somalia and Eritrea will need to continue
the Committee’s engagement with not only Somalia
and Eritrea but also other States in the region. In the
short term, the Committee will also have to take a view
on the issue of the large quantity of charcoal found
in Kismayo and surrounding areas. I am convening a
meeting of the Sanctions Committee shortly to discuss
the issue with the Monitoring Group.
It is my considered view that sanctions should be a
measure of last resort by the Security Council and must
fully comply with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter. Sanctions regimes of the Security Council
must be not an end in themselves, but instruments for
the promotion and maintenance of peace and security
in the region. In their implementation, the sanctions
regimes must ensure that they have the intended impact
and do not exacerbate the suffering of the population.
As such, it is necessary to keep these regimes under
constant review and adjust the measures to suit the
objective and also keep pace with the changing situation
on the ground in the countries concerned.
In view of the developments in Somalia during the
past year, I think that time has come for this Council
to review the sanctions regimes in the Horn of Africa.
This should be done taking into consideration the views
expressed by the States of the regiona, as well as the
African Union.

12-63345

In conclusion, on my personal behalf and also
on behalf my delegation, I would like express our
sincere appreciation to all colleagues in the Security
Council for reposing their faith in my chairmanship
of the Somalia-Eritrea Sanctions Committee for past
two years. I would also like to thank all members of
the Committee, their experts and the Secretariat for
their valuable support, especially the Secretary of the
Committee and his team.
The President: I thank Mr. Puri for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wittig.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Over the past two years,
Germany has had the honour to chair the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. Advancing the work
of these bodies has been one of Germany’s priorities
during its membership of the Council. Both the fight
against terrorism and the protection of human rights
are essential elements of our foreign policy. I therefore
appreciate the opportunity to share some personal
observations on this with the Security Council.
With regard to the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, I would like to point out three of the challenges
we have had to tackle. First, we had to make the
regime more responsive to the changing nature of the
terrorist threat. Secondly, we have had to make sure
that the sanctions regime continues to serve its political
purpose. Thirdly, we have had to ensure continued
universal respect for the sanctions regime.
Those challenges could be met only with a
determined and united effort of Council members. Our
task was to forge a consensus in the Committee as a
basis for the needed reforms. These efforts culminated
in June 2011 when the Council adopted resolutions 1988
(2011) and 1989 (2011), establishing new landmarks
within the United Nations sanctions policy.
Resolution 1988 (2011) separated the Taliban
sanctions regime from the former Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime. This step rendered the instrument of
sanctions more nimble and more responsive, which is
of significant importance to the political process in
Afghanistan. It is an encouraging development that
Afghanistan is seeking an even stronger role in the
Committee’s work and has presented proposals for
delisting reconciled individuals.
3

S/PV.6881

Resolution 1989 (2011) substantially strengthened
the role of the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. This introduced a much-needed element of due
process that is crucial to ensure universal respect of the
sanctions regime.
It is time to consolidate the progress made and
to build further on it. Germany, together with our
partners in the group of like-minded States on targeted
sanctions, has made concrete suggestions to improve
due process in the sanctions regimes. In particular,
we are of the view that the Council should consider
widening the mandate of the Ombudsperson to other
sanctions regimes. We are convinced that all Council
members must have an interest in the universal respect
of the Council’s political instruments, especially the
sanctions regimes. We are therefore looking forward to
the discussion of our suggestions in the Council.
I now turn to the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Allow me to start with a couple
of words on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, because it is on our minds in terms of
topical developments. Just last month, more children
were killed due to the fighting in Eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo than in the whole year before.
In 2012, the number of children killed or maimed by
parties to the conflict almost tripled as compared to the
previous four years. Some estimate that up to 200,000
children suffer in this conflict. The Mouvement du
23 mars (M23) is estimated to have forcibly recruited
at least 300 children as child soldiers. Other armed
groups increased recruitment of children as well. There
are gruesome testimonies from children confirming
that M23 commanders have killed child soldiers within
their ranks who tried to escape.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a grim reminder that civilians — especially
women and children — continue to bear the brunt
of war and conflict. Their suffering continues to
oblige the international community. The Security
Council commands unique powers — and has unique
responsibilities — to advance the protection of children
in conflicts. Germany is convinced that the Council
must make use of those powers for the sake of the
children affected and for the sake of international
peace and security. In that spirit, my delegation has
focused on three tasks within the Working Group. First,
we have worked hard to significantly reduce the time
gap between the reports of the Secretary-General on
a given situation and the Working Group’s respective

4

conclusions and recommendations. We appreciate the
cooperation of Council members in this time-consuming
and labour-intensive endeavour.
Secondly, we have set out to strengthen the
existing protection mechanism. We are pleased that the
Security Council adopted resolution 1998 (2011) under
Germany’s presidency in July 2011. The resolution
added a new trigger to guarantee that armed groups
that attack schools and hospitals, and persons related
to them, are listed by the Secretary-General in his
annual report. We also pleased with the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2068 (2012) in September, again
during our presidency, focusing on how to put more
pressure on persistent perpetrators and achieve better
accountability. Furthermore, the Secretary-General
now has an open-ended mandate to present annual
reports to the Council. Let me stress that his reports
and the listings therein are very valuable and effective
tools for protecting children. They are part and parcel
of the international legal architecture for protecting
children in war.
Thirdly, we have ensured that the protection of
children enjoys high priority in all peacekeeping
mandates and sanctions committees. Most of the
relevant sanctions regimes now contain provisions
to hold those who violate children’s rights in armed
conflict accountable.
The Security Council can be proud of the innovative
and successful mechanisms for protecting children
in armed conflict. However, we call on members to
remain vigilant and to prevent those mechanisms
from being weakened. In fact, members should strive
for further improvement. We firmly believe that the
Council should follow up swiftly on resolution 2068
(2012) and discuss what can be done to further advance
the protection of children and in particular to hold
persistent perpetrators accountable.
From our point of view, there are some practical
steps that the Working Group could already be taking.
It should make better use of its tool kit by issuing
press statements on situations of concern that occur
outside the reporting cycle. So far, there has been some
resistance to using that tool. I recommend discussing
the issue again, since the Working Group must be able
to react immediately to massive violations and abuses
of children’s rights in armed conflict. The informal
so-called horizontal note by which UNICEF informs
the Working Group about current situations on the
ground is an ideal source of information in that regard.
12-63345

S/PV.6881

The Working Group should continue to hear
briefings by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, such as those we have heard on Côte d’Ivoire,
Syria, Libya, Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Such briefings are not only a valuable
source of information, but also send strong signals of
Council members’ commitment. The Working Group
should also explore options for increasing the number
of country visits. We successfully conducted a highly
useful visit to Afghanistan in 2011 that was also part
of the preparation for resolution 1988 (2011). We are
certain that such visits can substantially complement
the work of United Nations staff on the ground.
In closing, let me take this opportunity to express
my appreciation for the tremendous work being done
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and her Office, as well as by our peacekeeping missions
and UNICEF. I commend them for their commitment.
They are the true cornerstones of the United Nations
mechanism for protecting children in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Wittig
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moraes Cabral.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Security Council for the opportunity to share my views
and assessments on the work carried out by the three
subsidiary bodies that I have had the honour to chair in
the course of my country’s membership of the Council,
and for bearing with me. Regarding the sanctions
regimes in general, I join previous speakers in pointing
out that sanctions are obviously not an end in themselves
and are there to support a political objective. They
should not exacerbate people’s suffering and should be
regularly reviewed. We also support the extension of the
Ombudsperson’s mandate to all the sanctions regimes.
I will start by addressing the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) during
the past two years. As Chair, I have always worked on
the basis of continuing and inclusive engagement with
all members in an effort to build consensus on fulfilling
the Committee’s mandate. To strive for consensus is
not always an easy task; however, reaching such a level
of agreement is actually the only way to make solid
progress in a sanctions committee context. That is why
we have focused very much on compromise and settling
potential differences when addressing the challenges
that have come our way.

12-63345

Secondly, although it has had its complexities and
difficulties, the 1718 Committee has shown that in
general it has had the capacity to effectively address
the situations faced during our tenure. Early this year,
as mandated by the Council, the Committee agreed on
new designations and updated the lists of individuals,
entities and items related to the nuclear and missile
programmes of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The annual work plan was also updated, giving
the Committee a comprehensive and clear approach
based on compliance, investigation, outreach, dialogue,
assistance and cooperation. It is against that background
that I want to commend the excellent work and valuable
assistance that the 1718 Committee consistently got
from the Panel of Experts.
Also very significantly, I think that the Committee
has developed a certain sense of convergence that has
allowed us to agree on some important principles:
first, the general understanding that implementation
assistance notices represent an important and valuable
tool in providing guidance to Member States on a
number of technical and practical issues; secondly,
the importance of regularly reviewing the concrete
parameters of the sanctions regime; and thirdly, the
importance of taking advantage of existing synergies,
informally and in a very pragmatic way, between
various committees and panels of experts.
Lastly, sustained effort within the Committee to
improve the implementation of sanctions is always a
work in progress, and I very much hope that the next
Committee Chair will continue to benefit from the
cooperation and constructive support I have received
during these past two years in helping to implement the
important mandate conferred by the Council.
Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, which I have
chaired since its establishment in February, the first
observation I would like to make is that its sanctions
regime seems likely to have been the most rapidly
evolving such United Nations regime of recent years. It
has certainly been characterized by the need to adjust
itself with efficacy to rapid changes in the political
context in Libya, and in consequence to respond to a
very significant workload, related to a diverse set of
areas prompted by the evolving situation on the ground.
Just as an illustration, I would like to point out that
within a period of 21 months the Committee received
362 official communications and issued 568 letters or
notes and a significant number of addenda, totalling
5

S/PV.6881

more than 1,500 official communications. Within
the same period, the Council adopted six resolutions
on the matter, resulting in various modifications and
adaptations of the sanctions regime that the Committee
has had to address.
My second observation is that while the core
objective of the sanctions was initially to prevent further
attacks on the civilian population in Libya and ensure
that the former regime leaders had no access to funds
outside Libya, the measures were later modified to
address the changing situation on the ground, in support
of the Libyan-led transition and rebuilding process, as
well as regional security. In that transition process the
Committee had an important role to play by constantly
adjusting to the new challenges and responding to the
needs, in line with the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council.
On the asset freeze in particular, the Committee
played a specific role in responding promptly to those
needs and devising ways to help funds become quickly
and readily available to the Libyan people. I would like
to make two observations, if I may, prompted by our
experience, that may serve as useful guidance for the
future. First, resolutions establishing sanctions regimes
cannot disregard their humanitarian impact and should
thus consider the early inclusion of humanitarian
exemptions to help populations affected by the freezing
of national assets and funds.
Secondly, those resolutions should clearly
determine whether or not subsidiaries of listed entities
are subject to the sanctions. I believe that those early
clarifications would be very useful for a more efficient
implementation of an assets freeze, while at the
same time helping to prevent unintended impact on
populations and third States more affected.
As of today, the assets freeze applies only to
two remaining listed entities: the Libyan Investment
Authority and the Libyan Africa Investment Portfolio.
It is my understanding that as soon as the Libyan
authorities deem it appropriate, the Council or the
Committee will consider the delisting to ensure that the
correspondent assets are made available to and for the
benefit of the people of Libya.
In relation to the arms embargo and the proliferation
of Libyan arms and related materiel in the region, we must
recognize that they continue to raise serious challenges
for the Committee. The continued cooperation of States
with the Committee, with the invaluable assistance of

6

its Panel of Experts, is fundamental to overcome those
challenges. In that regard, it is crucial to continue and
strengthen the good practice that has been followed
of putting together the efforts and contributions from
different United Nations bodies — the Panel of Experts,
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the International Civil Aviation Organization and
the Office for Disarmament Affairs — in order to
consistently assess and address the challenges posed
by the proliferation of arms and military materiel from
Libya to the region.
Finally, the complexity of this sanctions regime
and the rapid change of its normative framework
required an important effort of assistance to United
Nations delegations. We tried our best to provide
information and possible guidance to our colleagues
in many delegations who approached us with questions
concerning the implementation of the regime. We view
that as part of transparency, for which we advocate
strongly. But we also view that as very useful to the
overall efficacy of the sanctions regimes. Naturally, I
wish also to highlight the role of the secretariat of the
Subsidiary Organs Branch, and to express my gratitude
for its invaluable assistance, as well as that of Panel of
Experts: they have been truly indispensable. Last but not
least, I want to thank all members of the Committee for
their constructive commitment and spirit of cooperation
and creativity, which were fundamental in helping the
Committee address the number and complexity of
submissions. Without it, it would have been impossible
to carry out such a complex and important task.
Let me turn now to the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
which I have had the honour and pleasure to Chair
since January. To chair a working group, more than
helping build consensus, is to try to develop an agenda
by seeking to lead the efforts of its members towards
achieving major goals shared in general within the
working group.
The case of the Working Group on working
methods is a special one, where Council members
can share their views on ways to improve the Council
working methods and have the opportunity to make a
difference in the way the Council works in the future. It
is never easy to get away from routine, which is always
more comfortable than change; so it is a difficult
task to generate interest in new measures, to discuss
their usefulness and practicability, and to adopt them.

12-63345

S/PV.6881

Ultimately, more difficult is to persuade all of the need
to change. I must say that the experience I have had
was very positive. I counted on the active contribution
of all members in the many discussions we held during
the last year, at a pace of one, sometimes two, meetings
per month.
To improve the working methods, we must start
by improving the way the Council does its internal
work. A significant part of the Council’s work is done
in consultations. While there has been an effort by the
Council to meet more often in public, consultations are
indeed useful to help the Council prepare its decisions.
However, questions of transparency and inclusiveness
remain important within the Council for Council
members. We worked on that during the first part of
the year.
Following consultations organized by the Council
in March, during the United Kingdom presidency, a
discussion was held on further measures to improve
interactivity, better planning of work and better use of
conference resources. Those same aspects were further
developed in the Working Group and later condensed
in a note by the President in June (S/2012/402). The
underlying idea is to stress the informal aspects of
consultations, better organization of resources to allow
more space for subsidiary bodies to meet, more use
of video conferences to avoid the costly presence of
briefers, and better planning of work by readjusting
mandates and reporting cycles with a view to even up
the workload throughout the year, leaving more time
for the Council to prepare decisions and for prevention
activities.
Another aspect relevant to the internal work is
the practice related to the work of penholders and the
process of appointing Chairs of subsidiary bodies. The
Working Group is now concluding the consideration of
this question, through a draft note that deals with issues
of enhanced participation, inclusiveness and exchange
of information among Council members. These are
crucial elements to enhance the Council’s efficiency
and, ultimately, help promote the necessary consensus
building within the Council. I hope, indeed I trust, that
with the support and flexibility of all members in the
Working Group, to conclude the work very soon.
On the external aspects of Security Council work,
the Working Group is considering further measures to
improve transparency and interaction with the wider
membership. A draft note is being discussed now
on ways to improve open debates: by enhancing the
12-63345

interactivity, by ensuring a better follow up of open
debates and by improving their efficacy. We are also
considering measures to improve the annual report:
by reinforcing aspects related to the interaction with
non-Council members and providing more substantive
information in the report and in its presentation to the
General Assembly. Monthly assessments by Council
presidencies can be particularly useful instruments
to elucidate on the work done. Also very useful in
that regard are informal briefings to the general
membership by Council Presidents once they finish
their presidencies, which could be done as a matter of
practice, adding to the briefing that is already done at
the start of each presidency.
These are all aspects that have been discussed in
the Working Group this year and are being considered
through a draft note we expect to be adopted in the
coming days.
I am conscious that this is a work in progress. The
Council has done much recently on this matter, as a
result of efforts by Council members and especially
of the previous Chairs of this Working Group, whom
I salute, which resulted on the adoption of presidential
note 507 (S/2010/507). But we all know that there is
always room for improvement, and note 507 is the point
of departure not an end in itself.
I am confident that the next Chair who will carry
on from here will bring renewed energy and ideas to
further the work. I am sure that he or she will have the
full support and encouragement that I surely benefited
from.
Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to the
members of the Security Council for their support and
active contributions to the work of the Committees and
Working Group I had the honour to chair. I also thank
the experts and the Secretariat for their cooperation and
diligence, as well as the interpreters for their valuable
assistance and constant patience.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Moraes
Cabral for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having convened
this meeting, which provides a good opportunity for
the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the Council to
take stock of their work over the past two years. In my
case, this means the Committee established pursuant

7

S/PV.6881

to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran, whose
work I have had the privilege to steer as Chair since
1 January 2011.
First of all, with regard to the 1591 Committee, after
two years of work, I can affirm that the implementation
of measures by the Council is a useful instrument
for advancing a political solution for the situation in
Darfur, but there is still a long way to go to meet its
full potential. As Chair of the Committee, I sought to
foment consensus on the interpretation of the measures,
to offer all support possible to the Group of Experts in
supporting that work, and to establish open dialogue
with the various actors involved. During the period in
question, the Committee held 12 informal consultations;
maintained close communication with the United
Nations-African Union Joint Special Representative
for Darfur; responded to requests for information from
Member States with regard to the scope of sanctions;
and adopted an agreement with INTERPOL on
INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special
Notices, which entered into force on 20 November. That
agreement will strengthen the application of measures
by Member States.
The principle difficulty we have faced in the past
two years was guaranteeing the access of the Panel
of Experts to the Sudan. A failure to issue visas and
permits to enter Darfur in a timely manner was a
recurrent problem, which both the Committee and the
Security Council worked to resolve. Although there
were improvements over the last year, unacceptable
obstacles have recently begun to reappear. The
Permanent Representative of the Sudan was attentive
to our requests and conveyed the concerns and requests
that I presented on behalf of the Committee to the
authorities of his country.
I believe that it would be advisable to further the
direct dialogue between the Committee and the Sudanese
authorities in order to improve the mutual perception
of the impact that the sanctions regime could have on
the peace process in Darfur and to exchange opinions
on the remaining concerns with regard to the measures
imposed by the Security Council. The visit that the
Committee intends to make to Khartoum and Darfur, to
which the Sudanese Government has assented, will be
an excellent opportunity to expand the communication
channels, improve the understanding of the sanctions
and move towards their full implementation.

8

Despite the difficult environment in which it must
work, the Group of Experts has been noteworthy as a
reliable source of information for the Committee in
monitoring the implementation of sanctions. In order
for it to do its job, there must be harmonious work,
cooperation and singleness of purpose among its
members, as well as high levels of quality with regard
to the information it supplies. To that end, I appeal to
Member States, in compliance with their responsibilities,
to cooperate with the Group of Experts, to provide it
with timely, accurate and truthful information, and to
answer its requests and facilitate its visits.
I must highlight the cooperation of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) with the work of the Group. I believe that it
must be permanently maintained at every level.
The effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions requires the commitment and full
cooperation of all Member States. The reports on the
implementation of sanctions are vital for the work of
the Committee and its Group of Experts. To date, only
29 national reports have been received. I therefore
invite Members of the Organization to provide available
information on the implementation of the relevant
Council resolutions.
With regard to new listings, I believe that progress
must be made in considering proposals involving
the individuals and entities falling under the criteria
established in Security Council resolutions, particularly
with regard to those who impede the peace process and
those involved in attacks on UNAMID staff.
Lastly, I would urge a greater degree of discussion
with the private sector in order to improve the
understanding of sanctions by the businesses at work
in the Sudan.
Allow me, Mr. President, to refer now to the
activities carried out by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) under my
leadership. With the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010),
on 9 June 2010, a decisive step was taken towards the
full implementation of measures to ensure that Iran’s
nuclear programme is destined exclusively for peaceful
ends. The resolution established the Group of Experts
so that, under the guidance of the Committee, but
acting independently, it would assist it in complying
with its mandate. During my two years as Chair, the
practice of holding regular meetings was established,
which provided the possibility of exchanges of view

12-63345

S/PV.6881

with the active participation of the Group of Experts.
Those meetings were intended to effectively achieve
the proper implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Committee met eight times.
In order to optimize its work, in July 2011 the
Committee thoroughly revised the guidelines for
carrying out its work. This process was aimed at
redefining its working methods to make them more
effective and establishing clearer and more accurate
procedures. Thanks to the judicious review of its
guidelines, the Committee has improved its level
of dialogue with Member States, inter alia, by
means of the timely receipt of notices on reports of
sanctions violations and matters related to requests for
exemptions. In fulfilling my duties, I submitted eight
quarterly reports in public meetings giving an account
of the developments in the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions pertaining to the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
In July, under the Colombian presidency of the
Security Council and with the support of the Group of
Experts and the Secretariat, a public meeting was held
on the work of the Committee and its Group of Experts.
That provided an good opportunity to interact with
non-Security Council members and to learn first hand
of their opinions on the sanctions committees, the work
the committees do and their effectiveness with regard
to compliance with the respective mandates. I believe
that this practice should be kept up, as it contributes
to the outreach and transparency that Member States
want in the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies.
During the 2011-2012 biennium, the Committee, with
the valuable support of the Secretariat, modernized and
updated its web page to make it more user friendly.
Allow me, Sir, to refer now to the close cooperation
that has prevailed between the Committee and its
Group of Experts over the past two years. There
is no doubt that we have benefitted enormously
from the experience of the Group with regard to the
implementation of sanctions. If the Committee is to
do its work properly, it is vital that this exchange be
maintained and strengthened. The working methods
adopted by the Group have made it possible to ensure
the Group’s independence in investigating reported
incidents, to provide information on its findings and
to make recommendations aimed at making Member
States aware of their obligations with regard to the
implementation of Security Council resolutions.

12-63345

I must say that, both for my country and for me
personally, it was a great pleasure and honour to
have presided over those two Committees that, albeit
different, made it possible for us to understand that,
without the full and firm support of Member States,
those subsidiary bodies would be unable effectively to
carry out their work. We believe that it is imperative
to intensify dialogue and cooperation with all Member
States in order to bolster their ability to effectively
implement the measures adopted by the Council.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Committees for their cooperation, active
participation, valuable contributions and enriching
discussions. I also wish to extend thanks to the Group of
Experts for the work they have done in contributing to
compliance with the mandates of the two Committees.
Lastly, I would like to sincerely thank the Secretariat
team for its excellent work and exceptional support to
me in carrying out my work.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Osorio
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sangqu.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa has had
the honour and privilege to serve as the Chair of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa for the past two years. The Group
was created pursuant to statement S/PRST/2002/2 by
the President of the Security Council, in which the
Council recognized the need for adequate measures to
prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa. Consequently,
the Working Group has over the past two years
considered thematic issues that directly concern the
work of the Council in identifying proposals, which
may be useful to the Council’s work in Africa. As such,
my statement will focus on the work that has been done
since we assumed the role of Chair of the Working
Group in 2011.
On 31 March 2011, the Working Group held
a meeting that examined ways of enhancing the
Group’s effectiveness. The meeting looked at how the
Working Group could improve its monitoring of the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the presidential statement and how fast the Council
could actualize and concretize their recommendations,
as well the frequency of their reporting to the Security
Council. Several recommendations on the working
methods of the Working Group emanated from this
meeting, the most notable being that the Council could

9

S/PV.6881

task the Working Group with tracking and monitoring
the implementation of the Council’s resolutions and
other outcomes concerning peacebuilding, conflict
prevention and resolution mediation in Africa and with
submitting recommendations to the Council.
On 3 May 2011, the Working Group held an
interactive dialogue between the members of the
Working Group and the permanent representatives of
the African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council
members based in New York. That discussion focused
on cooperation between the two Councils and was in
preparation for the annual discussions between the
Councils, which were held in Addis Ababa later in May.
The Working Group also held a seminar on
early warning tools and indicators to assess the
risk of election-related violence in Africa. The
meeting reviewed the early warning tools available
for identifying and preventing election-based and
election-related violence and how those tools could
be used by the international community before,
during and after elections. On 28 September 2011, the
Working Group held another seminar that focused on
the root causes of conflict on Africa and looked at new
and emerging challenges to peace and security. The
meeting, inter alia, discussed the Secretary-General’s
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(see S/2011/476) as well as the World Bank report on
conflict, security and development in 2011.
The Working Group also held a seminar on recent
lessons learned in African conflict prevention and
resolution, coordinating responses and supporting
local capacities. The meeting discussed how the thrust
of preventive work could shift from reactive external
interventions, with a limited and superficial impact,
to internally driven initiatives on developing local
and national prevention capacities. On preventative
diplomacy, the discussions focused on success stories,
particularly the important role played by the United
Nations, the AU and other regional organizations.
On 8 June, the Working Group held a meeting on
enhancing African Union-United Nations cooperation.
The seminar discussed practical ways in which
the commitments made by the Security Council in
resolution 2033 (2012) could be implemented and how
the AU and the United Nations could further cooperate
in the prevention of conflict in Africa.

10

The Working Group also held a meeting on the
promotion of and respect for the rule of law and justice
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts in Africa.
That meeting discussed the relationship between the
rule of law and conflict prevention, particularly in
the context of the Security Council. Furthermore, the
discussions allowed for an exchange of views on the
application of the rule of law. Practical insights were
made on the challenges regarding implementation of
the rule of law in Africa and how it applies to the efforts
of the international community to resolve conflict, with
a focus on Security Council efforts.
Unfortunately, due to Hurricane Sandy, we
cancelled the meeting entitled “The promotion of
the African Union Charter on democracy, elections
and governance”, which was scheduled to take place
on 30 October. Likewise, we were unable to hold the
meeting on reflecting on conflicts in Africa, which
aimed to look at understanding the causes and drivers
towards promoting and providing sustainable solutions
to African conflicts.
During South Africa’s tenure as Chair of the Working
Group, we have placed significant emphasis on making
the meetings open to non-members of the Security
Council and civil society organizations, especially
those active on the ground. We have encouraged open
and frank discussions in order to cultivate ideas that
would positively contribute to enhancing the work of
the Security Council, especially since its agenda is
particularly focused on African issues. We would like
to recommend that the Working Group continues to
have more open meetings of that nature.
During our tenure, we utilized diverse expertise
from the academia, the Secretariat and other
practitioners. That has greatly enriched discussions
by providing different expertise and experiences. We
therefore encourage the continuation of that practice.
Furthermore, we would propose that topics are
continually revisited in order to examine in depth the
challenges that continue to persist in Africa and to try
and find mitigating mechanisms through continuous
dialogue.
In addition, it will be recalled that, in
resolution 2033 (2012), the Council decided to follow
up on the communiqués of the annual consultative
meetings of the two Councils, including through its
Ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. The Working Group should

12-63345

S/PV.6881

continue with that important mandate, entrusted to it
by the Security Council.
Moving forward, the various meetings identified
very useful recommendations that could enhance the
work of the Security Council. Furthermore, we would
like to propose that the Council holds an interactive
discussion based on the recommendations to consider
those that could be incorporated into the work of the
Security Council.
I would like to express my personal gratitude and
that of the South African delegation to the members
of the Working Group for their collaboration and the
support extended to me in discharging of the Group’s
mandate. My appreciation also goes to the Organization
and all individuals who greatly enriched the discussions
of the Working Group.
Finally, I would like to thank the Secretariat for
assisting us in fulfilling our mandate, in particular James

12-63345

Sutterlin, Marylyn Alfred and, previously, Oseloka
Obaze, for their dedicated support to my delegation. I
wish my successor all the best in continuing with their
work done by the Working Group.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Sangqu
for his briefing.
On behalf of the Security Council, I take this
opportunity to express appreciation to the outgoing
Chairs of India, Germany, Portugal and South Africa
for their briefings. The Council appreciates their
presentations and the manner in which they have
carried out their work.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

11
