S/PV.7398

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7398th meeting

Wednesday, 4 March 2015, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Letter dated 23 February 2015 from the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1973 (2011) addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2015/128)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2015/144)

15-05832 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1505832*

S/PV.7398

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Letter dated 23 February 2015 from the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1973 (2011) addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/128)
Report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2015/144)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Bernardino
León, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting. On behalf of the
Council, I welcome Mr. León, who is joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Rome.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/144, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya. I also wish to draw the attention of
Council members to document S/2015/128, a letter dated
23 February 2015 from the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Bernardino León and by Ambassador
Hussein Haniff, Permanent Representative of Malaysia,
in his capacity as the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. León.
Mr. León: By now, the Council will have received
the Secretary-General’s special report on the strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Libya
(S/2015/113), as well as the Secretary-General’s report
on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya

2/8

04/03/2015

(S/2015/144), detailing the Mission’s work over the past
six months.
Two weeks ago, I briefed the Security Council
(see S/PV.7387) in the aftermath of the horrific
beheadings by Islamic State-affiliated elements of
21 men, including 20 Egyptian nationals. That was a
crime so heinous and vile, yet its perpetrators showed
no misgivings about presenting the world with images
of their brutal and base barbarity. On 20 February, two
days after my briefing to the Council, Libyans were
again reminded of the lengths to which terrorists and
extremists will go. A car bomb in Al-Qubba, the home
town of House of Representatives President Agila
Gwaider, left 44 people dead, according to official
figures released by the Government. That is the highest
number of fatalities recorded as a result of any single
act of terrorism in Libya. Even in the current climate
of political polarization and armed hostilities, the
nature and scale of that attack shocked all Libyans,
irrespective of political affiliations. Across political
divisions, condemnation was swift and unequivocal.
I have no doubt that the attack in Al-Qubba,
coming only days before a planned round of dialogue
talks, was a blatant attempt to derail any opportunity
of Libyans coming together to forge consensus on a
peaceful solution to the political crisis and the military
conflict that has gripped their country for much of the
past year. I also have no doubt that terrorist groups such
as Islamic State will stop at nothing in their bid to play
on existing political divisions and the sense of mutual
mistrust among the main political stakeholders in order
to consolidate their own presence and influence in
Libya.
The sense of fear and concern within Libya regarding
the threat of terrorism is very palpable. In meetings I
had over the past week, Libya’s counterparts expressed
grave concern about the danger that terrorism posed to
Libya’s security and stability, and about the very limited
capacities of the Libyan State to effectively confront
that challenge. It is crucial to create the right conditions
to address that threat. At the same time, we should be
ready to support Libyan efforts to tackle terrorism and
extremism. We should be careful not to underestimate
the sense of urgency and alarm underpinning that
request for international support on addressing the
threat of terrorism.
Earlier this week, I held a new round of
consultations with Libyan political leaders in Tobruk

15-05832

04/03/2015

The situation in Libya

and Tripoli. Both sides have since delivered a clear
and resounding message that terrorism will not be
allowed to prevail or hold hostage the dialogue process.
Following the conclusion of a seven-day mourning
period announced by the House of Representatives in
the aftermath of the latest terrorist attack, the House
formally voted to resume participation in the dialogue
talks. Tomorrow, dialogue teams representing the
major political stakeholders will convene in Morocco
to advance discussions with respect to proposals on the
three key agenda items.
The first item relates to the formation of a national
unity Government under whose umbrella Libyans can
adopt a unified approach to address the huge political,
security and economic challenges facing Libya. The
second will address security arrangements to pave
the way for a comprehensive ceasefire, the phased
withdrawal of all armed groups from towns and cities,
measures for weapons and arms control, and adequate
monitoring and implementation mechanisms. The third
is related to the completion of the constitution-drafting
process and the need for clear timelines in that regard.
To galvanize broader support for the ongoing talks,
UNSMIL will next week convene two other dialogue
meetings. The first meeting, in Algeria, will bring
together a range of prominent Libyan political leaders
and activists. The second meeting, in Brussels, will draw
together municipal representatives from across Libya to
further the implementation of the confidence-building
measures previously agreed in Geneva. Later on, we
will convene a meeting of tribal leaders, very probably
in Egypt.
While I am confident that there is sufficient
political will and determination on all sides to reach a
comprehensive political settlement, I cannot overstate
the challenges facing the process. Foremost among
those is the fluid security situation, as the warring
parties continue to engage in reciprocal attacks against
each other in different parts of the country. We have
repeatedly called on all parties, particularly on the
military front, to desist from taking any action that
would risk escalating tensions.
Yesterday’s and today’s attacks by both sides
on public infrastructure and facilities, including
airports, coming a day after the different parties
recommitted themselves to resume the dialogue talks,
is unacceptable, reckless and totally uncalled for. The
escalation calls into question the commitment of those
responsible behind those latest acts of aggression, and

S/PV.7398

is a stark reminder that more needs to be done on the
security front. I call on Libya’s political leadership to
take all the necessary measures to prevent any further
attacks, and to exercise its authority in line with its legal
and political responsibilities to ensure that all forces
operating under its command comply with the political
commitment it has made with respect to the dialogue.
Moreover, the systematic campaign of misinformation
that recently surfaced in various Libyan media outlets
regarding the dialogue and its outcomes is symptomatic
of the deep mistrust that continues to manifest itself on
the Libyan political landscape.Only a few days ago I
met with a sizeable number of members of the House
of Representatives to discuss the dialogue process and
dissipate doubts regarding its scope and transparency.
In that context, I would like to take this opportunity
to once again reiterate the assurances I have given
publicly and in private to all parties in Libya that this
is a Libyan-Libyan dialogue that is anchored in the
principle of mutual consensus among the parties. The
role of the United Nations has been to facilitate the
talks without any imposition, while maintaining the
utmost respect for Libyan ownership of the process.
In our efforts to ensure transparency of the process,
every participant will be required to consult with its
respective constituency before any final agreement is
formally endorsed.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, allow me to take
this opportunity to express my thanks and appreciation
to the Council for its unwavering support to the Libyan
political dialogue, as well as to all Member States and
other international partners that have been generous in
extending financial, logistical and other support to the
process.
Within just the span of a few weeks since the
first round of talks convened, on 15 January, Libya’s
political leaders have come a long way towards
injecting hope that an end to their country’s political
crisis and armed conflict is possible. The sense of
expectation and anticipation on the part of all segments
of the Libyan population is profound. While the onus
remains on Libya’s leaders to agree on a road map for
a resumption of the political process and an end to the
conflict, the support of the international community
will be critical to the successful implementation of a
political agreement, should the parties conclude one.
The ability of a Government of national unity
to govern effectively and deliver a notable change
in the lives of ordinary Libyans, however, will be

15-058323/8

S/PV.7398

The situation in Libya

largely dependent upon our collective ability, as the
international community, to rethink and articulate a
clear strategy for delivering technical assistance. The
limited progress made over the past three years towards
building capacities at all levels in the Libyan State
should serve as a stark warning of the huge challenges
ahead.
The worsening humanitarian situation in the
country, including in Warshafana, Benghazi and
Nafusa, calls for a stronger commitment on the part of
the international community to addressing the needs of
the people who have been victims of this conflict. In
Geneva, representatives of municipal and local councils
agreed on a set of confidence-building measures, and
we must step up our efforts to implement those and start
making a difference in the lives of the Libyan people.
The international community should also move quickly
to present a clearly articulated strategy in support of
the Libyan State and the efforts of the national unity
Government to combat the growing threat of terrorism.
I believe that will be key to allaying the growing
concerns across Libya about what is perceived as the
real and imminent danger that extremist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant pose to Libya’s
overall security and stability.
The overall situation on the ground is deteriorating
rapidly, and Libya can no longer afford to allow the
political crisis and armed conflict that have gripped the
country for much of the past year to continue to fester.
Unless Libya’s leaders act quickly and decisively, the
risks to their country’s national unity and territorial
integrity are real and imminent. As difficult as the past
few years may have been for their country, the Libyan
people have not given up on their hopes and aspirations
for a modern Libyan democratic State based on the rule
of law and respect for human rights. Tomorrow’s meeting
in Morocco is an important opportunity to honour the
sacrifices that they have made in their quest for a life
of dignity and respect and a country that safeguards
the interests of future generations. Difficult decisions
and compromises will be needed. But Libya’s leaders
must be assured that as they make those decisions, the
United Nations and the international community will
be their partners in the difficult journey ahead.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. León
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Haniff.

4/8

04/03/2015

Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of its Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. My report
covers the period from 18 December 2014 to 4 March
2015, during which time the members of the Committee
met once in informal consultations.
At the outset, I would like to touch briefly on
the final report (S/2015/128) of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) and most
recently extended by resolution 2144 (2014), which the
Committee received on 4 February. As the report is
now publicly available, I will confine my remarks to a
few highlights from it. The Panel concluded that weak
implementation of the arms embargo, high demand
for arms, and the amount of resources available to
the fighting parties to procure materiel indicated that
large-scale trafficking was likely to continue and had
the potential to contribute to a lasting conflict with no
clear militarily dominant party. The Panel also reported
on the diversion of military materiel, including
materiel exempted by the Committee and non-lethal
military materiel, to armed groups on both sides of the
political divide. It also highlighted the difficulties in
differentiating between authorized and illicit transfers
of arms and related materiel. The Panel further reported
on significant security challenges, particularly in
relation to terrorism, Libya’s neighbours and countries
in the Sahel, owing to arms proliferation. It concluded
that arms and related materiel originating from Libya
had also significantly reinforced the military capacity
of terrorist groups operating in those countries.
Concerning the travel ban, the Panel reported on
violations of the measure by two listed individuals.
With regard to the assets freeze, the Panel believes that
large amounts of assets are likely being held outside
Libya under false names and by front companies. It
also continued to identify Member States lacking the
capacity to implement the assets freeze, due to gaps
in domestic legislation and the relevant constitutional
framework, and cautioned that a number of fraudulent
attempts were being made to recover looted Libyan
assets. Concerning measures related to attempts to
illegally export crude oil from Libya, the Panel noted
that while exports of crude oil not under the control of
the Libyan Government had probably taken place, no
requests for designation of the transporting vessels had
been made by the Government. It further found that in

15-05832

04/03/2015

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7398

addition to crude oil, its derivatives and other natural
resources were also subject to illegal export.

the Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations.

The Committee discussed the report and
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in informal
consultations on 20 February. The report was generally
well received and lauded for its detailed information.
The main points that emerged from the discussion were
concern about the reported arms-embargo violations and
the Panel’s lack of access to Libya and other countries
with pending requests, and how to carry the Panel’s
recommendations forward. Of the 18 recommendations,
the Committee agreed to take follow-up action on six.
Of the remaining 12 recommendations, 1 pertaining
to the designation of individuals first requires action
on the part of the sponsoring Member State, while the
other 11 were addressed to the Security Council.

Lastly, since the last periodic report to the Council,
the Committee received one notification under
paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011) in connection
with the basic expenses exemption to the assets freeze,
on which no negative position was taken.

I would now like to provide a brief update on the
Committee’s activities following up on its meeting
of 14 November 2014, with Libya and regional States
participating. On 4 February, the Committee wrote to
Mr. Bernardino Léon, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, inviting him to brief it.
On 23 and 26 February, the Committee wrote to the
Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations regarding access to the Panel’s report, then still
unpublished.
During the reporting period the Committee also
dealt with various aspects of the arms embargo. In that
regard, it replied to a Member State concerning the
disposal of seized military materiel and received an
inspection report on a new seizure, provided guidance
to a Member State on proceeding with a previously
exempted arms transfer to Libya and sought additional
information from a Member State regarding an intended
transfer of non-lethal military materiel to Libya.
As anticipated in the last periodic report to the
Council, the Committee send a letter to the Permanent
Mission of Libya to the United Nations conveying
information it had received from a Member State on an
arms embargo matter in response to the Committee’s
queries on the subject. The Committee further took
note of the change in the focal point authorized to
sign off on arms embargo exemption requests an enduser certificates on behalf of the Libyan Government.
Such requests must now bear the signature of the
Chief of Staff of the Libyan Army and be certified by

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Haniff for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on France’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I thank you and the members of the Council
for providing me with this opportunity to address the
Council.
I thank Mr. Bernardino León, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing
and I wish him the greatest of success in his efforts.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Hussein Haniff,
Permanent Representative of Malaysia and Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), for his briefing. I wish him and his delegation
the greatest of success in leading the work of the
Committee throughout his chairmanship.
I would like to re-emphasize that, when discussing
the work of that Committee, there is a need for
transparency and cooperation in the relationships
between the Libyan Mission to the United Nations and
the Sanctions Committee because the legitimate Libyan
authorities, as I have previously said, are a partner of
the Security Council in guaranteeing that the arms
embargo is not violated by non-State parties or terrorist
organizations. We hope to receive the reports of the
Panel of Experts in a timely manner so that we can
share that share them with experts in our Government
before they are submitted to the Council. We hope that
the Committee will take that into consideration in the
future.
Considering that the Libyan Army is waging a
war against terrorist organizations in Libya, some of
which have declared their loyalty to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, it is in the interest of peace and
security not only in Libya but also in the broader region
to facilitate the procedure for the Libyan army to obtain
weapons, either by lifting the embargo completely or

15-058325/8

S/PV.7398

The situation in Libya

by facilitating the procedures for exemptions from the
embargo. We have informed the Sanctions Committee
of the new procedures adopted by the provisional Libyan
Government to guarantee that the weapons exempt from
the arms embargo will not reach no other party except
the Libyan army. The procedures include limiting the
points of contact to one, as the Chair of the Sanctions
Committee mentioned. That focal point is the Chief
of Staff of the Libyan army and the Libyan Mission to
the United Nations in New York. This procedure was
adopted in response to the wishes of some members of
the Sanctions Committee. The Libyan Army is ready to
accept an observer to ensure that the weapons approved
by the Committee are in effect delivered to the official
Libyan Army.
Allow me also to commend the efforts of the Panel
of Experts of the Sanctions Committee, as well as the
clear and objective report submitted to the Council
(S/2015/128), which addresses the relevant topics from
all sides and clearly indicates that that the Libya Dawn
militias are responsible for derailing the political
process. It also lists the damage inflicted on the country
and indicates the responsibility of some leaders of that
militia. At the same time, the report also refutes the
allegations that the Libyan Air Force was responsible
for losses among civilians.
The report of the Panel of Experts differs from
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/144), which
uses the same terminology as the Libya Dawn militias
and tries to ignore the existence and presence of the
Libyan army and its achievements in Benghazi. I take
this opportunity to repeat what I have said before at the
Security Council. No country has the right to intervene
in the decisions of the elected Libyan authorities
concerning the identity of the leaders of the Libyan
army or State institutions.
We have reached a stage where it is no longer possible
to overlook the acts of terrorism being committed in
Libya against civilians, the legitimate authorities,
State institutions and economic facilities. I want to
make it very clear that the silence of the international
community in the face of the terrorist organizations
overtaking the cities of Derna and Benghazi has
encouraged those organizations and their allies to take
over the capital Tripoli. The silence in the face of the
destruction by these organizations of the international
airport in Tripoli, their overrunning of State institutions
and expulsion of the legitimate Government therefrom
has encouraged the militias to continue the war in order

6/8

04/03/2015

to take control of the country’s oil resources, especially
after the Libyan army succeeded in expelling the
militias from most neighbourhoods of Benghazi and
halted their progress in the western mountains.
Terrorism is not merely an ideology; it is first and
foremost action. The definition of terrorism in the Arab
Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism is any
action that causes harm to the environment, damages
or occupies a public or private facility or property, or
exposes national resources to danger. This definition
of terrorism by the Arab Convention is what led the
Libyan House of Representatives to classify Libya
Dawn alliance as a terrorist militia. I do not believe
that anyone would dispute that it applies perfectly to the
actions of that coalition in burning the Tripoli Airport,
the Tripoli neighbourhoods of Zintan and Warshafana,
and the houses of Government officials, in overtaking
State institutions in the capital and in attacking the oil
crescent. The House of Representatives was therefore
not wrong at all, in spite of objections by some members
of the Security Council.
The Libyan people feel that the international
community has failed them, given its lack of adequate
support for the elected House of Representatives and
the Government it established, and given the silence of
certain countries that back the militias that are seeking
to defeat and eliminate the legislature, including
hteir encouragement of the militias to continue their
occupation of the capital, Tripoli, and the institutions of
State. Indeed, some have misrepresented the truth and
overlooked crimes in order to perpetuate the prevailing
situation.
A representative of one permanent member
of the Council was not ashamed to claim that one
militia allied with Ansar al-Sharia was the only party
combating terrorism in Libya. If he was asserting the
opinion of his Government, I challenge him and his
Government to persuade those militias to announce
their disengagement and dissociation from Ansar
al-Sharia or to describe Ansar al-Sharia as a terrorist
organization, as the Council itself has done. Such
statements require an official apology from that
Government to the Libyan people. It is quite clear that a
certain permanent member does not wish the legitimate
authorities to reclaim the capital, and is pursuing
that agenda by providing political support to certain
militias and by objecting to the arming of the Libyan
army. Such behaviour raises many questions among the

15-05832

04/03/2015

The situation in Libya

Libyan people, which aspires to restoring peace and
security and to ending the bloodshed.
I should like to share some of the analysis now
current within political and cultural circles in Libya.
According to this analysis, the State to which I refer is
either planning, with its proxies, the division of Libya
or is trying to pave the way for its citizens of Libyan
descent to take control of Libya on the grounds that
they represent the majority of the leadership of the
so-called Islamist movement. Whatever the objectives
may be, they do not serve peace and security in Libya
or anywhere else, and are not compatible with its
responsibility as a permanent member of the Security
Council. Such conduct will damage the good relations
that have emerged between our two countries in recent
years.
Other States, including members of the Security
Council and Libya’s neighbours in the region, that have
not responded to the request of the legitimate Libyan
Government to replace their accredited ambassadors.
They are thereby, in practical terms, establishing
diplomatic relations with the militias controlling the
capital, which are in alliance with Ansar al-Sharia. The
Libyan Government could well be compelled to take
the necessary steps to correct this situation, even if it
should mean suspending relations with those States.
Any delay in restoring legitimate authority over
State institutions in the capital and in expanding State
authority throughout the national territory can only
reflect support for ongoing violations of human rights,
including the forced expulsions of Libyan citizens
from Warshafana, Tawergha and several other Libyan
villages. It will compel hundreds of thousands of
Libyan refugees to continue to suffer in dire conditions
in neighbouring countries, where their children are
deprived of schooling.
The resolution of such tragedies cannot be tied to
the outcome of a national dialogue that remains hostage
to the whims and desires of militias that survive on
crime and enjoy demeaning and humiliating Libyans,
and that have emptied the country of intellectuals,
political activists and tourists, who have fled under
threat. Efforts to address the security situation and
combat terrorism must not remain hostage to the success
of the national dialogue. They should be undertaken in
parallel with the dialogue if we wish to prevent Libya
from falling under the total control of terrorists and to
stop terrorism from spreading throughout the region.

S/PV.7398

The Libyan people look forward to Mr. León’s
successful persuasion of the militia leaders, as opposed
to the political leaders, to accept the formation of a
Government of national unity consisting of Libyans
who do not hold foreign passports or citizenship, and
that would be ratified and supported by the entire
membership of the House of Representatives. The
Government would assume its functions in the capital
at a date certain once all the militias have withdrawn
and once it enjoys the security necessary to carry out
its tasks without threat of force.
I stress that, for the first time since 2011, there is
a legitimate Government in Libya that is not amenable
to the threats and extortion of the militias. This could
not have come about without the regrouping and
reorganization of some units of the army in the eastern
part of the country. The performance and achievements
of the Government would still be weak and fall short
of the expectations of the Libyan people and the
international community if that had not occurred, yet
objective circumstances prevent it from meeting the
aspirations of the Libyan people, including the fact that
it is not working from its seat and offices in the capital
and that it is unfortunately operating on a war footing
with a limited staff, few financial resources and very
little support from the international community.
The Government cannot be prohibited from
obtaining the weapons and other military equipment
needed to strengthen the capacity of army and the
security apparatus while blaming it for its inability
to control the security situation internally and at the
borders or to stop the flow of weapons inside and
outside the country.
The Libyan army leadership has presented specific
requests to the Sanctions Committee for exemptions
from the arms embargo designed to strengthen the
capacity of the Libyan air force to monitor Libyan
territory and borders and prevent the terrorists from
taking over oil fields and related facilities, in order to
protect the wealth of the country. In the next few days,
we will see how serious the Security Council is in terms
of its concern about the security and stability of Libya
and the region. From now on, the Libyan people will no
longer accept a position of neutrality on the issue of the
legitimate authorities versus the terrorist organizations.
It will not accept any State that claims to want the best
for Libya while continuing to provide the Libyan Dawn
militias with weapons and political and media support.
The Council’s position and that of the United Nations

15-058327/8

S/PV.7398

The situation in Libya

Mission in Libya must be very clear to those who do
so. And it must be in line with Council resolutions,
especially resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2174 (2014).
Those who want to be Libya’s partner and an honest
broker must listen to the legitimate Libyan authorities,
who were properly elected, and must respect Libyans’
interests and wishes, as expressed through elections.

8/8

04/03/2015

The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

15-05832
