S/2019/1004

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 27 December 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2480 (2019) on the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA), by which the Council requested me, addressing perspectives from all
relevant actors, including my Special Representative for Mali, in consultation with
the Force Commander, to provide the Security Council with a letter focusing on:
(a) information on security challenges in Mali, progress in mission operations, troop
performance and rotations, and an update on the coordination of security
responsibilities; (b) an update on the integrated strategic framework and related
transition plan, as well as a possible exit strategy, for the Mission on the basis of
improved security and political conditions, and of progress in the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Security challenges in Mali and Mission operations
As outlined in my report S/2019/983, which contains a thorough assessment of
the situation in northern and central Mali, MINUSMA continues to play an essential
role in supporting the parties to advance political solutions, while adopting a more
robust, flexible and mobile posture to support the stabilization and restoration of State
authority and protect civilians in those regions.
The Mission has reinforced its presence in central Mali. Within the framework
of Operation Oryx, it put added focus on areas where civilians are most under thre at
in central Mali, including in Bandiagara, Bankass and Koro cercles. The deployment
of temporary operating bases allowed the Mission to strengthen its engagement with
communities in the most vulnerable areas in central Mali. MINUSMA also supported
the establishment of an early warning mechanism involving 207 localities in 49
municipalities in central Mali.
The redeployment of the reconstituted Malian Defence and Security Forces
remains critical to move the peace process forward and to facilitate the retu rn of other
State officials to northern and central Mali. In order to rapidly meet this objective and
to counter the expansion of terrorist activity, the Malian armed forces have deployed
units that often lack mobility and strength to bases that do not off er adequate
protection, which increases the vulnerability of the units.
Despite announcements by the authorities to this effect, the number of national
defence and security forces deployed to the centre has not increased significantly.
Furthermore, the Malian armed forces lost two strategic positions in the north,

19-21616 (E)

060120

*1921616*

S/2019/1004

following the attacks on and subsequent withdrawal from their camps in Indelimane
and Anderamboukane to Ménaka.
Against this backdrop, MINUSMA recently conducted a pilot operation to
reinforce the positions of the Malian armed forces in remote locations, including
through the strategic deployment of air assets and the airborne insertion and
extraction of special forces in a short time frame. Through the full implementation of
the adaptation plan, the Mission would be able to implement similar operations in all
sectors.
In order to support a more flexible, integrated approach to implementing the
Mission’s mandate and to assess progress made by the Mission towards achieving its
objectives, MINUSMA has begun implementing the comprehensive performance
assessment system, an operational planning and performance assessment tool. The
system will allow MINUSMA to more quickly adapt its plans in response to changes
to the local context and to collect data and analysis on mission impact over time.
Troop and police performance
For United Nations peacekeepers, Mali is one of the most challenging and
dangerous operational environments. Effective action to improve mission performance
and address related challenges is therefore particularly important, considering the link
between the safety and security of peacekeepers and mandate implementation. I
would like to commend the commitment of the MINUSMA troop - and policecontributing countries and the sacrifices of uniformed and civilian personnel
operating in this most challenging environment. Their sustained commitment is
crucial to ensure the effectiveness of MINUSMA and the full implementation of its
mandate.
Constantly evolving security threats, however, call for enhanced performance
and, ultimately, adaptation. Only a mission that retains the ability to adapt to new
realities is able to deliver on its mandated tasks in such a highly dynamic
environment. As outlined in my most recent report ( S/2019/983) and in keeping with
my Action for Peacekeeping initiative, enablers play an essential role in ensuring
robust and effective mandate implementation and bolster peacekeeping performance.
MINUSMA needs capable and efficient enablers, including airlift capability,
highly mobile and rapidly deployable ground units, enhanced intelligence
surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities, enhanced medical support facilities and
qualified uniformed personnel. I call upon all Member States to support the adaptation
plan presented in my most recent report and actively contribute to the generation of
such specialized capabilities.
Effective leadership, the Mission’s ability to deliver in an integrated manner,
the mindset of commanders and their willingness to take risks, the preparedness of
units, and their flexibility and ability to engage with local communities are all
essential to peacekeeping performance. Despite limitations in terms of training and
being underequipped, some MINUSMA troops have demonstrated the most
courageous and robust engagement in northern Mali under very difficult
circumstances at great personal risk and sacrifice.
In spite of the challenging environment, there are many examples of outstanding
performance and committed leadership in MINUSMA. In July, three MINUSMA units
were among those recommended to be awarded premiums for exceptional
performance.
Building on efforts to enhance the safety of its personnel and as part of the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, MINUSMA has taken concrete measures to

2/6

19-21616

S/2019/1004

improve mission performance, address related challenges and further enhance the
security of United Nations peacekeepers.
Effective community engagement is a critical factor in successful mandate
implementation in Mali and in gaining the trust of local populations. A contingent that
was temporarily deployed to central Mali was able to establish effective relationships
with local communities in the centre through its specific use of interpreters. It
received more timely information from the communities on threats and unsafe areas
and faced fewer instances of patrols being blocked by local protesters. The
community-oriented policing programmes of the United Nations police continued to
facilitate the redeployment of the Malian security forces, thereby building confidence
in the population and contributing to the Mission’s situational awareness. Efforts are
under way to put added focus on community engagement, including in the Mission ’s
regular performance evaluations and training efforts.
In the light of increasing demonstrations and public unrest, well -trained and
professional formed police units are essential to ensure a successful de -escalation of
public disorder situations. During three consecutive days of demonstrations in front
of the Mission’s base in Sévaré, Mopti Region, the United Nations formed police unit
and individual police officers responded firmly but with restraint and managed to
protect the base from being taken over without inflicting civi lian casualties.
In order to improve protection for individual police officers, MINUSMA is
enhancing protective equipment for its officers, strengthening crowd -control training
for police and military components, reinforcing perimeter security and increa sing
patrolling.
MINUSMA made further progress in enhancing protected mobility, which
remains essential to mandate implementation in northern and central Mali and
protecting civilians. The Mission launched a series of counter-improvised explosive
device operations, aimed at detecting and removing improvised explosive devices
placed in and around roads.
In the centre, since the launch of the Mission’s fifteenth such operation in May,
no deaths, injuries or equipment damage due to explosions of improvised explosive
devices have been recorded on the highest risk axis, a segment of the Mopti -Douentza
road. Overall, the Mission’s proactive and targeted strategy for countering the use of
such devices supported the delivery of predeployment and in-mission training and
mentoring through the Mine Action Service and the provision of specialized
equipment, and the improved operational readiness of the troops resulted in
MINUSMA detecting and neutralizing more improvised explosive devices than ever
before, effectively reducing the risk and number of related fatalities, including the
number of troops killed.
In an effort to improve efficiency and response times, MINUSMA reviewed its
procedures for casualty evacuation and is in the process of revising its st andard
operating procedures. Since October, a series of pilot exercises indicated that the
simplified procedures and delegation of authority markedly reduced evacuation
timelines following receipt of a notification.
Challenges
In spite of these encouraging trends, performance continues to be hampered by
instances of training and capabilities shortfalls, a lack of understanding of the
Mission’s mandate and the rules of engagement, undeclared caveats or unwillingness
of some commanders to take risks or comply with orders. Such cases have a negative
impact on the performance of MINUSMA and need to be addressed.

19-21616

3/6

S/2019/1004

In some instances, the Mission’s ability to ensure performance was hampered
by caveats and national controls, including cases of units refusing to escort civilian
convoys. Similarly, on a few occasions, troops refused to perform tasks involving the
disposal of explosive ordnance. Efforts are under way to provide these troops with
further training and equipment. When these incidents occurred, the M ission took
immediate action, communicated incidents of refusal to follow orders to Headquarters
and recommended the repatriation of one unit commander for the refusal to follow
orders on grounds of national caveats. The Secretariat informed the Member Sta tes
concerned.
I would like to reiterate that every troop- or police-contributing country must
communicate, during the negotiations over possible deployment, any national caveats
regarding the use of contingents. The decision process in selecting forces will take
those caveats into account, including whether to proceed with the deployment.
Additional caveats cannot be accepted after deployment.
In one case, a contingent has continued to deny access to the part of the United
Nations camp it is occupying, which hinders the access of MINUSMA emergency
response teams to airport facilities. I would like to reiterate that all contingents
deployed in a United Nations peacekeeping operation are an integral part of the
Mission under the authority of the Head of Mission and that non-adherence must have
consequences.
Equipment shortfalls continued to hamper performance. Several armoured
personnel carriers are not operational owing to, inter alia, damage from improvised
explosive devices or the lack of the required level of mine protection. The Secretariat
continues to work with the troop- and police-contributing countries to address such
gaps and enhance operational mobility.
The reduced intelligence capabilities and the lack of required air assets,
following the departure of several units, limited the Mission’s capability to obtain
appropriate situational awareness in due time and to respond swiftly to emerging
situations, including in cases where civilians are under threat, such as in Lerneb,
Timbuktu Region, or in the centre. These gaps continue to negatively affect the
Mission’s capacity to fully implement its mandate.
Several contractors are struggling to supply the required transport capabilities,
including through losses incurred due to attacks involving the use of improvised
explosive devices. The lack of load carriers that are suitable for the prevailing road
conditions and can be sourced through the local inland transportation and freight
forwarding market negatively affected the delivery of contingent -owned equipment
and the deployment of new military and police capabilities in the second half of 2019.
MINUSMA is taking measures to secure necessary contracts and employing aviation
assets, where necessary, which comes with added costs, in order to address the
situation and re-establish uninterrupted supply to its remote operating bases.
Troop rotations
In order to ensure timely contingent rotations and deployments, MINUSMA
depends on a combination of its own air and ground transportation and on contra cting
such services, as well as on secure supply routes. While a single contingent troop
rotation mainly requires air transportation, MINUSMA has a limited network of
airfields that can accommodate fixed-wing transport aircraft. In order to improve the
situation in northern Mali, MINUSMA contributed to the construction of a new
runway in Kidal.

4/6

19-21616

S/2019/1004

Coordination of security presences
The Instance de Coordination au Mali has proven to be an effective forum to
coordinate the activities of all security presences in Mali, including the Malian
Defence and Security Forces, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the
French forces, the European Union training mission in Mali and MINUSMA. During
one of its most recent meetings, participants agreed to progressively include security
stakeholders.
Integrated strategic framework and transition plan
The development and implementation of the integrated strategic framework had
a positive impact on overall mission performance and contributed to a more coherent,
resource-effective and integrated response by the United Nations to the highly
dynamic and constantly evolving security situation. Integrated planning was guided
by the mandated strategic objectives of MINUSMA, and the framework is based on a
joint conflict analysis that recognizes the correlation between gender dynamics and
drivers of conflict. The Mission and the United Nations country team designed
projects to support the peace process and the stabilization of the centre, taking into
account their specific context, physical presence, operational capability and
comparative advantages. The implementation of the framework resulted in the
prioritization of a number of joint projects and changes in resource allocation.
In central Mali, integrated plans are focused on six areas of intervention in
support of the Government’s revised stabilization strategy for the centre: political
engagement and participatory governance, stabilization and security, humanitarian
assistance and development, social cohesion and reconciliation, human rights and the
rule of law, and communication. Integrated efforts by MINUSMA and the country
team leverage the Mission’s comparative advantage and, in particular, its relationship
with political actors in Bamako and its ability to provide security and access in remote
and hostile areas, as well as the country team’s technical expertise and competencies.
In Mopti, MINUSMA is collaborating with the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Health Organization and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) on a project funded by the
trust fund in support of peace and security in Mali to promote access to health care
for displaced persons and communities affected by intercommunal violence.
In Timbuktu, the Mission and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees implemented six joint projects fund ed through quickimpact projects and a project funded through the trust fund in support of peace and
security in Mali with the objective of facilitating the reintegration of returning
refugees and strengthening social cohesion between displaced and host co mmunities.
These efforts support host and displaced communities by providing access to water
and to income-generating activities and are an important contributing factor to the
reintegration of over 2,000 refugees, who had fled to Mauritania following the 2012
conflict. MINUSMA also collaborated with the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, including on two joint projects in Timbuktu to
promote the protection of cultural heritage.
The projects support the Government’s decision to reopen the University of
Timbuktu, and the development of a specialized course on the restoration of cultural
artefacts with the aim of countering violent extremism through education and the
provision of skills and employment opportunities to youth.
In Gao, MINUSMA is collaborating with UN-Women on a project promoting
the economic empowerment of women and enhancing their participation in the
community.

19-21616

5/6

S/2019/1004

A key challenge in the effective coordination and implementation of the
framework remains the lack of physical presence of the country team in certain field
locations, such as Ménaka and Kidal, and partial representation in other field offices
owing to the security situation. Nevertheless, agencies, funds and programmes
conduct field visits and operate through implementing partners. Taking into account
the highly complex security situation, the Mission will need to continue to provide
logistical and security support to the country team for a gradual transition, particularly
on joint activities, as relevant. As such, the redeployment of the Malian Defence and
Security Forces and an enhanced State presence, as well as their acceptance by local
communities, remain prerequisites for an effective and sustainable transition to the
country team and Government institutions.
Possible long-term exit strategy of the Mission
As part of the development of the mission concept, MINUSMA is defining a
desired end state, which identifies necessary minimum requirements in terms of
political and security conditions, progress in the implementation of the Agreement
and improvement of the overall security situation that would allow for a gradual
withdrawal of the Mission. Increased capacity and effective deployment of the Malian
State, in particular its national defence and security forces and State administration,
and of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, and state authorities, will
be prerequisites of any possible exit strategy for MINUSMA.
In keeping with my directive on transitions, and in line with the agreed planning
framework for the integrated strategic framework, a workshop with the Mission and
the country team was held in Bamako from 5 to 7 November to develop a transition
calendar identifying timelines and significant milestones for the transition process in
Mali. The workshop concluded that any transition planning in Mali at the current
juncture should focus on modalities for the United Nations to work more efficiently
and coherently to achieve mandate implementation and make progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, including by enhancing the capacity of key actors
that will support Mali in the long term. MINUSMA is operating in a unique threat
environment, which makes it more difficult to apply lessons from other transition
contexts, including those in Liberia, Timor-Leste and, most recently, Haiti.
The consequences of a premature withdrawal of MINUSMA could be
devastating for Mali and negate the efforts of the United Nations in the country thus
far, given the current vacuum of state authority, in the context of which multiple
armed groups are vying for power and there are various armed conflicts along
community lines.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

6/6

19-21616
