TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

16 DECEMBER

197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
6 17) . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . + . . . . . .

Page
1

. ,. .. . ,. .. . . . . . . . , . . ,. . , . . . ,. . . .. . . . , .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation

in the India/Pakistan

subcontinent

. . . , . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . .

S/PV.1617

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly

Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

President:

HUNDRED

AND

SEVENTEENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday,

16 December

1971, at 3 p.m.

Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

(Sierra Leone).

the western fronts. Consequently, hostilities and military
actions have ceased. The bloodshed has been stopped.
There is no threat to human lives. The draft resolutions
which have been submitted up to now, yesterday and
before, have no further purpose. It is necessary for the
Council to adopt a definite, specific decision in the light of
the situation which has now arisen as a result of the
measures which have been taken by the Indian Government
for a cease-fire and for the cessation of hostilities.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l617)
I.

Adoption

4. Under these conditions, in the opinion of the Soviet
deIegation, it would be advisable to adopt a Council
decision welcoming the cessation of hostilities in East
Pakistan. The Security Council’s decision should express
the hope that the cease-fire will be observed by both sides.
That would ensure, too, that measures are taken for an
appropriate political settlement of the situation. We have in
mind the immediate and unimpeded transfer of power to
the lawful people’s representatives who were elected in
December 1970. Such a decision by the Council would also
contribute to the solution of the problems linked with the
conflict on the Hindustan subcontinent.

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent.
The meeting was called to order at 5.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent
I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with a previous
decision of the Council [1606th meeting], I invite the
representatives of India and Pakistan to participate in the
discussion of this item without the right to vote.

5. It would be advisable for the Security Council to call
for an immediate cease-fire and the cessation of all other
military actions along the entire frontier between India and
West Pakistan, that is, aIong the entire line of the western
theatre of military operations. At the same time, the
Council should caI1 for an immediate cease-fire and the
cessation of all other military actions along the 196.5
cease-fire line in Jammu and Kashmir. The Security Council
should give positive consideration to the Indian Government’s statement concerning its decision on a unilateral
cease-fire and cessation of all other military actions in this
region, beginning at 1430 hours Greenwich Mean Time on
17 December of this year, and should welcome this decision
of the Indian Government.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Swaran Singh
{India)
and Mr. A, Shahi (Pakistan) took places at the
Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has also decided
/160 7th and 1615th meetings] to extend invitations to the
representatives of Tunisia, Saudi Arabia and Ceylon to take
the scats reserved for them in the Council chamber, with
the understanding that they will be invited to take a place
at the Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.

6. It is also advisable and necessary for the Security
Council to make an urgent appeal to the Government of
Pakistan to take a similar decision without delay.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia),
Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. If. S. Amerasin&e (Ceylon) took the places reserved for them irz the
Council chamber.

7. In view of the de facto situation on the Hindustan
subcontinent, the Security Council should also call on all
States Members of the United Nations to render comprehensive assistance for the speediest cessation of military
actions and to refrain from any steps which could impede
normalization of the situation on the Hindustan subcontinent. In the light of this de facto situation, in view of the
Indian Government’s official statement which was communicated in Mr. Singh’s statement and in line with the
views which I have just expressed, the Soviet delegation

3. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation
from Russian): We have heard the Indian
Government’s
official statement, which was made at the
previous meeting of the Security Council by Mr. Singh, the
distinguished
Minister for External Affairs of India. It is
quite clear from his statement that the Indian Government
has taken the decision to cease fire on both the eastern and
1

submits the following
the Council:

draft resolution for consideration by

15. That is the essence of the draft that was circulating
here and it is one that has a good deal of appeal to our
Government. I would urge that it be printed and circulated
and be available for consideration when next we meet.

[The speaker read out the text of a draft resolution
subsequently circulated as document S/10458./

16. The PRESIDENT: AS the representative of the United
States has already stated, this appears to be a draft which
has been neither submitted nor circulated. If the members
agree with the proposal to rise for a period of an hour, the
draft resolution may then be processed and circulated for
discussion.

8. That is the text of the draft resolution which the Soviet
delegation is submitting for consideration by the Security
Council and its members. We believe that, in view of the
specific situation which now prevails and of the de facto
situation on the Hindustan subcontinent, the adoption of
such a draft resolution by the Council would greatly assist
the normalization of the situation in that area.

17. Mr. VINCI (Italy): May I make a practical suggestion
that we convene again as soon as the text of this new draft
is ready for circulation in the original language in which it
has been drafted, if other members have nothing against it.

9. The PRESIDENT:
The Council now has six draft
resolutions before it. I da not know whether members
would wish me to begin putting them to the vote, or
whether they would prefer to have a suspension of the
meeting in order to have further consultations on them. I
would suggest a suspension for one hour.

18. The PRESIDENT: There being no other speaker, if it
is agreed upon, I propose to suspend for a while to meet
again as soon as this draft resolution has been processed and
circulated.

10. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I should like to
ask, on a point of order, what would be the appropriate
time and procedure for submitting amendments to one of
the draft resolutions now before the Council. Would
amendments to draft resolutions before the Council be in
order now?

It was so decided.
The meeting was suspended at 5.45 p.m. and resumed at
9.20 p. m.
19. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): A few more
hours have gone by, and it seems to my delegation for a
moment as if the most recent draft [S/10459), bearing the
name of Japan and the United States, to which many
delegations have contributed through their work in the last
week or so, came reasonably close to an agreement between
most of the members of this Council. I cannot report to
you, Mr. President, that there is agreement in which the
parties to the conflict would both concur, but I am not sure
that that will be achievable, although we came so close to
agreement on this draft. Of course, what really is important
is that we have total agreement here in this Council. We are
rather at a loss as to what the next step should be, except
that we do not want to give up on this draft, or any draft.

11. The PRESIDENT: It appears to me that the best step
to take, in accordance with the usual practice of this
Council, would be to have a brief suspension with a view to
having further consultations, during which members may
decide either to withdraw or to consolidate various draft
resolutions. The submission of amendments now might
prolong the discussion unnecessarily.
12. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Mr, Chairman, I should like to
add that the Soviet delegation, in submitting its second
draft resolution, is withdrawing the first one. I refer to the
draft resolution which it submitted on 15 December
/S/10457/. The Soviet delegation is withdrawing that draft
and would be prepared for the Security Council to consider
the draft it has submitted today.

20. My query to the Council at large is this. If indeed the
parties are in close proximity, if not actual agreement,
would the various delegations around this table be able to
support the draft and would they be able to act on short
notice? What troubles me is this. If we obtain agreement
-and the representatives here have been working very hard
in the past few hours-on a text on which Pakistan and
India might finally agree, would the Council, that is, the
various delegations here, be willing to move forward and
vote on this tonight or would they have to obtain
instructions? If there is any use in staying here-if it. is a
question of obtaining instructions in an hour or two-we
should certainly be in favour of continuing, but I must
confess that I do not see that shaping up at this very
minute. So I would simply like to put that question
forward for any other representatives who might feel SO
inclined. If we can obtain agreement between the parties in
an hour or so, would the Council then be willing to act with
unanimity, or would we still be hampered by having to
adjourn? If that is the case, I think we might as well
adjourn; but if there is a chance that we can get this matter
through, if the representatives have enough flexibility, given

13. The PRESIDENT: In further reply to the representative of the United States, I should like to say that if he
wants to submit amendments he may do so orally or in
writing, and then they will have to be discussed. But as I
have already stated, I believe that if we have a brief
suspension in order to hold consultations, we shall make
more speedy progress.
14. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): In order to
have yet another draft resolution before the Council, we
should like to submit a draft resolution which, at one point
in the consultations, seemed to have a great deal of support.
I shall read it out, and after the text has been circulated and
the meeting is resumed, I hope that the Council would be
willing to discuss it. It reads as follows:
[The speaker read out the text of a draft resolution
subsequently circulated as document S/10459./
2

the Tact that we have been over this again and again, I think
it would be worth staying here. It is an open question for
anybody who would care to respond.
21. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation, like others, has
been in close contact with the delegations of India and
Pakistan in an effort to draw up a formula which would
satisfy them both. At certain points there seemed to be
some hope that an agreement would be reached, but it is
evident that more time is needed, and I would suggest that
we adjourn until tomorrow morning. However, to take up a
point made by the representative of the United States, it
seems to me that if the two parties to the conflict are
reaching agreement, no other delegation here could possibly
seek a further postponement of our debate, since after all
we are here to try to reconcile the two parties. If they reach
agreemart, I do not think a further adjournment would be
necessary.
22. Mr. OGISO (Japan): The new joint draft resolution
presented by the United States and Japan, contained in
document S/ 10459, has just been circulated. The representative of Somalia has also stated that he is trying hard to
find smne common ground in his contacts with the Indian
nnd Pakisiani delegations. 1 think this new draft is the result
of extensive
consultations
among the non-permanent
members and also with some permanent members. There
may be some points which still create problems for some
members of the Council. Iiowever, this draft is intended as
an approach taking into account the development of the
situation in the India-Pakistan subcontinent. So, for the
purpose of further consultations, it would be helpful if the
delegations could make some comments, even of a preliminary nature,
on this draft. It could help the further
consultations
among the members with a view to finding
common
ground between the parties concerned. So, although my delegation has no objection to the proposal of
the representative
of Somalia that we adjourn until tomorrow morning, my delegation would be very much interested
in hearing any comments delegations might wish to make
before the adjournment.

Most of the people we consuIted felt that that would make
the draft more acceptable to the parties themselves and to
other representatives. We Lherefore ask that that draft
revision be circulated as S/10459/Rev.l, provided the
Japanese delegation concurs. But even if there is not
agreement on this, at least members will have some changes
before them.
26. As I have said, these two draft amendments seemed to
meet with a large measure of agreement. So that the
Council will know where we stand, I would inform it that
the problem between the parties seems principally to
concern the language of the second half of operative
paragraph 1. In revealing that I am not betraying the
confidence of any party, but simply suggesting that any
representative with sufficient energy left might expand it
and try to work out an agreement between the parties
concerned on the language of paragraph 1. If that could be
worked out, I would concur with the representatives of
Somalia and Japan that this would then provide a document that could meet with the agreement of the parties and
might make it possible for the Security Council to act.
27. Mr. OGISO (Japan): In order to facilitate the
Council’s conside&tion of these drafts I should like to say
that my delegation agrees to the amendments proposed by
the representative of the United States.
2X. Mr. ORTJZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): In reply to the question addressed to USby
the representative of Japan, I should like to say that my
delegation has no major objections to this text. Accordingly, if, as it would appear, the consuitations between the
two parties concerned, India and Pakistan, are producing
favourable results in the sense that their respective points of
view have come closer together, I think that we should
make the greatest possible effort to arrive at a document
that can be adopted unanimously by the Council.
29. In recent days we have striven in vain to arrive at a
text which would win the approval of this body, and if we
are about to achieve this I think we should leave no stone
unturned. Accordingly, 1 would venture to make the same
suggestion as the representative of Somalia, my friend
Ambassador Farah: namely that between now and tomorrow consultations should continue on the aspects still
dividing the parties, so as to arrive at a wording satisfactory
to both.

23. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I should like to
report
on a Few very small changes that I think were
unanimously
accepted in consultations on this draft. J
report them now simply to put them before the meeting, so
i3.s to save time tomorrow when we meet.
24. It was generally suggested that operative paragraph 1,
instead of reading ‘Demunds that a durable cease-fire , , .“,
should
read: “‘Demunds that an imlnediate and durable
ccnse-fire . . .“, So we shall offer that draft text as a
revision, provided our co-sponsor is agreeable.

30. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I have noticed that the meeting
has concentrated mainly on the draft submitted by the
delegations of the United States and Japan. I should like to
remind the members of the Security Council that the Soviet
Union’s draft was submitted before that draft. I would
request members of the Council, in studying this item
before the next meeting, to give attention to the Soviet
draft resolution, to consider its realistic nature in the light
of the situation on the spot at the present time and to
observe that the measures envisaged in it ensure a cease-fire,
peace and stability on the Hindustan subcontinent.

25. Concerning paragraph S-and again I am putting this
forward
on the understanding that we shall seek agreement
with our colleague from Japan after the meeting-it was
rather
unanimously
suggested that it be eliminated as
written
and replaced by the following new paragraph 5,
which
is taken directly from a British-French text, I
believe:
“lnvifes
the Secretary-General to appoint a special
representative
to lend his good offices, in particular for
the solution of humanitarian problems;“.

31. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): Bearing in
mind what the Soviet representative has said, we certainly
3

want to make clear our Government’s position. We would
be prepared to vote on the Soviet text right now, if he
wishes us to do so. We would also be prepared to Vote on
our own text right now, if any representative SO wishes. The
point is that there seems to be proximity between the
parties concerning the text submitted by Japan and the
United States. But lest there be any confusion concerning
the position of the United States Government on the Soviet
text, we are prepared to proceed to vote on it right away.
32. I am not suggesting that Ambassador Malik had it in
mind, but we do not want to be in the position of delaying
proceedings, and we are perfectly willing to consider the
drafts and dispose of them one way or the other right at
this meeting.
33. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Of course, each delegation has a
special attachment to its own draft resolution because it
better reflects its own views on this crucial problem. It was,
however, our understanding that we are all making a joint
effort in order to achieve a unanimous agreement so that
the Council may finally take a decision and act.
34. Speaking for my delegation, at this advanced stage,
after so many days and nights of hard work, we certainly
would not insist upon our own draft being considered. And
I believe that should be the spirit of the Council at this
stage. And if we understand that progress has been made in
order to reconcile the position of the two main parties, we
should continue these efforts. The more so when this draft
resolution-I think it is well known-was
a draft which was
prepared by several delegations and of course reflects that
desire, that wish of these delegations to come to some
agreement finally. I believe that if we wish to work in that
spirit and, I hope, come to a positive conclusion, we should
at this stage forget about our personal views and preferences.

nation that wants to have its name on it--after
the ~~~EX*CXI
has been worked out, after agreement has been reached FL
the parties-be enabled to put its name on the dr&?
resolution in alphabetical order. There is no prid’e i*:
authorship,there is no feeling on our part that we---that
k6..
Japan and the United States-want to get credit !L*breakingthe deadlock, most or all of the work on this CCI~
wasdone by most of the non-permanentmembers. “t^ha1 2~
very widely known. And my suggestion would
be t!~
inasmuchas we were reasonablyclose to an agreementi 4.?a
this text, we shouldpresson-Ambassador Farah and o8lnes)
who have negotiated so hard on it in just the last 1:@&
hours-and then at the last minute, if agreenrcrlt can %c
worked out between India and Pakistan, throw the H:BK~:~
thing open, put a new number on it, put the names sf a.:;
the membersof the Council on it, call it anything a~~~,,
want, leaveour nameoff or put it on, but let anybody tkp~f
7~
there that wants to be in. It is in that spirit that I think w~la
are goingto get it done and not asa Soviet text or a linite,i
Statestext or someother kind of text. I think that was bbf
spirit of what the representativeof Italy had in mi~~f
Certainly in terms of the technicalities we will leave a,:i”,:
name on becauseprocedure requires it, but tornommEI
there is a way in which it can be thrown open fur rbzr
unanimoussponsorshipof this Council, that is the w-a>- I
should like to see the matter resolved and I ani sure tf;c
representative of Japan would concur, I wnuld !TQ~,
inasmuchas we are very closeto agreement on &is ZCXT,<
that we can continue and that Ambassador Far& a;-:
others will use their good offices to negotiate tile &fie:.
ences.And tomorrow, if we canget agreement between 65
parties let us make it a 15member text and let us pea 3:
voted on and let us get about the businessof ending ~?Pr:i
war.
36. The PRESIDENT: There being no further sprab;cs%,
?
wish to say that in view of the suggestionsin tile recc:::
statementsof membersand in view of the fact that &rr*:
measureof agreementis reported to have been reaclled wi:k
the two parties, if there is no objection I shrill adjourn
~&.a
meetinguntil 10.30 a.m. tomorrow.

3.5. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I could not
agree more with what the representative of Italy has said,
Let me simply say that if this draft resolution, S/10459/
Rev.], on which many people here worked diligently,
becom’es the consensus and the vehicle that solves this
problem, I would propose that at the next meeting every

The meetingroseat 9.45 p.m.

4

HQW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NA’P’IONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publirwtions
nmy be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLlCATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
KJnies sent cn vente dam les librairies
et les egenees
d&o&sires
do monde entier. Infonnez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
h : Nntions
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

[JNIDAS

publicnciones
de Ins Naciones
Unidas ent,in en venta en librerias
y cams distribuidoras
en todas pm+
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a so librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas, Nucw
York o Ginebre.
Las

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

82260-July

1974~2,050
