THtRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th

MEETING: 5 MAY 1978
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

,...,.....,...,.....,..,......

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . I .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 5 May 1978 from the Permanent Representative of kWgola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12690) .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2077)

S/PV .2077

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters comkned with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Document; of the Security Council (symbol S;. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Officio1 Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fuliy operative on that date.

2077th MEETING
Held in New York

on Friday,

President: Mr. Ruben CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela).

representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria, w]licll
reads as follows:

&Wilt:
The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
NigCria, U!I~OII of Soviet Socialist Republics, United King
dam of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to the consideration of the item entitled ‘CornPlaint by Angola against South Africa’, the Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO).”

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2077)
1. Adoption

5 May 1978, at 8.30 p.m.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to this request.

of the agenda

2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 5 May 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12690)

It was so derided.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Council is meeting today in response to a letter dated
5 May from the representative of Angola to the President of
the Council. The letter is contained in document S/12690. I
wish also to bring to the attention of the members of the
Council the other documents on this item: document
S/12689, containing a letttir dated 5 May from the representative of Angola to the Secretary-General, and document
S/12693, containing a letter dated 5 May from the representative of Zambia to the President of the Council.

The meeting was called to order at 9.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
?he agenda was adoptecl.
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 5 May 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12690)

4. The first speaker is the representative of Angola, on
whom I now call.
5. Mr. DE FIGUEIKEDO (Angola): Once again an African
country and an African people are facing the guns of a
racist minority rkgime, behind which stands the might of
imperialist allies. Once again the People’s Republic of
Angola is under attack by the troops of the racist minority
r&&me at Pretoria. Once again my delegation is appealing to
the international community to help to defend the cause of
territorial integrity and a people’s just aspirations to
liberation and independence.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fvom Spanish): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Angola, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia in which they
request to be invited to take part in the discussion.
Consequently, I propose, in conformity with past practice
and with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

6. On ,4 May at 6 a.m., the South African Air Force, based
in the illegally occupied Territory of Namibia, began an
invasion and aerial bombardment of a Namibian refugee
camp in Angola, in the vicinity of Kassinga, some 155 miles
inside the sovereign borders of the People’s Republic of
Angola, in the province of Cunene. The bombing was
followed by a drop of parachute troops, which was
accompanied by ground support aircraft. This continued
throughout Thursday, and the latest news from mY.coun~V
is that South African troops are still insideAngola, giving
the lie to the myth of the “limited operation” claimedby
the racist, Fascist minority Government at Pretoria. A

At the invitatiorz of tfze President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table and Mr. Sdim
(United Republic of Tanzania) and Miss Konie (Zambia)
took the places reQerved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (irzterpretation from Spanish): Tlx
members of the Council have before them in document
S/12694 the text of a letter dated 5 May from the
1

@XfXal of the racist clique is quoted in the news media as
saying that this “limited operation has now been corn.
pleted”. But reinforcements are still being brought
in even
LIOW and the troops show no signsof withdrawing. Instead,
the bombardment has extended to Chitiquela and Tombondola aswell asto the CaluequeDam.

junta that rulesat Pretoria and by its allies.However,asmy
country’s delegation statedat the recently concludedninth
specialsessionof the GeneralAssembly,
“it must be borne in mind that there isone country-the
People’sRepublic of Angola-which is constantly being
subjected to aggressionand one aggressor,
the racistand
Fascistregimeof South Africa, that isthe justification for
the military apparatus which has been set UP by the
glorious armed forces of Angola in order to ensurethe
defence of our national territory and the achievements
of
our revolution”.l

7. The dangerous duplicity of South Africa
will not
succeed. We ase aware of what the racist rCgime is up to.
This latest aggression,which is still continuing, is not aimed
OII~Y at attempting to destroy SWAP0 and tile liberation
struggle of the Namibian people; it is also intended to
destubilize the situation inside the People’s Republic of
Angola in the vain hope of helping puppetsbeing trained by
South Africa in the Territory of Namibia. FurtIler, it was
the abstention of the Western five on the just Programme
of Action adopted at the ninth special session of the
General Assembly [resolution S-9/2/ that gave Pretoria the
encouragementit needed to embark on the invasion of my
country.

In the same statement, the People’sRepublic of Angola
firmly and clearly declared:
“So long as Namibia and its people have not gained
independence, we shall not cease giving SWAP0 all
logistical facilities and all material, political and diplomatic support so that the Namibianpeoplemay win their
legitimate right to be free and independent.“2

8. We are still waiting for the racist minority rdgime to
make good the just claims of the People’s Republic of
Angola for full compensation for the damage and destruction inflicted on us and for the restoration of the
equipment and materials seized by the South African
invading forces when South Africa launched its first major
invasion on our soil and againstour nation, whell we were
but a few months old as a sovereignState. And now comes
another armed, large-scaleinvasion,striking a brutal blow at
the economy and stability of my people and my country.

13. We shall not consider our own revolution complete
until all of southern Africa is free of the fetters of
colonialism, apartheid, minority r&imes and the denialof
the human right of the peoplesto genuineindependence.
We are witnessingthe final stageof colonialismin Namibia.
A people’sinexorable march towardsfreedom andindependencecan be delayed but not preventedby the imperialist,
racist minority r6gimeof Pretoria. What the heroic people
of Namibia arenow goingthrough is but the culminationof
their long history of fierce resistanceto the savageinroads
of colonialismover their land and people.The originalsons
of the soil have been restricted to reservationson poor
agricultural land or in the sandy tracts of the Kalahari,
while the rich natural resources-diamonds,copper, lead,
zinc, vanadium, uranium, off-shore fisheries-are whitcowned and, in the caseof mineralsand fishing, dominated
by large South African or international companies.Namibia
is one of the world’s largest producersof diamonds,while
the Rossingmine near Swakopmundon the Atlantic coast
is expected to becomethe largestsingleuranium producer
in the world by the 1980s.

9. It appears that certain countries have asked South
Africa for an “urgent explanation” of its nditary
action.
Hut urgent explanations required or given can hardly begin
to compensate the People’s Republic of Angola for this
blatant aggression,this attack upon our national sovereigrlty, our territorial integrity, and the principles of
independenceand the inviolability of our national borders.
10. The last time the Security Council was seized of this
matter, in March 1976, it adopted resolution 387 (1976),
condemning the utilization by South Africa of the international Territory of Namibia to mount aggression against
the People’s Republic of Angola and further condemning
South Africa’s aggressionagainstthe People’s Republic of
Angola. The same resolution demandedthat South Africa
scrupulously respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the People’sRepublic of Angola and
desist from utilizing the international Territory of Namibia
to mount provocative or aggressive
acts against the People’s
Republic OC Angola or any other neighbouring African
St&e.

14. Pretoria has governed Namibia as its de facru fifth
province. The mining sector in Namibia is almost totally
dominated by multinational corporations. The two most
important companiesare ConsolidatedDiamond Mines of
South West Africa, a South African subsidiary but with
extensive British participation, and Tsumeb Corporation
Ltd., owned by American Metal Climax Inc. and other
United States and South African corporations, It is these
extensive economic and imperialist interests shared by
South Africa and its international trading partners which
keep alive and well the apartheid systemand rCgimeand its
strangleholdover the Namibian land and people. It is these
sameinterests which hamper and delay, but will never be
able to prevent, freedom and genuineindependencefrotn
comingto southernAfrica.

I I . That invasion did not signalthe end of South Africa’s
aggressionagainst the People’sRepublic of Angola. Instead,
we leave been faced with a series of acts of %UesSion
committed by the racist minority r6gime of Pretoria With
consistent regularity, in flagrant violation of the principles
of international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

15. The West remainsa staunch financial, political and
military ally of apartheid, with Namibia and Zimbabwe ns

12. As a vanguard of the revolutionary struggle to liberate
southern Africa from the imperialist yoke, the People’s
Republic of, Angola has been singled out by the Fascist

1 official I<ecor& of the General Assembly, Ninth
Session, Henary Meetings, 12th meeting,
Para.61.
2 Ibid., para.62.

2

Special

20. My delegation appeals once again to the international
community and to progressive forces all over the world to
stand by US in our hour of need, strongly condemn South
Africa for its invasion of the People’s Republic of Angol’a
and implement strictly the embargoes on arms and oil and
observe economic sanctions against Pretoria in accordance
with the Programme of Action adopted at the ninth special
session of the General Assembly.

buffer zones, extending, in effect, South Africa’s borders
hundreds of miles to the north. It is international credit
which enables South Africa to carry out its military
build-up, to stockpile oil and expand its ability to withstand economic and military sanctions. We have consistently warned that South Africa’s militarization of
Namibia, which it continues to occupy illegally, poses a
threat to international peace and security. South Africa’s
military build-up in Namibia is exemplified by the expansion of its military air base at Grootfontein into one of the
largest of its kind in Africa, and by the building of a major
air base at Mpacha in the Caprivi Strip. The South African
armed forces are equipped with sophisticated military
weapons and material, most of which have been acquired or
built under licence from various Western countries. South
Africa has been reinforcing its Namibian troops with elite
soldiers from the Bloemfontein base and thousands of
mercenaries, with a large-scale invasion of Angola planned
for the middle of 1978; the preparations for this invasion
were laid last September, with large quantities of ammunition shipped to Namibia and barracks being built at key
positions.

21. Southern Africa refuses to live under the guns of
imperialist South Africa and its allies. We refuse to be
sacrificed to fill the coffers of imperialism. We will admit of
no threat to our sovereignty or our territorial integrity; nor
will we ever betray our revolutionary principles by denying
whatever support may be needed to aid in the attainment
of true independence by the people of Namibia, led by
their liberation movement, SWAPO. If necessary, every
Angolan man, woman and child will courageously face the
imperialist threat, from whatever quarter; we will give our
blood, we will lay down our lives, so that southern Africa
may become and remain free of imperialism, neocolonialism and apartheid.

16. This is the posture of a racist clique which walked out
of negotiations earlier this year and, with malicious timing,
seemingly accepted the proposals put forward by the five
Western members of the Security Council, but with
impossible conditions attached. A genuine liberation movement can never betray the sacred trust placed in it by the
people it represents. At the recently concluded special
session of the General Assembly on Namibia, SWAP0 once
again demonstrated its willingness to continue to negotiate.
However, no genuine liberation movement can accept the
dicta of the Fascist clique of Pretoria and still represent a
people. That sort of mercenary dealing is left to puppets
who
continue to serve the interests of imperialism and
colonialism while attempting to delude the world and their
own people that they arc independent.

22. The struggle continues. Victory is certain.
23. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is Mr. Sam Nujoma to whom the Council has
addressed an invitation under article 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
24. Mr. NUJOMA: First and foremost, 1 should like to
thank the representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria
for having sponsored our participation in this crucial debate
on the complaint by the People’s Republic of Angola
against racist South Africa. I also thank you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council for agreeing to this
request.

17. Vis-&vis Namibia, the international community has
already adopted, by an overwhelming majority, the Declaration and Programme of Action for the liberation of
Namibia. It is not coincidental that the People’s Republic
of Angola is subjected to a brutal invasion by the racist,
Fascist Pretoria rCgime just a few days after South Africa
appears to accept the proposal of the Western five. South
Africa has no intention of giving up what it has virtually
colonized, and shows every intention of continuing to use
Namibia as a base for aggression against neighbouring
sovereign African States.

25. At 6 a.m. on 4 May, just a few hours after the
conclusion of the special session of the General Assembly
on Namibia, the racist rtjgime of South Africa launched a
premeditated and massive invasion of the People’s Republic
of Angola using French-made Mirage jet fighter-bombers,
British-made Buccaneer bombers, airborne troops and
helicopter gun-ships. The racist troops took off from their
illegal bases in Namibia at Grootfontein, Ondangua, Runtu,
Ruacana and Onuno and concentrated their indiscriminate
attack on the Kassinga refugee settlement.

18. South Africa’s invasion of my country is further
directed towards pre-empting international attempts to help
SWAP0 and the Namibian people work their way towards
achieving independence, for which they have struggled SO

26. The concentrated attack on Kassinga was aimed at the
massacre of thousands of Namibian women, old people and
cltildren wlto had been given shelter there by the Angolan
Government after having fled the racist terror of the
criminal occupation r6girne of South Africa in our country.
The aim of this mass murder was to intimidate the
Namibian people, under the leadership of SWAPO, and
force them to succumb to South Africa’s neo-colonial
designs to impose a puppet regime on the Namibian people.
It is also a part of the aggressive imperialist action
throughout southern Africa and one of the many attempts
to undermine the sovereignty and violate the territoriaI
integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola.

long.

19. South African troops are still inside the People’s
Republic of Angola. It is pertinent here to invite the
Western five to examine South Africa’s contravention of
the principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, and to question Pretoria’s motives and
good faith, for it is on this latter ncn-existent item that the
Western five seem to be relying for the success of their
proposals.
3

27. In pursuit of its imperialistic and hegemonic designs in
Africa in general and in southern Africa in particular,
Pretoria has built up a huge military network in Namibia,
consisting of regular forces, commandos, citizen forces and
tribal armies as well as the Angolan counter-revolutionaries
of the Unigo National para a Independencia Total de
Angola and the Frente National para a Liberta@
de
Angola.

34. The Security Council and the international community as a whole should resolutely condemn racist South
Africa’s act of aggression against the Namibian people and
the People’s Republic of Angola. Furthermore, the Council
should not sanction any inadequate measures which will
enable South Africa to implement a neo-colonial solution in
Namibia, thereby compromising the genuine and legitimate
aspirations of the Namibian people.

28. In my address to the ninth special session of the
General Assembly on 24 Aprils I pointed out the fact that
recently South Africa had embarked on reinforcement of
its already huge army of occupation in Namibia. This
reinforcement, I stated, involved the shipment into Namibia
of large numbers of tanks, combat aircraft and artillery
pieces and large quantities of ammunition.

35. In the light of the ongoing massacres, arrests, detentions and harassment of the Namibian people, as well as the
provocative invasion of the People’s Republic of Angola,
SWAP0 calls for the imposition of mandatory economic
sanctions and a comprehensive oil and arms embargo
provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter.
36. In conclusion, I should like to reassure the Council
and the world community that no force of intimidation OI
harassment would deter the people of Namibia, under the
leadership of SWAPO, from prosecuting and intensifying
the political and armed liberation struggle until racist South
Africa is forced to end its occupation of Namibia.

29. Racist South Africa’s invasion of the People’s Republic of Angola testifies to our contention that, in refusing
to withdraw its troops from its numerous military bases in
Namibia, including Rooikop at Walvis Bay, Grootfontein
and Oshivelo, South Africa not only intends to perpetuate
its illegal occupation of our country, but also to USC it a~ a
spring-board to commit acts of aggression against neighbouring independent African States.

37. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Sparzisll): The
next speaker is the representative of Zambia, who wishes to
make a statement in her capacity as Chairman of the Group
of African States. I invite her to take a place at the Council
table and to make her statement.

30. As we have stated on several occasions before this
body and elsewhere, racist South Africa’s continued occupation of Namibia constitutes a serious threat to peace in
Africa in particular and the world in general.

38. Miss KONIE (Zambia): Sir, on b&If of the African
Group, I have the pleasure and great honour to welcome
you to the United Nations as the new Permanent Rcpresentativc of Venezuela, and to congratulate you warmly OII
your assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the month of May. The commitment
of your great country to world peace, justice and dcvelopment, particularly in the developing countries, is well
known. We in Africa appreciate in particular the active and
leading role that Venezuela has always played in the United
Nations, including in the Security Council, in support of
the struggle of the oppressed people of southern Africa for
self-determination and national independence.

31. The invasions of Angola and the attack on Namibian
refugee settlements in that country are but part of South
Africa’s over-all strategy to destroy the Namibian people’s
liberation movement, SWAPO, which is the only effective,
organized political force capable of frustrating Pretoria’s
schemes to install a puppet rCgimc in Namibia.
32. The other aspect of this strategy is the so-called AC 26
regulation, by which racist South Africa’s newly appointed
Colonial Governor, M. T. Steyn, has unleashed a repressive
terror campaign against SWAP0 leaders and supporters
inside Namibia. As a consequence, hundreds of SWAP0
leaders, members and supporters have been arrested and
detained.

39. I also wish, at the outset, to thank all the members of
the Council for having promptly responded to the request
for this meeting to consider the invasion of the People’s
Republic of Angola by the military forces of the racist
regime of South Africa. The Council’s action in this regard
manifests its firm dedication and sense of responsibility in
respect of a question which is but one integral aspect of the
challenging situation in southern Africa.

33. All these new measures of terror and intimidation by
the South African occupation rhgime in our country are
being undertaken at a time when the world is being urged
to believe that South Africa has finally come to adopt a
conciliatory and co-operative attitude regarding its withdrawal from Namibia. It is against this background that
SWAP0 has insisted and continues to insist that the
international
community should not be deceived into
believing that conditions for a negotiated settlement exist
in Namibia. It is also against this background that we
consider it imperative that a number of the outstanding and
crucial points of disagreement in the context of the current
talks must be resolved to ensure that conditions for holding
free, fair and democratic elections leading to genuine
independence will exist in Namibia.
3 Ibid.,

Plenary

Meetings,

40. It is evident to us that the speed with which the
Council has proceeded to consider the question serves to
underscore not only the significance of this specific
problem but also the impact of its ramifications, especially
in the light of the firm resolve of the United Nations and
the international community at large to achieve a speedy
solution to redress the over-all sjtuation in southern Africa.
It is needless for me to stress that the situation in southern
Africa, the root cause of which remains the continued
existence of racist minority rigimcs, increasingly constitutes a grave threat to peace and security in the region, and
to international peace and security,

1st meeting.
4

41. I shall not delve into the details of the latest invasion
of Angola by the military forces of the racist regime of
South Africa. My brother and colleague, the representative
of Angola, who preceded me, has indeed given eloquent
testimony of the barbaric and cowardly nature of the
attack and its dimensions. It has now been firmly established that on 4 May South Africa unleashed a premeditated and unprovoked massive ground and air invasion of
the Kassinga area of Cunene Province in Angola.

people of Namibia in the fight for their independence in
accordance with the provisions of the Charters of the
organization of African Unity and of the United Nations.
;?irticular mention should be made of the landmark
resolution 1514 (XV) of 1960.
the

48. Permit me to remind members of this august body
that this latest act of aggression against Angola is a familiar
devilish tactic adopted by the white racist minority rdgimes
in southern Africa against neighbouring countries. The
racist rBgimes have adopted more and more desperate
measures in their relentless but futile struggle to retain
power. Fortunately, Africa knows that their days are
numbered.

42. South

Africa, of course, used the most modern
weapons of mass destruction, supplied by some Members of
the Organization, to attack refugee camps, killing and
maiming many women, men and children, and destroying
valuable property. Racist Premier Johannes Vorster and his
cohorts have proudly admitted this and went so far as to
congratulate themselves for their savage acts. What arrogance and audacity!

49, The African Group views this most recent and
outrageous act of aggression against the People’s Republic
of Angola by racist South Africa with indignation, It is not
only a show of arrogance by the Pretoria rdgime but also a
challenge to the Western Members which, in the recent
debate during the special session of the General Assembly
on Namibia, were at pains to enjoin the African Members
and the rest of the international community to give South
Africa the benefit of the doubr so that the racist rCgime’s
genuineness in its so-called acceptance of the Western five’s
proposals could be put to the test, We are now firmly of the
opinion that not only is racist South Africa buying time: it
is in effect doing everything possible to neutralize SWAP0
and to put that vanguard for genuine independence in
disarray in order to facilitate the imposition of a so-called
internal settlement in Namibia. It is therefore paradoxical
and difficult to reconcile racist South Africa’s reported
willingness to negotiate for the peaceful settlement of the
Namibian problem with its continued barbaric acts of
aggression and repression.

43. Africa and the world know that, contrary to propaganda from South Africa and its allies, the attack was
directed against the sovereign and independent State of
Angola-period.
Once again, racist South Africa has invaded
an independent African State, a member of the Organization of African Unity.
44. The history of South African aggression against Angola
and other African States is very well known to us. In fact,
South African aggression against the people of Angola
predates the heroic independence of that country. South
Africa was a partner of the defunct Portuguese colonial
regime, which ruled over Angola for centuries. In recent
times, South Africa has stubbornly and nahely refused to
COI~IXC~
defeat by accepting the independence of Angola.
Ilncist Pretoria has irlterfered and continues to interfere
with the inalienable right of the people of Angola to
freedom and independence.

SO, Let me reiterate our observation that this latest
invasion confirms our rears that South Africa is intent on
militarizing Namibia and using that Territory as a base for
attacking African countries. This situation must not be
allowed to continue. The international community not only
must c0ndem.n it, but should adopt positive measures to
end the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa.
That is the root cause of the problem, Time for prompt
action is running Out.

45. We say to Vorster and his allies that the independence
of Angola and all independent Africa is truly irreversible.
The people of Africa, who have long been subjected to
colonial exploitation, are OII the forward march to realize
our potential and maintain our hard-won independence by
all the means at our disposal.
46. Africa is indeed aware that these sustained acts of
aggression against Angola are part of South Africa’s
expansionist policies and militarism. South Africa is intent
on controlling Africa, but this will never happen. The
apzrtlzeid rCgime still lives in the past by entertaining the
illusion that ils expansionist designs will succeed. They are
doomed to failure.

5 1. Much as this latest act of aggression is deplorable and
its consequences ominous, the States members of the
Organization of African Unity are not at all surprised at its
occurrence; for it is not coincidental that this barbaric and
reprehensible act has been perpetrated in the wake of the
recent ninth special session of the General Assembly, on
Namibia. Likewise, it was not by coincidence that the
acceptance by racist South Africa of the so-called Western
proposals for a negotiated settlement of the Nanlibian
question was accompanied almost immediately by that
rigime’s further detention of leaders of SWAPO, the sole
and authentic representative of Namibia.

47. By attacking refugee camps, South Africa erroneouslY
believes that it can force Angola, other African States and
freedom-loving people the world over to abandon their
support for the oppressed people. Let it be known that
Angola is a host to refugees who have fled their home
country, Namibia, to escape South Africa’s brutal repression. Angola is pursuing a lzumanitarian policy of caring for
refugees. For how long can innocent refugees continue to
be killed and maimed by the very forces which create their
situation? Africa will no? stand idly by while its people are
being killed every day. Furthermore, Angola is supporting

52. The invasion of Angola by the trigger-happy military
forces of South Africa has additional ominous consequences for Namibia, SWAP0 and the United Nations. It is
not by coincidence that South Africa planned and carried
out an attack on Namibisn refugee camps inside Angola
5

ilnmediately after the special session of the General
Assembly on Namibia.

dynamic leadership, will seriously and responsibly address
itself to the problem before us.

53. The African Group calls upon the %CWity
Council to
adopt prompt and effective measures to stop South African
aggression against Angola forthwith. South Africa must be
condemned in the strongest possible terms for its latest
invasion of Angola and for the killing of innocent people,
including refugees. The Council must tell racist ketOria
scrupulously to observe the territorial integrity of Angola.
This principle cannot be compromised on the altar of
irrelevant rationalization either by South Africa or by any
Member of the United Nations.

58. We have come to the Council not SO much to declare
our unequivocal support for and solidarity with the
fraternal people and Government of the People’s Republic
of Angola as they face the ferocious armed invasion on
their soil by the racist regime, for to do so would simply be
stating the obvious. Tanzania and Angola arc linked by
militant ties of brotherhood and solidarity. The struggle of
the Angoian people is in fact the struggle of the Tanzanian
people. The acts of aggression against Angola indeed
constitute acts of aggrcssjon against Tanzania. But I shall go
beyond that. It is not so much to express Tanzania’s sense
of solidarity, for in this as in other similar situations Africa
has always spoken with one voice. Thus it is not just Angola
that is complaining before the Council here today; it is all
the independent States of our continent, and indeed all the
men and women in the still unliberated areas. For Africa,
through the voice of the Chairman of the African Group,
Miss Gwendoline Konie, the representative of Zambia, has
already stated its collective position in a most eloquent
manner. And also the statement which we have heard from
the President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, constitutes not
only the authentic voice of the Namibian people but,
indeed, the valid expression of indignation of all the
fighters in southern Africa.

54. The Security Council must further censure the upartheid regime for using the international Territory of Namibia
as a launching pad for committing acts of aggression against
Angola. South Africa must get out of Namibia; it must stop
the militarization of Namibia and abide by resolutions
calling for its withdrawal from Namibia. The Council
should impose mandatory and comprehensive economic
sanctions, an oil embargo and an arms embargo under
Chapter VII of the Charter against the Fascist, racist and
arrogant white minority rBgime in South Africa, in accordance with the Programme of Action adopted at the ninth
special session of the General Assembly /resolution S-9/2/.
55. Finally, I wish to reiterate the fraternal solidarity of
the African Group with the Government and people ot
Angola in their resistance against repeated attempts by
South Africa to undermine their hard-won national independence. The African Group similarly reiterates its unreserved support for the Namibian people, who, under the
leadership of SWAPO, are waging a gallant struggle for the
liberation of their country from illegal occupation by South
Africa and the enjoyment of their inalienable and imprescriptible right to self-determination and genuine national
independence. Africa will never rest in the fulfilment of its
sacred duty to liberate every inch of its soil.

59. Nor have we come to the Council simply to draw the
attention of this distinguished body to the dangers inherent
in the situation in southern Africa as a result of the
continued acts of aggression of the minority racist rcigime.
The Council in its collective wisdom is more than aware of
that. It has on numerous occasions not only condemned
these acts of aggression of the racist rGgime but, more
importantly, unequivocally affirmed and reaffirmed that
only the liberation of Namibia and Zimbabwe and the
elimination of apartheid in South Africa will create
conditions for the attainment of justice and lasting peace in
the region.

56. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fi’om Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

60. I do not want to be cynical, for this is not the moment
for cynicism. Yet, let me add that we have not come to the
Council because we are surprised at this latest act of
aggression committed by the Pretoria authorities. A r&me
which is in itself the embodiment of aggression cannot be
expected to behave in a way consistent with recognized
international norms. Furthermore, we are not surprised
because this is not the first time that South Africa has had
the audacity to commit acts of aggression against independent States. Need I refresh the memories of the members of
the Council by recalling that, as recently as March 1976,
South Africa became the first State Member of the
Organization to be specifically condemned as an aggressor?
Need 1 also remind this august body that, since then, that
rdgime has persisted in its acts of military adventurism
against both the People’s Republic of Angola and the
Republic of Zambia? All the representatives present are
serious persons representing serious Governments. It is
thcrerore a logical assumption that all of you are familiar
with the record of the Pretoria racists as well as the record
of Council actions.

51. Mr. SALIM (United
Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, if the circumstances necessitating the convening of the Council are deplorable and unfortunate, the fact
that the Council is meeting under your presidency is very
reassuring. The Government and the people of Venezuela
have consistently supported the struggle of the African
people for self-determination and independence. Your
esteemed head of State, His Excellency President PCrez, is
an eloquent and steadfast spokesman for the cause of
colonized people. Venezuela’s support has been manifested
in many ways, including at the diplomatic, political and
material levels. It is, for example, very gratifying for me
personally to record with satisfaction the ties of militant
co-operation and understanding that prevail between our
two delegations here at the United Nations. Therefore, the
commitment of your country, coupled with your own
unquestionable talents of statesmanship and devotion to
the principles for which the Organisation stands, is an
obvious guarantee that the Council, under your wise and

61. Why, then, consjdering that background, have we
brought this question to the Council and why has my
6

delegation found it necessary to take part in the current
proceedings?

aggression and run amuck in its external ventures. In the
past, we have never failed to emphasize the need for these
countries to act in concert with the rest of the international
community to treat South Africa as the international pariah
that it is. At no time has such concerted action had more
urgency and relevancy.

62. I said I did not want to be cynical, but the truth is
that the apartheid rCgime at Pretoria believes that it can
treat the international community and in particular the
Council with contempt and cynicism and get away with it,
For how else can one explain the behaviour of the racist
authorities? Is it a mere coincidence that one day after the
General Assembly concludes it special session devoted to
Namibia, the South African re’gime mounts a full-scale
invasion of a sovereign African State with the declared
objective of physically eliminating Namibians? Is it a mere
coincidence that, at a time when the collective will of the
international community is more unanimously manifested
in terms of demanding the end of illegal occupation of the
international Territory of Namibia, the South African
authorities not only have intensified their brutd repression
of Namibians but have once again, and in a more arrogant
manner, utilized Namibia as a spring-board for aggression
against an independent African State? Can this be anything
but a calculated rebuff to and defiance of the international
community? Is this not yet another deliberate challenge
and affront to the international community?

66. It is not enough to condemn in unequivocal terms this
latest aggression by the South African re’gime. It is not
enough to denounce its continued occupation of the
international Territory of Namibia and its utilization of
that Territory as a spring-board for aggression against
independent sovereign African States, It is not enough to
reiterate our demand for the immediate ending of South
Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia. All this the Security
Council and the General Assembly have done before. Nor is
it enough to express our moral outrage and verbal condemnation. The need of the hour is to act, and act firmly and
decisively. The Council can ill afford a further deterioration
of the situation in southern Africa. It cannot afford to have
one of the Member States behave systematically, persistently and consistently in contravention of all the
principles and purposes of the Organization. The Council
cannot afford to allow a recalcitrant Member to defy its
decisions at will. For to equivocate can lead only to two
things. First, it will be sending a message to the peoples of
southern Africa, both those still under colonial and racist
domination and those that have liberated themselves, that
the only way left for them is armed resistance to the finish.
Secondly, a lack of firm decision by the Council can have
the effect of further eroding the credibility of this body
which is primarily responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We can afford such
erosion only at our own collective peril, for then South
Africa and similar outlaws will conclude that the law of the
jungle pays.

63. And while we are still asking questions about coincidences, 1 should like to pose yet another question: Is it a
mere coincidence that, at a time when efforts by the five
Western members of the Council are under way to secure a
negotiated settlement of the question of Namibia, the
Vorstcr rigime has unleashed its massive acts of aggression?
Indeed, is it just coincidental that these developments have
taken place on the eve of further talks between SWAP0 and
the representatives of the five Western Governments? Is
this not a challenge to those who have persistently
reassured us that there are in fact hopes for a negotiated
solution’? Are we to believe that the way to negotiation lies
in further aggressions and acts of wanton murder, plunder
and pillage? Can we believe that South Africa is really
desirous of complying with the will of the international
community and terminating its illegal occupation when it
resorts to further escalation of violence against Namibians
and indeed embarks on a premeditated invasion with the
objective of killing Namibian women and children and
destroying refugee camps? Is the perpetration of human
and material destruction symptomatic of the so-called
desire of the regime at Pretoria to withdraw from the
international Territory?

67. We urge the Council and more particularly those who
have in the past frustrated its actions to assume their
responsibilities and meet the challenge of the hour. The
People’s Republic of Angola expects no less, Tanzania
expects no less. But, above all, free Africa as a whole
demands no less. We urge the Council in its collective
wisdom to demonstrate through its actions that aggression
does not pay. We urge it to show that there can be no
compromise with evil. For any compromise with aggression
or any compromise with the forces of evil will make the
Council an accomplice of such aggression and evil.
68. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I wish, orally but formally, to introduce a draft resolution at this stage on the
complaint by Angola against South Africa. The document
will be issued and distributed by the Secretariat in all
languages tomorrow morning under the symbol S/12692.
Members already have in their hands a working paper
containing the draft resolution, except for some tninor
changes which will soon become clear.

64. It is our submission that this latest criminal adventure
of the Pretoria authorities constitutes a particular challenge
to the Western world, and more specifically to the five
Western members of the Council. How they respond to this
challenge, how the five Western Governments act to
confound the arrogance of the Pretoria authorities, will
determine, first, their own credibility and, secondly and
more importantly, the nature of the path that lies ahead of
us in the struggle for the liberation of Namibia.

69. 1 introduce this draft resolution on behalf of the
following seven sponsors: Bolivia, Gabon, India, Kuwait,
Mauritius, Nigeria and Venezuela.

65. We make that assertion in all seriousness and in all
solemnity. We have in the past repeatedly emphasized that
it is only the support and protection that the South African
Government enjoys from its major trading partners and
allies tha t has enabled that r&gime to perpetrate its internal

70. The first preambular paragraph would refer to the fact
that the Council has considered the letter from the
7

and territorial integrity of Namibia, and its aggressive
military build-up in the area. This is really a repetition of
Council resolution 385 (1976).

Permanent Representative of Angola transmitting a communication from the First Vice-Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of Angola [S/12690] and the letter from
the Permanent Representative of Zambia on behalf of the
African Group of States at the United Nations [S/12693/.

79. In the twelfth paragraph, the Council would reaffirm
its condemnation of the militarization of Namibia by the
illegal occupation re’gime of South Africa. This again is the
wording of resolution 385 (1976).

71. The second and third paragraphs would refer to our
hearjng of the statement of the Permanent Representative
of the People’s Republic of Angola and that of Mr. Scam
Nujoma, President of SWAPO.

80. I shall now deal with the operative part of the draft
resolution.
81. In paragraph 1, the Council would strongly condemn
this latest armed invasion perpetrated by the South African
racist r&&e
against the People’s Republic of Angola,
which constitutes a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Angola.

72. In the fourth paragraph, the Council would refer to
the fact that all Member States are obliged to refrain in
their international relations from the threat or use of force
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political
independence of any State and from acting in any other
manner inconsistent with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations, Those are general principles
which we have adopted in the past.

82. In paragraph 2, the Council would condemn equally
strongly South Africa’s utilization of the international
Territory of Namibia as a spring-board for armed invasions
of the People’s Republic of Angola,

73. In the fifth paragraph, the Council would recall its
resolution 387 (1976) in which, inter alia, it condemned
South Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola and demanded that South Africa scrupulously
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola. I shouId like to
emphasize here that the sponsors have used the word
“recalling” intentionally, bearing in mind the fact that
some members did not vote in favour of resolution
387 (1976). So we are not using the word “reaffirming”.

83. In paragraph 3, the Council would demand the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of all South
African forces from Angola.
84. In paragraph 4 the Council would further demand that
South Africa scrupulously respect the independence, savereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of
Angola.
8.5. In paragraph 5, it would reaffirm its support for the
just and legitimate struggle of the people of Namibia for the
attainment of their freedom and independence and for the
maintenance of the territorial integrity of their country,

74. In the sixth paragraph, the Council would express its
grave concern at the armed invasions committed by South
Africa in violation of the sovereignty, air space and
territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola and
in particular the armed invasion of Angola carried out on
4May 1978.

86. In paragraph 6, the Council would commend the
People’sRepublic of Angola for its continued support of
the people of Namibiain their just and legitimatestruggle.

75, In the seventh and eighth paragraphs, the Council
would express its grief at the tragic loss in human lives,
including those of Namibian refugees in Angola, caused by
the South African invasion of Angolan territory, and its
concern at the damage and destruction done by the South
African forces in Angola.

87. In paragraph 7, it would demand that South Africa
put an end to its illegaloccupation of Namibiawithout any
further delay, in compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions,in particular resolution 385 (1976)
88; In the last paragraph,paragraph8, the Council would
decide to meet again in the event of further acts of
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
People’s Republic of Angola by the South African racist
rkgimein order to considerthe adoption of moreeffective
measures,in accordancewith the appropriate provisionsof
the Charter, including Chapter VII thereof. I must here
emphasizethat we have intentionally usedthe words “to
considerthe adoption of more effective measures”.In other
words, at the appropriate time memberswill have the
opportunity to consider negatively or positively. I might
recall that the Council has only recently invoked Chapter
VII and voted unanimouslyfor a mandatory armsembargo
againstSouth Africa,

76. In the ninth paragraph, the Council would reaffirm the
inalienable right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the legitimacy of
their struggle to secure the enjoyment of such rights as set
forth in the Charter, This paragraph is very much in line
with, indeed almost a reproduction of, the relevant provision in all previous similar Security Council resolutions.
77. In the tenth paragraph, the Council would reaffirm
that the liberation of Namibia is one of the prerequisites for
the attainment of justice and lasting peace in southern
Africa and for the furtherance of international peace and
security.

89. I have great faith in the senseof justice of the Council
and have no doubt that memberswill not find it difficult to
vote in unanimity in favour of the draft resolutionI have
just introduced.

78. In the eleventh paragraph, the Counci1 would reiterate
its grave concern at South Africa’s brutal repression of the
Narnibian people and its persistent violation of their human
rights, as well as its efforts to destroy the national unity

The meetingroseat 10.50 p.m.
8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans ies librairies
et les agences
depositaims
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adresses-vous
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
es&in en venta
en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nuova York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U,S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

78-7oo05-February

1980--2,200
