S/2020/639

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 1 July 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council
As Germany assumes the presidency of the Security Council on 1 July 2020,
there will still be some restrictions imposed due to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). New York City entered “phase 2” of reopening on 22 June and is
projected to enter “phase 3” on 6 July, allowing more economic and social activities
to take place, with appropriate precautions. United Nations Headquarters remains at
“phase zero”, which limits the presence of United Nations staff on United Nations
premises; these limitations are currently in place until 31 July. On 17 and 18 June,
elections for the President of the General Assembly, new members of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council were held at Headquarters.
The members of the Security Council are in agreement th at the decision on
convening in-person meetings of the Council on the premises of United Nations
Headquarters lies with the Security Council.
Guidelines on reopening will be supplemented, as appropriate, by the modalities
for in-person meetings of the Council, as proposed under the presidency of Germany
in July 2020 (see annex).
The guidelines respond to the current circumstances, while taking into account
the need for and value of in-person diplomacy. They will be assessed continuously
and might be reviewed, adjusted or discontinued, subject to agreement among all
members.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
Security Council members (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, these briefings and
statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
President of the Security Council

20-08903 (E)

060720

*2008903*

S/2020/639

Annex to the letter dated 1 July 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council
Modalities of in-person meetings of the Security Council for July 2020
In the light of recent positive developments regarding the containment of the
COVID-19 outbreak in New York City, the Security Council intends to undertake a
gradual and phased shift towards in-person meetings of the Council at Headquarters
while continuing to ensure the safety of the delegations and of United Nations
personnel by taking all necessary health precautions. Upon receiving a request from
a member of the Security Council for a meeting to be conve ned at Headquarters, the
presidency will consult with members in order to achieve a consensual decision.
Location and access
According to the information submitted by the Secretariat, it would be possible to
conduct Security Council meetings in the Economic and Social Council chamber while
complying with appropriate social distancing measures. The Economic and Social
Council chamber provides for a capacity of 97 participants while respecting social
distancing (see enclosure). All members of the Security Council will have assigned seats
in the room. Access to the meeting rooms will be limited to two persons per delegation
and a required number of United Nations and Security Council Secretariat staff
(approximately 38). For the purposes of contact tracing, security officers will register
each participant who enters the Economic and Social Council chamber.
Entrance and exit to the Economic and Social Council chamber will be adapted
to allow no-touch entry. The entrance to the chamber will be organized through the
door adjacent to the Delegates Lounge. The door of the chamber facing the
Trusteeship Council Chamber will serve as the exit. Doors will open at 9.30 a.m. or
2.30 p.m. on days where a physical session is scheduled. Delegations are kindly asked
to be in the room at least 10 minutes in advance so that the meetings can start at
10 a.m. or 3 p.m. sharp.
Health and security
In the interest of the health, safety and well-being of all delegates and staff,
anyone not feeling well should not come to Headquarters. Members of the Security
Council are encouraged to limit the number of delegates to a maximum of “1 plus 1”.
Participants are kindly requested to limit the time they are physically present at
Headquarters to the strict minimum necessary for conducting official business. Social
distancing must be maintained at all times.
Within the conference room, participants will be asked to circulate clockwise
only and to respect the required physical distance of two meters (six feet) at all times.
Two seats will remain unoccupied between delegates. All persons physically present
inside the conference rooms are required to wear a face covering mask. Masks must
also be worn at all times in common areas of Headquarters.
There will be no distribution of documents in the meeting rooms. Likewise, all
delegations should refrain from the distribution of any material or documents in the
meeting rooms, on the tables and boards outside the meeting rooms or elsewhere at
Headquarters.
The meetings will be made public only by live broadcasting on UN Web TV.
Rules of procedure
For the in-person meetings, the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council apply.
2/3

20-08903

20-08903

Enclosure
Seating chart of the Economic and Social Council chamber for social distancing *

S/2020/639

3/3

* Circulated in the language of submission only.
