NATIONS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.....,...,....................

1

.., . ~. . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution
331 (1973) (S/10929) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . . . . * . . * *

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 724)
Adoptionoftheagenda

s/PV. 1724

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securiljl Coutrcil. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or ic which information

about it is given,

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiotts and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDTWENTY-FOURTHMEETING
Held in New York

on Wednesday,

President: Mr. Y&OV MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist

13 June 1973, at 10.30 a.m.

Republics).

M. Al Saffar (Bahrain) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.

PreseW The representatives of the follow~g States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I invite
the first speaker on the list for today’s meeting of the
Council, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia,
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

3. Mr. SAKKAF (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, allow me
to thank you for granting my request to be allowed to
express the views of my Government on the item under
consideration.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l724)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 I (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929).

4. It is six years now since the Zionists occupied territories
belonging to three States Members of the United Nations. It
was by illicit means and all kinds of pressuresbrought to
bear on the United Nations that Palestine was artificially
partitioned in 1947.

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.

5. My Government has, from the very beginning, taken a
definite and consistent position concerning the Palestinian
question. His Majesty King Faisal, in his historic speech
delivered on. 26 November 1947, on the eve of the
infamous resolution of the partition of Palestine, declared:

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(~5) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973) (S/10929)

“Today should not be considered as Palestine Day. In
fact, it is United Nations Day, It is the day when either
justice or tyranny will prevail, It is the day when either
right or wrong will be upheld.

1, The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): In accordance with the decisions taken by the Security Council at
previous meetings, I intend, with. the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, the United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian
Arab Republic; Nigeria, Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates, Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania, Kuwait, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Iran and Bahrain to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s consideration of
the situation in the Middle East.

“Remember that in the preamble of tire Charter you
have pledged before God and history that you would
stand firm against the aggressor and direct your effort to
establish world peace and international security. IS not
what is being attempted today in Palestine a case of
flagrant aggression? IS it not tyrannical that an .international organization is intervening to partition a country
in order to present a part of it to the aggressor?“1
6. I, myself, when I had the honour of representing His
Majesty King Faisal Bin Abdul Aziz on the occasion Of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations in 1970,
made it clear that Zionism is an aggressive,expansionist and
racial movement that is basically in conflict with all the
lofty ideals of mankind and constitutes a continuous danger
to world peace.2

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. II. El-Zayyat
(Egypt) and Mr. Y, Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table; and Mr. A. H. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. S. Salim
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. H. G. Ouangmotching
(Chnd), Mr. H. Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. E. 0.
Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. A. Bouteflika (Algeria), Mr. M Zentar
(Morocco),
Mr. A. Al-Pachachi (United Arab Emirates),
Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia}, Mr. R E. Jackson (Guyana),
Mr. M. El Hassen (Mauritania), Mr. A. Y. Bishara (Kuwait),
Mr, J. X Jamal (Qatar), Mr. 0. Sakkaf (Saudi Arabia),
Mr, E. Ghorra (Lebanon), Mr. F. Hoveyda (Iran) and Mr. S.

1 See OfjXd Records of the General Assembly, Second Session,
Plenary Meetings, 125 th meeting.
2 Ibid., Twentyfifth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1871th meeting,
para. 202.

1

7. We regret to have to note that since the Palestinian
question was brought to the attention of the United
Nations scores of resolutions have been adopted condemning Israel for its aggression, The non-compliance of Israel
with all those resolutions is known to all of you.

proceedings of this Council your vast experience, your
skill and tact as a diplomat and the revolutionary spirit
of your great country. My delegation hopes that the
personal prestige of your good self and the dynamism
of the country you represent will act as positive
catalysts and will help us to find solutions and answers
to some of the burning problems of the world such as
the current item on the agenda of the Council. Beyond
that, we are nappy to see you presiding, Sir, because your
presidency of this Council helps to strengthen the happy
and cordial relations which exist between your great
country and mine. My delegation will give you its full
co-operation because we know that in these matters
co-operation between your Government and people, on the
one hand, and my Government and people, on the other, is
vital. This occasion affords both our countries the opportunity to work in a common endeavour in this Council for
peace, co-operation among nations and security for all.

8. In short, Israel saw fit to ignore the United Nations
resolutions and has been consolidating its occupation of
Arab territories in utter violation of the letter and the spirit
of the United Nations Charter.
9. Our deep concern for peace and stability in the Middle
East is rendered more serious by the inability of this
Organization to put an end to the aggression of a Member
State which has flouted the basic purposes and principles of
the Charter.
10. I do not intend to engagein polemics. The position of
my Government has been clearly expressed and is to be
found in the records of this Organization. However, I deem
it is necessary once again to repeat here the position of my
Government in the simplest terms. First, we firmly insist on
the complete and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all the Arab territories occupied since June 1967.
Second, we firmly uphold the right of the Palestinian
people to return to their homeland. Should the Palestinians
be denied that right, there can be no solution to this
problem. Third, we should like to make it absolutely clear
that my Government, like, I am sure, every other Arab
Government, stands strongly behind Egypt in declaring
that, if the Zionists refuse to withdraw from the occupied
territories, there will be no other choice than to resort to
action which will compel them to do so.

15. I should not like to let pass this opportunity to
express my delegation’s gratitude and appreciation to your
predecessor, my brother and colleague Ambassador Abdulla
of the Sudan, for the energetic and able manner in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council during the month of
May. Ambassador Abdulla’s remarkable and brilliant performance as last month’s President of the Council was a
credit not only to his country but also to the tradition of
this august Council.
16. I wish to take this opportunity also to express my
delegation’s gratitude to the Secretary-General and, through
him, to Ambassador Gunnar Jarring, for their untiring
efforts in pursuit of peace in the Middle East, efforts which
are brought out so clearly in the report before us submitted
by the Secretary-General [S/10929/.

11. Within 25 years, the Zionists expanded their authority
by force to territories that have gone far beyond the 1947
lines. Hence, as long as the Palestinians are denied access to
their homeland we do not see how peace can be established
in the region. It would be an understatement to say that the
situation is fraught with great danger which may easily pave
the way to a world conflict.

17. I am addressing the Council today in two capacities:
first, as representative of the Republic of Kenya in the
Security Council and, secondly, in discharging the responsibility which has been conferred on my Foreign Minister and
the Foreign Ministers of Nigeria, Chad, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Guinea and Algeria, who have been designated
by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to be its
spokesmen on the item currently before the Council. In this
connexion, I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
most sincere apologies of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Kenya, Mr. Njoroge Mungai, who could not
participate in this debate because of illness.

12. It is high time for you, members of the Council, to
prevent the outbreak of a war which may spread and get so
out of hand as to endanger the whole of mankind. We do
not wish to sound as if we were alarmists. However, it is
quite possible that a chain of events that may unfold from
the dangerously unstable Middle East situation could easily
force the hands of many Governments inside as well as
outside the region, to take action from which there may be
no return.
13. Once more we find it is our duty to raise our voice,
not so much to protest past inaction on the part of the
Council, but to solemnly warn its members that evading a
prompt solution may lead to a situation which even the
super-Powers would not be able to contain.

18. Under Article 52 of the Charter of the United Nations,
OAU is Africa’s regional body concerned with matters
relating to co-operation in the maintenance of international
peace and security in our region. To fulfn this function,
OAU, as far back as 1963, stated its belief that “the United
Nations is an important instrument for the maintenance of
peace and security among nations and for the promotion of
the economic and social development of all peoples”.

14. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, before
touching on the substance of the subject on our agenda, I
should like on behalf of my delegation to congratulate you
on your elevation to the important position of President of
this august Council. My delegation is confident that during this month you will bring to bear on the work and

19. In order fully to harmonize the objectives and
activities of OAU with those of the United Nations, the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of OAU in
1963 adopted a resolution, subsequently endorsed by the
General Assembly of the United Nations, which stated that
OAU
2

“Reaffirms its dedication to the purposes and principIes
of the United Nations Charter and its acceptance of all
obligations contained in the Charter”.

(0) Reaffirmed its adhesion to the principles of respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of member
States;

20. It is on behalf of OAU and, consequently, on behalf of
Africa, that my delegation is speaking today to state its
view and affirm its position on the issue before the
Council-namely, the situation in the Middle East. As an
African regional organization, OAU naturally takes three
positions which have a direct bearing on the item on the
Council’s agenda. They are: OAU’s concern for the peace
and security of its members; the territorial sovereignty and
integrity of States members of OAU; and non-aggression on
any of its members. On these three matters the charter of
OAU states inter alia:

(b/ Voiced concern at the grave situation prevailing in the
United Arab Republic, an African country whose territory
is partially occupied by a foreign Power;
fc) Expressed its sympathy to the United Arab Republic;
and
(d) Decided to work within the United Nations m order
to secure the evacuation of the United Arab Republic’s
territory.
24. Secondly, the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of OAU meeting in its fifth ordinary session in
Algiers in September 1968:

“The member States, in pursuit of the purposes stated
in article II, solemnly affirm and declare their adherence
to the following principles:
“1.

the sovereign equality of all member States;

“2.

non-interference in the internal affairs of States;

(a) Again reaffirmed
Republic;

its support for the United Arab

(b) Called for the withdrawal of foreign troops from all
Arab territories occupied since5 June 1967, in accordance
with the resolution adopted by the Security Council on 22
November 1967; and,

“3. respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of each State and for its inalienable right to independent
existence;

(c) Appealed to all members of OAU to use their
influence to ensure strict implementationof that resolution.

“4. peaceful settlement of disputes by negotiation,
mediation, conciliation, or arbitration”.
I have quoted this article partly to underline our adherence
to the fundamental question of the territorial integrity of
all States and partly to demonstrate to the Council the
similarity of the fundamental principles of OAU and those
of the United Nations.

25. Thirdly, at its sixth ordinary sessionin Addis Ababa,
in September 1969, the Assembly of Headsof State and
Government of OAU:
[a) Reaffirmed its opposition to the occupation by force
of any part or the whole of one country by another;

21. Regarding the specific issue on the Council’s agenda,
OAU’s involvement stems from the tenets and fundamental
principles of its charter as well as from the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. OAU has
been seized with the problem of the situation in the Middle
East over a number of years and a study of the resolutions
and declarations adopted at sessions of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of OAU since its inception
shows a pattern of growing concern, disappointment,
disenchantment and sense of danger. This is because OAU
cannot turn a blind eye on the fact that the territory of one
of its founding members, the Arab Republic of Egypt, has
been the object of military occupation since June 1967,
contrary to the purposes and principles not only of the
Charter of the United Nations, but also of OAU itself.

(b) Reaffirmed its solidarity with the United Arab
Republic;
(c) Emphatically reaffirmed the contents of the resolution adopted at the fifth sessionof the OAU Assembly,in
Algiers in September1968, quoted above.
26. Fourthly, at its seventhordinary session
in September
1970, the Assembly:
(a) Expressedits grave concernthat for over three yearsa
part of the territory of a sisterAfrican State wasstill under
occupation by foreign troops, which would threaten world
peace;
fb) Reaffirmed its earlier resolutionson the samesubject,
and againcalled for the withdrawal of foreign troops from
all occupied Arab territories to the linesof 5 June 196’7in
implementation of Security Councilresolution242 (1967);

22. I should like first to enumerate the various decisions of
OAU on the Middle East crisis since the outbreak of the
six-day war to the present. The main aim of this exercise is
to show the gravity with which African countries view the
situation, and the rationale of the collective African
position and attitude in relation to the situation in the
Middle East.

(c) Further expressedits solidarity with the United Arab
Republic and appealedto all member States of OAU to
support the efforts of the United Nations SpecialRepresen
tative to implement resolution 242 (1967), taking into
account that it cannot be implementedconditionally or
partially; and,

23. First, at its fourth ordinary session held in Kinshasa, in
September 1967, the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of OALJ solemnly
3

(d) Requested all States members of OAU to use their
influence to ensure the full implementation of that resolution.

withdrawal of Israel from the Arab territories, and con.
demned Israel’s attitude which impedes the implementation
of resolution 242 (1967) based on the Charter of the
United Nations, which forbids, under any pretext, the
acquisition of territories through the use of force.

27. Fifthly, in June 1971, at its eighth session, the
Assembly of OAU once again:

30. Finally, the OAU Assembly requested all States
Members of the United Nations to refrain from supplying
Israel with any weapons, military equipment or moral
support likely to enable it to strengthen its military
potential and to perpetuate its occupation of Arab aad
African territories.

(a) Reaffirmed emphatically its previous resolutions on
the subject and called for the immediate withdrawal of
Israeli armed forces from all Arab territories to the lines of
5 June 1967, in implementation of resolution 242 (1967);
(b) Expressed its full support to the efforts of the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General to
implement resolution 242 (1967) and to his initiative for
peace of 8 February 1971;

31. The result of the latest endeavours by OAU to help
solve the Middle East conflict is contained in the OAU
Assembly resolution of May 1973 which has been circulated as a document of the Council [see S/10943/.

(c) Reaffirmed its solidarity with the United Arab
Republic and appreciated the positive attitude reflected in
its reply of 1.5 February 1971 to the Special Representative’s initiative for peace as a practical step for establshing a just and lasting peace in the Middle East;

32. As a representative of one of the OAU member
countries designated by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government, as one of Africa’s spokesmen at this Council
and in the face of the struggles and endeavours by OAU as
outlined earlier, my mandate can be stated as follows.

(d) Deplored Israel’s defiance of that initiative and called
upon it to make a similar positive reply to the Special
Representative’s initiative for peace of 8 February 1971;
and,

33. In relation to the principles and the purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations, we are charged with the task
of taking action in relation to the Middle East conflict in
accordance with Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations which states:

(e) Requested the current Chairman of OAU to consult
with the Heads of State and Government so that they could
use their influence to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 242 (1967).

“To maintain international peace and security, and to
that end: to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of
the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in
conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the
peace”.

28. Sixthly in the aftermath of the abortive OAU initiative
to seek a peaceful solution to the Middle East crisis, at its
ninth ordinary session the OAU Assembly, in Rabat, in
June 1972, once again:
(a) Congratulated Egypt for its co-operation with the
Committee of Ten African Heads of State and Government,
and for its positive attitude and its continuous efforts for
the restoration of peace in the region;

34. Because it is already the verdict of this Council and
the General Assembly that the existing situation in the
Middle East constitutes a threat to international peace and
security, we aremandatedto request the Security Council
to exerciseits primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in relation to the Middle
East situation. Furthermore, we are directed to insist that
in dischargingtheseduties,the Security Council must act in
accordancewith the principles and purposesof the Charter
of the United Nations and the various declarations, deci.
sions and resolutions of this Council and the General
Assembly.

(b) Deplored Israel’s negative and obstructive attitude
which prevents the resumption of the Jarring mission;
(c) Invited Israel publicly to declare its adherence to the
principle of non-annexation of territories through the use
of force, and further, invited Israel to withdraw immediately from all the occupied Arab territories to pre-June
1967 lines in accordance with resolution 242 (1967);
(d) Reaffirmed in the name of African solidarity and in
pursuance of article II, paragraph 1 c; of the OAU charter,
its effective support to the Arab Republic of Egypt in its
legitimate struggle to recover totally and by every means its
territorial integrity.

35. In this respect,my delegationwould like to draw the
attention of the Council to the responsibility of Members
of the United Nations to fulfil, in good faith, the
obligations assumedby them in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the solemnundertaking
by Member countries to refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
integrity and political independence of any State. My
delegationwould also like to recall the provisions of the
following declarations, resolutions and decisions of the
GeneralAssemblyand the Council.

29. Article II, paragraph 1 c, of the OAU charter calls
upon OAU member States to defend their sovereignty, their
territorial integrity and independence. The Assembly in
Rabat urged all States members of OAU to give Egypt every
assistance, called on all Members of the United Nations to
take all initiatives for the immediate and unconditional
4

36. I should like to refer to General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples, which is a basic resolution of the
General Assembly. The international community cannot
remain unconcerned when the territory of a Member State
is being subjected to a regime which is akin to a new form
of colonialism.
37. I should like to draw-your attention to the resolution
on permanent sovereignty over natural resources which
clearly prohibits the exploitation of natural resources from
the territories presently occupied by Israel for the benefit
of Israelis, as is happening at the moment.
38. I should like to refer to the four GenevaConventions
regulating the conduct of warfare, particularly the Geneva
Convention on the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, which should be strictly adhered to in order to
safeguard the right of civilian populations in the occupied
Arab territories, SO as to ensure the protection of their
human rights.
39. Finally, I wish to refer briefly to the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. I refer to resolution
2625 (XXV), which was unanimously adopted during the
commemorative session of the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Organization. Among the many principles which were
proclaimed therein, I wish to refer to the first principle,
namely
“The principle that States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations.”
Under this principle, the following elaboration was made:
“Every State has the duty to refrain in its international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial
integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations. Such a threat or use of
force constitutes a violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations and shall never be
employed as a means of settling international issues.
“ . *.
“Every State has the duty to refrain from the threat or
use of force to violate the existing international boundaries of another State or as a means of solving international disputes, including territorial disputes and problems concerning frontiers of States.
“Every State . , . has the duty to refrain from the threat
or use of force to violate international lines of demarcation, such as armistice lines, established by or pursuant to
an international agreement to which it is a party or which
it is otherwise bound to respect. Nothing in the foregoing
shall be construed as prejudicing the positions of tile
parties concerned with regard to the status and efhfccts of

such lines under their special regimes or as affecting their
temporary character.
“
.

.

.

“The territory of a State shall not be the object of
military occupation resulting from the use of force in
contravention of the provisions of the Charter. The
territory of a State shall not be the object of acquisition
by another State resulting from the threat or use of force.
No territorial acquisition resulting from the threat or use
of force shall be recognized as legal.”
40. Those provisions are very relevant to the Middle East
crisis and the interpretation
of Council resolution
242 (1967), which, my country continues to believe, offers
the only basis for an equitable and just resolution of the
crisis. There cannot be a derogation, for any reason
whatsoever, from the principle of the territorial integrity of
States and the concomitant duty not to violate existing
international boundaries and indeed international lines of
demarcation. In this connexion, we should like to see all
States which participate in this debate, particularly the
African States, which are mostly weak and small, clearly
declare the inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by
force of arms. The security of one State cannot be
guaranteed through the acquisition of vantage points or
strategic positions on the territories of neighbouring States.
41. In the opinion of my delegation, it is therefore
erroneous to interpret resolution 242 (1967) as forming the
basis for a general revision of boundaries in the area so as to
arrive at what are called secure and recognised boundaries.
That could never have been the intention of the Council,
because that would have amounted to sanctioning an
illegality. This is contrary to existing boundary pre-emptory
norms of international law, that is, the sanctity of existing
boundaries and respect for the territorial integrity of all
States. This principle of the sanctity of existing boundaries
was only last year endorsed by the International Law
Commission in its draft articles on the succession of States
in respect of matters other than treaties.
42. It is the firm belief of the delegation of Kenya that,
even at this late stage, the solution to the Middle East
conflict still lies in the realistic implementation of resolution 242 (1967). The situation that now exists in the
area-of %o peace and no war”-can hardly be expected to
last for very much longer before a general conflagration
erupts which would seriously threaten international peace
and security not only in the Middle East but in the whole
world. The present situation of forcible occupation of the
territory of a member State of OAU by an extracontinental Power poses a negative precedent which might be
emulated by the racist colonial minority regimes in southern Africa under the guise of the so-called secure and
recognized boundaries. More significantly, the confrontation in the Middle East diverts Africa’s resources and efforts
from the liberation struggle in southern Africa. Unfortunately, it can only prolong the deprivation and suffering of
our people in southern Africa.
43. The manner in which the present crisis has developed
poses a serious challenge to the international community,

friendly relations between the Soviet Union and Kenya. 1
am proud to have had the honour to participate directly ~1
the development and strengthening of relations of friendship and co-operation between the USSR and Kenya, and
to visit your country, Mr. Ambassador, and its fine capital,
with which, as we say, I fell in love at first sight. I also had
the great honour to be received by your distinguished
President, Mr. Kenyatta, and to have a very interesting
conversation with that outstanding fighter for Africa’s
freedom. I can assure you for our part that the Soviet
Government and people will continue in future to make
every effort to develop and strengthen friendly relations
between the Soviet Union and Kenya, and between the
Soviet Union and all sovereign States in Africa.

particularly through the widespread resort to terrorism. My
delegation is particularly perturbed at the use of terrorism
by official organs of the State of Israel, which, we fear,
might be copied or emulated by the racialist, colonialist and
minority regimes of southern Africa. We are not being
alarmist at all. In fact, the racists are already thinking along
those lines. In an article entitled “Fear Grows on BlackWhite Borders” published by 7ke Times of London on
9 June 1973, that is, four days ago, there appears the
following:
“The liberal English-language papers have been noisily
critical of President Kaunda for his handling of the
incident, and one of the more conservative columnists,
writing in the English-language Financial Gazette, suggested that it would be a good thing to send South
African saboteurs into Zambia.

47. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation fioat
French): Mr. President, first of all, as is customary, I should
like to convey to you the congratulations of the French
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of our
Council. Everyone here is aware of your great experience
and your authority. Wewill certainly need those qualitiesif
the difficult and important debatethat we havejust begun
on the situation in the Middle East is to be concluded and
brought to an end.

“The point was taken by a former commandant-general
of the South African Defence Force, General S. A.
Melville, who,.mooted the formation of a private mercenary force to launch ‘reciprocal terrorist-style attacks on
Zambia and Tanzania’.”
44. On the issue of violence, members will remember that
I had the following to say on 18 April 1973 in this Council
while discussing the situation in Lebanon:

48. The exceptional presence in this room of several
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, the sustainedattention with
which the opening statementshave been listened to, the
placewhich the international pressis giving to our work-all
of this showsindeedthe major interest in this debate that
our Council hasdecided to hold at the request of the Arab
Republic of Egypt. The purpose of this discussion, in
accordancewith the provisions of resolution 33 I (1973),
adoptedon 20 April last, is to considerthe situation in the
Middle East sinceJune 1967. Accordingly, it is not merely
a questionof studying any particular aspectof the conflict,
but rather one of seekingthe meansfor putting an end to
this situation within arrangementsrespecting the resolutions of the United Nations.

“We cannot but regret the human suffering that has
ensued as a result of this situation. We thus strongly
condemn all acts of aggravation of the situation and all
acts of terrorism and counter-terrorism; we passionately
condemn these in the name of human dignity and in the
name of peace. Terrorism is not a commodity for
export.” [I 709th meeting, para. 8.1
4.5. Therefore we wish to address an appeal to the
Government of Israel, a country with which my country
has always enjoyed friendly diplomatic relations, to reassess
its policy and heed the voice of the international community in its call for peace withjustice for all States in the
Middle East. It is only with peace that the tragedy of
suffering, particularly of the Palestinians can be resolved.
We appeal to Israel to abandon its present arrogance, its
militaristic posture and its ethnic idiosyncrasy; we appeal to
the people of Israel to eschew the pursuit and worship of
expansionism and militarism, for Israel stands to gain
considerably more by adopting a peaceful policy towards
its neighbours than from its present policy of toughness
towards its neighbours. Israel stands to gain if only it can
heed the voice of the international community, the voice of
the Organization of African Unity and the voice of the
United Nations Security Council. Those who believe in
hawkish policies should remember that six years ago Israel
was one of the most popular countries, but Israel’s present
posture serves only to isolate it from its friends and
well-wishers.

49. At the request of the Council the Secretary-General
has drawn up a detailed report retracing the efforts
undertaken by his Special Representative, Ambassador
Jarring, in pursuance of resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967. My delegationwould like to extend its
thanks to the Secretary-Generaland to his Special Representative for the care with which this report has been
prepared.In preciseand objective language,this document
clearly brings out the respective positions of the parties
regardingthe application of the principles contained in
resolution242 (1967). It emergesfrom this document that
the reply given by Israel to Mr. Jarring’s aide-mhmoireof
8 February 1971[S/10403, annex I/ constitutes one of the
primary obstaclesto the application of that resolution and
to the beginningof a processleadingto peace.
50. Despitethe lack of any results from the efforts that
they have madeheretofore with patienceand courage-and
we wish to pay a tribute to them for that-the Secretary
General and Mr. Jarring state that they are prepared to
continue with their task in the hope of facilitating a
solution.

46. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Kenya for his statement and for his
kind words about my country and about the development
of friendly relations between the Soviet Union and Kenya. I
fully share his view in that regard and, for my part, I would
like to express my great satisfaction at the development of

51. No one amongus, I think, can doubt that a general
and final settlement of this new “question of the Middle
6

East” is essential, and all of the statements made so far
around this table testify to that. The situation which
prevails in that particularly sensitive area, despite the
cease-fire instituted in the month of August 1970, still
remains fraught with dangers, both in itself and because of
the serious risks it entails. This situation is contrary both to
the spirit and the letter of the Charter, to the rules of
international law, to the resolutions of the United Nations,
and also to the very interests of the parties and indeed of all
the countries of the region.

56. With respect to the text of resolution 242 (1967)
itself, it is clear that Israel’s commitment to withdraw from
the territories occupied in June 1967 should be balanced by
an end to belligerence and by recognition of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the States
concerned, including of course Israel, a Member of our
Organization and recognized as such ever since it was
created.
57. The two essential elements in resolution 242 (1967)
are inseparable: no withdrawal without commitments for
peace, but no commitments for peace without withdrawal,
That is why the Israeli response to Mr. Jarring’s aidememoire constitutes a prior condition which nothing can
justify. The dialogue should be started on a footing of
equality and not on a footing of relations of force. In
stating that it will not withdraw to the lines obtaining prior
to 5 June 1967 Israel is undermining the balance in
resolution 242 (1967). As regards the concept of “secure
and recognized boundaries”, this is in no way contradictory
to the principle of withdrawal from the territories occupied
in June 1967. It simply expresses the need to define and
authenticate once and for all the frontiers between the
countries involved by giving them the status of internationally cecognized frontiers. As we have always said, this
definition of frontiers does not mean that certain changes
of minor importance by common agreement cannot be
introduced in the lines of 4 June 1967 in the interest of the
parties, and this without any infringement of the principle
of the territorial integrity of States. As regards Egypt more
particularly and taking into account the case of Gaza, there
is no doubt that there exists between Egypt and Israel an
internationally recognized frontier.

52. The continued occupation by Israel of sizable areas of
territory belonging to three neighbouring Arab countries
obviously constitutes a standing violation of the principles
recognized by the community of nations, and in particular
the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force. It is appropriate therefore to put an end
to that situation in conditions which are in accordance with
the various resolutions of the United Nations, and in
particular resolution 242 (1967), and which provide all of
the parties concerned with the guarantees indispensable for
the establishment of a lasting peace. Of course we understand Israel’s concern to safeguard its security, but we do
not think that the occupation of territories that quite
obviously belong to neighbouring countries is likely to
ensure that security. Those countries have an inalienable
right to sovereignty and territorial integrity; no one can
dispute the fact that they have this right, and it is only
legitimate that they should appeal to our Organization to
have it respected. I cannot believe that Israel can seriously
envisage establishing satisfactory relations with its neighbours as long as this occupation continues; and we all know
that this occupation increases resentments, blocks all
initiatives and undermines any chance of peace.

58. With regard to the provisions of resolution 242 (1967)
which appear in paragraph 2 and which concern freedom of
navigation, refugees and the demilitarized zones, they give a
precise idea of the international guarantees that will have to
be provided either in order to facilitate the execution of the
agreement to be prepared or in order to ensure its lasting
character.

53. Speaking. on behalf of Africa, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria has told us of “the deep concern”
displayed by all African countries at the continued occupation by Israel of part of the territory of the Arab Republic
of Egypt; he said that in this very room. This concernwhich other African speakers have echoed-is, we may say,
felt by alt those who fear that the Middle East may become
the theatre of a new confrontation, while a general climate
of relaxation of tension appears to be emerging everywhere
else.

59. I should like to talk now about the Palestine refugees
whose position was dealt with in General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1 I December 1948. After the war of
June 1967 the problem acquired new dimensions. Beyond
its humanitarian aspects, for which the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East is responsible, its political aspect has appeared and
developed in recent years to such a degree that no
settlement could or henceforth should overlook the pcoblems of the Palestine people.

54. If the need for a settlement therefore appears evident,
the principles on which such a settlement should be based
are themselves well known. These principles are, first of all,
those of international law as they are proclaimed in the
Charter, and in particular that principle which provides that
“Members shall refrain in their international relations from
the threat or use of force”. These principles, moreover, are
those which are defined under resolution 242 (1967).

60. I turn now to the role which should devolve upon the
Council in this affair. Whereas the situation in the Near East
has appeared on the agenda of the United Nations for more
than a quarter of a century, and although dozens of
resolutions have been adopted on this question both by the
Council and the General Assembly, without their having so
far the results that were expected, we cannot fail to satisfy
the moving and legitimate request put to us by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Egypt. And it is not that we should
attempt to impose solutions which, since they do not have
the support of the parties would remain a dead letter, but it

55. There is no need for me to restate the importance of
that text which in our opinion has a two-fold advantage OF
having been adopted unanimously and of spelling out the
respective obligations of the parties. Furthermore, it has
acquired special merit in the fact that it was accepted by
three of the parties to the dispute: Egypt, Jordan and
Israel. We also know that the aide-&moire of Mr. Jarring
met with a favourable reception at Amman.
7

remains dangerous. They reaffirm that the Security
Council resolution adopted on 22 November 1967 shou1d
be put into effect. They favour the view that, in
accordance with that resolution, the Special Reprasen.
Secretary-General,
tative of the United Nations
Mr. Jarring, who was entrusted by the Security Council
with promoting such a settlement, should continue his
mission with a view to the establishment of a just and
stable peace involving the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all the occupied territories, the recognition by all
the countries concerned of the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of each State in the
area, and also respect for the rights and interests of all
peoples in the area, including the Arab people of
Palestine.”

seems to me that it is our duty to make a fresh effort in
order to emerge from the impasse in which we find
ourselves and to facilitate the search for and the application
of a settlement.
61. Seen in this light it would seem that the Council
should clearly reaffirm
the validity of resolution
242 (1967) in its totality, having in mind the fact that any
change would threaten to break the balance of the
resolution. It should naturally take into account the other
United Nations resolutions as well as the recent report of
the Secretary-General. But it would appear that its role
cannot be confined to recalling the past. Quite the
contrary, it should speak out in favour of a resumption of
the action which has been carried out heretofore by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in orderto use the language of paragraph 3 of the resolution-“to
promote agreement and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful
and accepted settlement”. We know quite well that the
likelihood of direct negotiations is still ruled out. If the goal
to be attained is of course the fact that in due course a
peace agreement should be completed which would of
necessity imply the mutual commitment of the parties, it is
equally evident that the intervention of the United Nations
is essential to achieve this goal, and therefore one should
not rule out any suggestion or new mediation to this end.

65. In my capacity as PRESIDENT of the Security
Council, I now invite the representative of the United Arab
Emirates Mr. Al-Pachachi, to take his place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

66. Mr. AL-PACHACHI
(United
Arab
Emirates):
Mr. President, I should like first of all to thank you and
members of the Security Council for giving me this
opportunity to take part in your present discussions. I am
particularly happy, Mr. President, to see you presiding over
the Council in this important debate. I have had the
privilege of working with you for many years in this house
and I have always admired your great qualities and your
ability as the eloquent and dedicated spokesman of your
great country.

62. The French delegation is ready to participate in
concrete fashion in this task, in close co-operation with the
other members of the Council. I shall not go back over the
efforts that France, side by side with other countries, has
never ceased to exert in recent years, in particular by
providing its full support to the Jarring mission, to enable
the United Nations to discharge the task entrusted to it.
That was the purpose of the meeting of the permanent
members of the Council. We remain ready, for our part, to
resume this action, and it is not we who are responsible for
the fact that it is not being continued.

67. I should also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his useful and informative and objective reports, and to his Special Representative, my friend
Ambassador Jarring, for his tireless efforts in the cause of
peace.
68. As the newest member of this Organization, the
United Arab Emirates welcomes this opportunity to express
its views on the great issue which for 25 years has
preoccupied the United Nations. As an Arab country in the
Middle East we are vitally concerned with the serious threat
to the peace and security of the area arising out of Israel’s
continued occupation of the lands it seized in June of
1967.

63. In conclusion, I should like to make an appeal both to
the members of the Council and to the countries directly
concerned. I would appeal to members of the Council to
agree to speak out clearly on the means of putting an end
to the conflict. I would appeal to the parties concerned,
and primarily to Israel, to agree to apply, under the aegis of
the Council, resolution 242 (1967). The vital interests of
the peoples of all the countries of the region, the interests
of the international community as a whole and the interests
of peace are at stake.

69. We are disturbed by the apparent failure of the United
Nations so far to deal effectively with this dangerous
situation. The United Nations as the embodiment of man’s
quest for peace cannot evade its responsibility. An international organization which fails ‘to deal with the wor1d’s
most dangerous conflict would neither obtain. nor deserve
the respect of mankind. We shall not shirk our responsibility to do everything possible within our modest means to
help the Arab States concerned to recover their lost
territories and to bring about by diplomatic means a more
objective, even-handed and just attitude by those who have
yet to play a role commensurate with their responsibilities
and world-wide interests.

64. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): As the
representative of the SOVIET UNION, I should like to
express my great satisfaction at the fact that a similarity of
views on the matter before the Council exists between the
French and Soviet leaders, and has been officially set down
in international documents. In the Soviet-French communique relating to the talks held between the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Comrade Leoxlid llyich
Brezhnev, and the President of France, Mr. Pompidou, at
Zaslavl, in the Soviet Union, on 11-12 January 1973, we
read:

70. In the many speeches and interventions, which I have
a feeling he immensely enjoys, the gentleman sitting on my
right has dealt with three themes: first, that resolution

“The Soviet Union and France declare their profound
concern at the fact that the situation in the Middle East

8

unopposed by Israel, demandedthe urgent withdrawal of
all Israel’sforces from all the territories occupied.

242 (1967) does not require Israel to withdraw from all the
territories it occupied in 1967; secondly, that new boundaries must be negotiated directly with the Arab States
concerned and, thirdly, that the root cause is the Arab
attitude to Israel’s very existence and security.

74. Mr. Arthur Goldberg, who could hardly be described
asan Arab sympathizer, saidthe following aslate as 14 July
1967, more than a month after the end of hostilities:

71. Let me deal with the question of secure and insecure
boundaries and the meaning of resolution 242 (1967) in
this regard. A great deal has been heard from the Israel side
about the vulnerability and insecurity of the armistice
lines which separated Israel from its Arab neighbours until
the war of June 1967.

“One immediate, obvious and imperative step is the
disengagementof all forces and the withdrawal of Israeli
forces to their own territory.“5
He did not speak about withdrawal to recognized and
secure boundaries. He spokeof withdrawal to their own
territory-meaning the territory they occupiedprior to the
war of 1967.

72. The fact of the matter is that until the outbreak of
that war Israel had never complained about the so-called
vulnerability and insecurity of the armistice lines, Quite the
contrary; it considered them highly satisfactory, and its
main aim for 18 years was concerned with the transformation of those lines into permanent and recognized
frontiers. Let me quote from Mr. Eban’s statement before
the General Assembly in October 1966-only eight months
before Israel launched its war of aggression of 1967:

75. The differences of opinion that separatedthe Members
of the United Nations during the emergencyspecialsession
were related not to the questionof withdrawal, on which
there was unanimousagreement,but to the other questions
having to do with belligerency, freedom of navigation,
mutual recognition, and so on. Thosedifferences,aswe all
know, were finally resolvedin Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. When that resolution
was introduced in November of that year by the British
representative, Lord Caradon,he declaredthat the policy of
his Government was that stated by the then Foreign
Secretary, Mr. George Brown, ln the General Assembly a
few weeksearlier. And he readout that statement:

“Behind the armistice frontiers established by agreement between Israel and its Arab neighbours in 1949, the
national life of sovereign States has become crystallized in
an increasingly stable mould, There is some evidence that
thoughtful minds in the Middle East are becoming
sceptical about threats to change the existing territorial
and political structure by armed force. Such threats, and
the policies concerted to support them, offend the spirit
and letter of the United Nations Charter. They violate
bilateral agreements freely negotiated and solemnly
signed. They undermine the central principles of international civility . . . for they encounter insuperable
obstacles . . . in the opposition of the world community
to the alteration by aggressive force of legally established
and internationally recognized situations.

“I should like to repeat what I saidwhen I washere
before: Britain doesnot acceptwar,asa meansof settling
disputes,nor that a State shouldbe allowedto extend its
frontiers as a result of a war. This meansthat Israelmust
withdraw. But equally, Israel’sneighboursmust recognize
its right to exist, and it must enjoy security within its
frontiers. What we must work for in this areaisa durable
peace, the renunciation of all aggressivedesigns,and an
end to policies which areinconsistentwith peace.“6

“, , , [We] regard the present armistice lines as immune
from any change without consent”.3

76. Now, aswe all know, a representativein the Security
Council can speakonly on the basisof, and all his actions
must stem from, the declaredpolicy of his Government.
The draft resolution that was presentedby Lord Caradon
could only be considered a reflection of British policy,
becauseit would be unthinkable for a British representative
in the Security Council to present a draft resolution at
variance with and contrary to the declaredpolicy of Her
Majesty’s Government as stated by’the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs. But we aretold that somehowthe draft
resolution presentedby the British delegationwasdifferent,
in letter aswell asin spirit, from the declaredpolicy of the
sponsorof that resolution.

Yet we all know that eight months later Israel did exactly
what Mr. Eban cautioned the Arabs against.
73. That shows conclusively that the slogan concerning
the vulnerability and insecurity of the 4 June 1967 armistice lines is only a convenient excuse to justify Israel’s
territorial
expansionist ambitions. That is why in the
General Assembly, when it met in emergency special session
one week after the end of hostilities in June 1967 and
before Israel clearly and openly declared its expansionist
aims, all of Israel’s staunchest supporters in the Assembly
felt that what was needed was transformation of those
armistice lines into permanent and recognized boundaries,
thus fulfilling the hope voiced by Mr. Eban eight months
earlier. That is why the Latin American draft resolution,”
which was supported by the United States and was
3 Ibid., nventyfirst Session, Plenbry Meet&s,
paras.112and113.

77. We are here as representativesof Governments,and
everything we do in the Council reflects the policy and
attitude of our Governments. Therefore, to say that the
declaration of Mr. GeorgeBrown somehowdid not relate to
5 Ibid., Fifth Emergency Special Session, Plenary Meetings,
1554th meeting,para.91.
6 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 1567thmeeting, pare.91.

1428th meeting,

4 Ibid., Fifth Emergency Special Session, Annexes, agenda item 5,

documentAjL.523/Rev.l.
9

and equity in the negotiating positions of the two parties.
That is why a Special Representative of the Secretary.
General was appointed and that is why certain principles
and guidelines were agreed to provide the basis of a
settlement.

the draft resolution is, I think, wrong and at variance with
United Nations practice.
78. So let me recapitulate. As late as October 1966
Mr, Eban declared that the armistice lines could not be
changed by force and could be altered only by mutual
consent. Far from considering them vulnerable and insecure, he wanted to transform them into permanent
frontiers. That was also the view of Israel’s supporters who
voted in favour of the Latin American draft resolution in
the General Assembly which demanded the urgent withdrawal of Israel’s forces from all occupied territories. That
was the view of Mr. Arthur Goldberg, who said that
withdrawal was an immediate, obvious and imperative step.
That was the background against which the Security
Council adopted its resolution 242 (1967), after having
heard the important clarification made by the sponsor of
that resolution regarding the policy of his Government.

83. I come now to the final point which the Israeli
representative said was the crux of the matter, namely, the
refusal of the Arabs to accept Israel’s existence, and their
threat to its security. The representative of Israel considered every statement made by an Arab representative in
the Council asking for a just peace in accordance with the
United Nations resolution, and indeed any mention of tile
Palestinians and their rights, as proof of a sinister design to
destroy the State of Israel. But what are the facts?
84. Jordan and Egypt, two of the States most directly
concerned, have accepted resolution 242 (1967) and have
agreed to enter into a peace agreement with Israel on the
basis of reciprocal commitments and obligations in accordance with that resolution. In spite of that, Israel continues
to harp on the theme of the threat to its security and the
Arab danger to its very existence. It is really quite
extraordinary for the representative of Israel to tell us here
with a straight face of the threats to Israel’s security while
Israel’s armies occupy Arab lands and when its troops and
air forces attack the neighbouring Arab countries whenever
and wherever they choose. Whose security is really threatened by Israel’s well-equipped and powerful war machine?
The neighbouring Arab countries live in the shadow of
Israel’s undisguised expansionist ambitions. Yet we Arabs
are continually being asked what is the reason for our
enduring hostility to Israel.

79. With this background how can it be seriously argued
now that what the Council meant was that the Arabs
should make major territorial concessions while the occupation continues? As members of the Council are no doubt
aware, the omission of the words “all” and “the” from
paragraph 1 of the resolution was explained privately to
Arab delegations at the time as meaning that they really
related to the possibility of minor and mutually agreed
rectifications of the frontier, and certainly not to substantial changes which Israel now openly demands.
80. In an article in the quarterly journal, For&y Affairs,
Mrs. Meir graciously said that Israel would not seek to
retain all or most of Sinai, but she demanded the Golan
Heights, Gaza, parts of the West Bank and, above all, the
whole of Jerusalem.

85. Our conflict with Zionism arose because the Zionists
planned to establish a State in a country overwhelmingly
Arab in population, in land ownership, in language and in
culture. The Zionist intent to establish a State in a country
inhabited by another people is the seed and fountainhead
of all the tribulations that have afflicted the Holy Land.
Such an intent was bound to be opposed by the Arabs. For
what nation in the world would give up its homeland to
accommodate another? But according to Zionist mythol.
ogy, Arab resistance against Zionist intent to take away the
country is itself aggression. According to the game the
Zionists want to play in Palestine, there must be two sets of
rules: one set allows the Zionists to use every manner and
means of force to establish themselves, and another set lays
down that their victims must not resist. The Zionists want
to act against the Arabs and, at the same time, prevent the
Arabs from reacting.

81. Having repeatedly and publicly made these demands,
and having formally informed the SpeciaI Representative of
the Secretary-General that it would not withdraw to the
pre-5 June 1967 lines, Israel now asks for direct negotiations, which can really mean only one thing: negotiations
on the extent of territorial concessions the Arabs would
have to make. With such a background, negotiations held in
the shadow of Israel’s occupation of Arab lands could only
end in failure, unless the Arabs are ready to surrender and
concede all of Israel’s territorial demands which, of course,
they will never do.
82. Israel’s earlier territorial demands, though not as
explicit as they are now, and its insistence on direct
negotiations, were not unknown when the Security Council
met in November 1967. The two demands, however, were
rejected not only by the Arab States, but by practically the
entire membership of the Organization. Israeli territorial
demands were rejected because they were clearly contrary
to the Charter, and that is why the resolution emphasized
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force.
Direct negotiations were also not accepted, because the
majority felt that the United Nations had a responsibility to
play a central role in bringing about a settlement. It was
recognized that asking the Arabs to negotiate without
certain conditions and gurantees and without any framework of principles would give an enormous advantage and
leverage to the Israeli negotiator and destroy any balance

86. The conflict in which the Arabs were caught was not
of their choosing, and in this conflict any fair-minded
person must surely see that from the beginning they have
always been, as they still are, on the defensive. The record
of Israel’s continuing aggression against the people of
Palestine would fill volumes. The active quest of greater
Israel now stands revealed, with no need for erudite proof.
The kind of terms that Israel is thinking of dictating are
well beyond its capacity, as it must know, for Palestine is
the hub of the Arab heartland and at its centre lies
Jerusalem, for which our people fought and died h
centuries past. In its long history the Arab nation has
10

suffered misfortunes far greater than the one our people is
engulfed in today. But its resilient and indomitable spirit
enabled it to overcome its past tribulations, as it will surely
overcome its present agony.

91. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, I wish first
of all to express to you and to the members of the Council,
the appreciation of my delegation for allowing us to
participate in your deliberations on the situation in the
Middle East, a question of vital importance to Lebanon,

87. Over the centuries invaders far more formidable than
Israel have come and gone, but our nation remains secure
and free in its homeland. For over a century our people
have been subjected to wave after wave of colonial
intrusions. The Zionist invasion is the last and most vicious
and dangerous of these colonial onslaughts. The Zionist
invasion draws its inspiration and driving force from the
dreams and aspirations of those tormented souls, the
products of the European ghettos. The countless years of
humiliation and oppression inflicted on the Jewish people
in Europe, culminating in the Hitlerite holocaust, have left,
it seems, a deep scar in the spritual make-up of the
European Jews who today guide the destinies of Israel. All
the frustrations and hatreds of centuries are now finding a
new outlet against the Arabs.

92. I should like to join in the congratulations extended to
YOU, Sir, on your assumingthe presidencyof the Council.

The tributes paid to you are a vivid expressionof the
genera1esteem in which you are held by all delegations.
Your positive contributions to the work of the United
Nations are of long standing and have eamed you the
recognition and appreciation of your colleagues.May I be
permitted alsoto expressmy delegation’sand my personal
satisfaction at the friendly andready co-operationthat you
have always extended to us during many trying debates
here in the Council. This co-operationreflects the friendly
relations which have been developingbetween our two
countries.
93. It has become ritual to describethe situation in the
Middle East asa threat to international peaceand security.
This is a truism recognizedby all. There exist in the area
enoughexplosivesand inflammableemotionsandmaterials
to make that threat potently dangerous.Fearsof minor or
major conflagrations have justified the persistentsearchfor
settlementof the Palestinianquestionand the consequences
of the war of June 1967,in order to avert catastrophe.The
United Nations and individual nations have on many
occasionsand in one form or another deployed sufficient
efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East, only to see
them break down on the rock of Israeliintransigence.This
intransigenceremainsthe stumblingblock on the road to a
just and lasting peace.

88. But what a cruel irony of fate that the Arabs, in whose
lands the Jews have found a haven and refuge from the
unspeakable horrors of medieval Europe, are today the
victims of such relentless hatred. A clear indication of this
state of mind can be found in what we have seen here
during the past week, a display rare in the annals of the
United Nations, of venomous invective and uncompromising hostility from the representative of Israel. What we have
heard from him reflects accurately, I regret to say, the
present thinking and mood of Israel’s rulers-intransigent,
arrogant, aggress&e, intoxicated with success and oblivious
of all the great values which made the Jewish faith such an
enduring moral force in the world. What we have been
hearing is the voice of triumphant militarism bent upon the
achievement of each and all of its objectives by force of
arms, determined to transform Israel into a garrison State
living by war and sustained by continuous expansion.

94. Twenty-five years have passedsince1.5 million Palestinians have been driven out from their ancestralhomeland
by Israeli forces. Six years have elapsedsincethe Israeli
aggressionagainst the three Arab States of Egypt, Jordan
and Syria, which resulted in the occupation by the Israeli
armed forces of large areasin those countries. Five and a
half years ago, precisely on 22 November 1967, the
Security Council adopted unanimously its resolution
242 (1967) having for its objective the achievementof a
peaceful settlement of the Middle East problem. The Arab
Governments and peoplesof the Middle East find themselvesafter all these years still exposedto Israeliviolence
and occupation, sustainedand supportedby militaristic and
expansionistpolicies and an ever-growingmilitary establishment. It is therefore needlessfor me to apprisethe Council
of a situation fraught with constantdangers.

89. Before I conclude my statement I should like to make
it quite clear that we have come here in quest of peace and
I should have liked very much to have avoided an exchange
of polemics with the representative of Israel. But having
listened to him for a whole week, it has become necessary
for us to answer. Let me tell him one thing in conclusion.
There are many in Israel, we are told, who have studied our
history and our culture-foremost
among them the Foreign
Minister of Israel, Mr. Eban. They must be aware of the
reserves of inner strength and the powers of resiliency of
the Arab nation and must know better than most that Israel
cannot forever continue taking the posture of a conqueror
annexing territories, expelling people and dictating its tenns
of peace. Unless it wishes to remain forever an outcast and
an enemy it must first recognize that a grievous injustice
has been inflicted on the Arab people of Palestine and that
only through respect for their rights as human beings,
entitled to freedom and security in their own homeland,
can a beginning be made to establish conditions of peace
and harmony which will endure because they are based on
justjce and not on the fluctuating fortunes of war.

95. It is true that Lebanon, which did not participate in
the hostilities of 1967, is not directly concernedwith
resolution 242 (1967). However,the LebaneseGovernment
and people are constantly and gravely concernedabout the
ordealssuffered by our sisterArab Statesbecauseof Israeli
occupation and the perpetuation of the agony of the
Palestinianpeople, A certain disenchantmentpervadesthe
Arab peoples becauseof the lack of progressin all the
efforts dedicated to the establishmentof the conditions of
tranquillity, stability, peaceand security that arenecessary
to usher our region into an unprecedentedera of progress
and prosperity. Their hopeshave given way to despairand

90. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I invite
the representative of Lebanon, Mr. Ghorra, to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
1

frustration and to a pessimistic conviction that the international community is incapable of facing up to Israel and
making it respect the international will, law and order.

borders. The denunciation by Israel of the Agreement
smacked of bad faith. Mr. Ralph Bunche in his report to the
Security Council on 20 July 1949 stated: “any breach of
their terms”-that is, of the Armistice Agreements-“would
involve a most serious act of bad faith” (S/1357, part I,
para. 41.

96. A widely held view is that this review of the Middle
East situation constitutes a test to determine whether the
Council is in fact and deed, rather than in words and
resolutions, the custodian of peace and security as it was
meant to be by the provisions of the Charter. It is a
challenge to stimulate, activate and enhance the authority
and the role of the Council. It stands to gain immeasurably
by its actions, for which it is eminently qualified.

102. Israel has abused its denunciation of the Armistice
Agreement by launching several aggressive attacks against
Lebanon, for which it has been condemned on several
occasions by the Council. There was a time when it suited
Israel to uphold the Armistice Agreements because it found
in them benefits to suit its interests. I would recall here
what Mr. Eban stated on 4 August 1949:

97. The Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt has
considered it to be its duty, not towards its own people
alone, but also towards the Arab countries and peoples, to
request the Security Council to review the Middle East
situation, as this situation faces an insuperable deadlock.
The Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat, has fully,
ably and squarely requested the Council to review and
appraise the situation in the light of the past six years’
developments and of the report that our esteemed Secretary-General has submitted to the Security Council about
the untiring and commendable efforts of his personal
representative, Mr. Jarring. Mr. El-Zayyat and previous
Arab and non-Arab speakers have fully expounded all the
facts and the various historical, judicial and political aspects
of the question. It is, therefore, not my intention to repeat
them. My intention is to emphasize some points which we
consider important to us in Lebanon as well as to the Arab
peoples and to the Palestinian people in particular.

“ . . . the provisional settlement established by the
Armistice Agreements is unchangeable until a new process
of negotiation and agreement has been successfully
consummated” [433rd meeting, p. 13J.
I‘ . . .
“Israel will observe each of these Agreements and every
part and section thereof. It will maintain them scrupulously in every respect until a new agreement is reached”
[Ibid., p. 141.
103. Therefore it is abundantly clear that the Armistice
Agreement is still valid and alive. The Secretary-General in
the introduction to his report to the General Assembly in
1967 stated inter alia:

98. The first point I should like to raise is the question of
the Lebanese-Israeli General Armistice Agreement.

“There is no provision in them”-that is, the Armistice
Agreements-“for unilateral termination of their application This has been the United Nations position all
along and will continue to be the position until a
competentorgandecidesotherwise”.’

99. Early in 1949 Israel concluded with the neighbouring
States Armistice Agreements ending the hostilities which
had arisen amongst them in 1948 and providing for a future
peace settlement. The Agreements were confirmed by
decisions of the Security Council on 11 August
1949-resolution 73 (1949). The Council became juridically
their executive overseer. Following the war of June 1967,
Israel unilaterally denounced the Agreements in contravention of international law and Security Council resolutions. The United Nations still maintains that the Agreements are valid and binding.

It is our conviction that that remains the position of the
United Nations. It is a position the LebaneseGovernment
adheresto. The sanctity of international agreementsmust
be respected.This is an elementary principle of law. Those
agreements
command even more respect when, sanctioned
by the Council, they become governed by the law of the
United Nations.
104. Now I should like to addressmyself to the wider
problemof peacein the Middle East. My delegationcannot
but reiteratethe often repeatedprinciple that in order to be
achievedand to last peace must be basedon the administration of justice to the Palestinian people and on the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from aI the Arab territories
occupiedasa result of the hostilities of 5 June 1967.

100. The Lebanese Government has continuously maintained that the Lebanese-Israeli Armistice Agreement of
1949 denounced by Israel in August 1967 is still valid and in
effect. That view was communicated to Mr. Jarring by the
Foreign Minister of Lebanon on 21 April 1969, and it was
confirmed in later communications to him. The Security
Council, by adopting its consensus of 19 April 1972
[S/l 061 I/, acquiesced in the stationing along the Lebanese
borders of additional United Nations observers, at the
express request of Lebanon and in conformity with the
Armistice Agreement-and this was done, Sir, partly during
your presidency of the Council.

105. With regardto the first point, the LebaneseGovernment and peoplehave assumed
a leading role in the defence
of the legitimate and inalienablerights of the Palestinian
people sincethe inception of the Palestinianquestion. At
no time hasLebanonrelinquishedthat role. Today we are
asattachedto it aswe ever were, regardlessof the traumatic
and unsettling developmentswhich have overtaken the
Lebanese
scenein recent weeks.

101.. The Security Council in its resolutions 270 (1969),
316(1972) and 332(1973) has confirmed the validity of
that Agreement. The Agreement establishes a demarcation
line which runs along the recognized Lebanese international

7 lb&

12

tienty-SecondSession, Supplement No. IA, pnru. 43.

106. We must all remember at all times that the convulsions and upheavals WC witness in the whole Middle
East-not in Lebanon alone-find their primary cause in the
tragedy that was visited upon the Palestinian people by the
Zionist-Israeli aggression of 1948. The obstinate refusal by
Israel and the incapacity of the United Nations to render
justice to the Palestinian refugees in accordance with
United Nations resolutions have maintained them in the
camps and in a state of misery, despair and frustration.

homelessin 1948 and 1967”. And Mr. Rogers added
“There is a new consciousness
among the young Palestinians who have grown up since1948 which needsto be
channelled away from bitternessand frustration toward
hope andjustice.”
111. The yearning of the Palestinianpeople to return to
its homeland is strong and unyielding. To that people and
to all of us it is incomprehensiblethat Israeland the Zionist
forces can resort to all sorts of pressureto bring more
foreign Jews to Israelunder the slogan,“let my peoplego”,
while the Palestinian people, living in squalor in the
confinesof its homeland,is deniedthe right of return.

107, Twenty-five years of exile have embittered them
while the usurpers of their ancestral homeland and their
properties have enjoyed the fruits of their military conquests. Allow me to cite here what Mr. Kalyl Abou Hammad,
the Foreign Minister of Lebanon, stated regarding this
matter in the general debate of the General Assembly on 26
September 1972:

112. This debate could very well be placedin the context
of the on-going processof quest for peace. But are we
nearer to peace today than we were when resolution
242 (1967), for instance, was adopted on 22 November
1967? Despite all the efforts made since then, my
delegation maintains that the situation in the Middle East
suffersfrom a dangerousdeterioration, despitethe apparent
adherence to the cease-fireand other positive elements
which have been evoked in the Council. Arms continue to
flow into the area; Israelis strengtheningits foothold in the
occupied areas by creating new facts which are making a
peaceful settlement a more complicated and difficult
objective to attain. Israel not only has undermined and
nullified all efforts deployed for peace,but hasconstantly
raisedits stakesand demands,impedingfurther the chances
for agreementon a peacesettlement.

“The creation of the State of Israel was accompanied
by the mass exodus of the inhabitants of Palestine,
provoked by threats, intimidation and terror. Today there
is a new Diaspora of wandering Palestinians and displaced
Arabs, who cannot and do not want to be assimilated in
any other country.“~
108. Is the Palestinian people destined to live in a
permanent diaspora, denied the right to reintegrate its
ancestral homeland? Its inalienable rights to return and to
self-determination have been recognized by many resolutions adopted by the United Nations and in many statements delivered by leading heads of delegations at the
General Assembly and elsewhere.

113. Israel has wilfully widened the area of conflict by
provoking, since December 1968, an area which had
hitherto been calm and peaceful. I refer specifically to
Lebanon. The multiple and repeatedacts of Israeii aggression against Lebanon in violation of international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and the Lebanese-Israeli
General Armistice Agreement of 1949 have brought us
before the Council on nine occasions.The Israeli actions
have been condemnedin severalresolutionsadoptedby the
Council.

109. In this respect, the right of the Arab people of
Palestine to self-determination was recognized long ago by
none other than Mr. David Ben-Curion, the former Prime
Minister of Israel. During a conference held in Berlin in
3931 he stated:
“The right to self-determination is a universal principle.
We are totally in favour of the right of all peoples to
self-determination, and it goes without saying that the
Arab people in Palestine has the right to self-determination. This right is not limited and cannot be
conditioned by our own interests. This freedom of
self-determination of the Arabs cannot be hampered out
of fear of the obstacles which it may create with regard to
our own accomplishments. It may be that the achievement of their aspirations to self-determination will create
grave difficulties for us, but that is no reason for refusing
them their rights”9

114. Progresstowards peacecan be achievedwhen Israel
decidesto co-operate earnestlywith the United Nations and
the international community. Israel can take a big step
forward by implementing the resolutionsof the Council,
but not by usingthem for semantics.
115. The Israeli Foreign Minister, Mr. Eban, statedin the
Knesset on 28 May last that his Government would not
accept any addition to or explanation or reformulation of
resolution 242 (1967). AmbassadorTekoah echoed this
view here in the Council. For the IsraeliGovernmentwould
want us to believe that that document is immutable,
untouchable and sacrosanct.AmbassadorTekoah went to
great lengths to convince us that the resolution envisaged
only “withdrawal from occupied territories”, and not
withdrawal from all the occupiedterritories.

110. The settlement of the problem of the Palestinian
people is an essential element for the establishment of
peace in the Middle East. I wish to refer in this respect to
only one significant statement which I cited in a previous
debate. It was made by the United States Secretary of
State, Mr. William Rogers, in a speech on 9 December 1969
in which he said that “there can bc no lasting peace without
a just settlement of the problem of those who were made
8 Ibid.,

llventy-sever?

th Session, Plenary

?&etings,

204Ist

116. In this respect, we shouldlike to makethe following
remarks: Israel did not wait for the outcomeof the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-Generalandhis representative,
Ambassador Jarring, or by other States endeavouringto
promote agreementon implementationof the resolution.It

meeting,

para. 40.
9 Quoted in French by the speaker.

13

decided from the outset to go it alone and decided upon its
own course for that implementation.
117. No sooner had its troops entered the Arab sector of
Jerusalem than it declared the annexation of that sector. It
maintains now that Jerusalem is not negotiable; it has
undertaken a huge master plan in the Holy City with a
Jewish goal: to make it a Zionist exhibition, as the Minister
of Housing, Mr. Sharaf, once said. This is being done in
flagrant violation of several General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions enjoining Israel from taking, in contravention of the Geneva Convention of 1949 and of those
resolutions, any action which affects the geographic character and demographic composition of the Holy City.
118. The problem of Jerusalem is of paramount interest to
us in Lebanon, country of Christians, Moslems and Jews. It
is needless to re-emphasize its importance to Islam, being its
third holiest city. But to Christianity, it is the prime Holy
City, and the 10 million Christians of the Middle East feel
deep concern about its future.
119. The Apostolic Delegation to Jerusalem, Archbishop
Laghi, was reported to have said that “when the Arabs leave
Jerusalem, Christianity leaves with them”. And the Christians have indeed been leaving Jerusalem. Their exodus was
described by Archbishop Joseph Raya of Gallilee as a
“distressing stampede without hope or joy”. Pope Paul VI
expressed his anxiety about the Christians of the Holy City
when on 11 April 1971 he said the following:

122. Israel has gone further in its unilateral implemen.
tation of resolution 242 (1967). It declared that the Golan
Heights are not returnable to Syria and that it intends to
retain them for security reasons. It proceeded to establish in
the area scores of civilian and paramilitary settlements.
Over 50 settlements have already been established in the.
Golan Heights, the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and Sinai.
General Dayan has been advocating the construction of
major new Israeli urban settlements in several strategic
areas, amongst which a city for 250,000 in the southern
part of the Gaza strip.
123. In Sharm-el-Sheikh, Israel has established settlements
and laid claim to the area. It has built a road connecting
Israel with it. Its designs to annex a large strip of Sinai have
never been concealed. The Foreign Minister of Egypt has
raised a fundamental question. He has requested a pronouncement whether acquisition of territory by force is
permissible under the United Nations Charter. The Charter
and several resolutions and declarations adopted by the
United Nations have made it crystal clear that acquisition
of territory by force is not permissible.
124. Israel forgets that we are living in the era of the
United Nations and not during those ages when it was
common to acquire territories by force. The return to the
old practices of war and conquests will only bring disaster
to this Organization and to the world. International public
opinion is strongly opposed to the use of force ln
international relations ‘and to the acquisition of territories
by force. The resolutions adopted by the Organization of
African Unity at Addis Ababa, and ably and clearly
communicated to the Council by a distinguished group of
Foreign Ministers representing that organization, testified
to where the public opinion and the official position of
Africa stand. The resolution adopted by the Conference of
Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries at Georgetown,
Guyana and also communicated to this Council on 8 June
1973 [see S/Z09441 does not leave any doubt about this
point.

“Today, we must look with affection in our hearts to
the Christian community of this Holy Land, already so
sorely tried in ,the course of history, these our brothers,
who live where Jesus lived, and who, surrounded by the
holy places, are the successors of that ancient and very
first Church, from which all the other churches take their
origin.”
His Apostolic Delegate expressed the fear that the role of
Christianity in the Holy Land may soon be reduced to “no
more than keepers of museums and curators of shrines”.

125. The Security Council did not delegate to Israel the
prerogative of interpreting resolution 242 (1967). It delegated to the Secretary-General and his personal representative the definite mission of its implementation.
Mr. Jarring has diligently and patiently sought to Fulfil his
mission. His aide-memoire of 8 February 1971 appears to
have been intended to break the deadlock; it was considered to make a breakthrough, Hopes have risen sharply
as a result of the positive and constructive reply of Egypt to
that aide-mbmoire on 15 February. Egypt has undertaken
definite commitments including that of entering into a
peace agreement with Israel. Those hopes were soon to be
dashed by Israel’s intransigence. Egypt was considered more
forthcoming than expected and was widely commended on
its stand.

120. A group of religious leaders representing all Christian
and Moslem denominations in Lebanon met on 6 June, last
week, in the Catholic Archbishopric of Beirut. They
addressed to the Security Council a cable-and we hope
that YOU have it in your possession, Mr. President-in which
they requested the Council to take effective measures to
preserve the holiness of the Holy City and to prevent its
Judaisation, rejecting strongly that might makes right.
121. The unanimous position of the Council has been
made clear on many occasions about Jerusalem. Secretary
of State Rogers emphasized in his speech of 9 December
1969-to which I referred-the United States position on
Jerusalem. He said:

126. The context of discussions and thinking at the time
Mr. Jarring established his aide-memoire appeared to have
encouraged the principle that Israeli troops should withdraw to the Egypt-Palestine international recognized lineand I wish to underscore this particular point.

“We have made clear repeatedly in the past two and a
half years that we cannot accept unilateral actions by any
party to decide the final status of the city,”
The United States delegation reiterated this position in its
statements and voting on various resolutions in this Council
concerning Jerusalem.

127. In good faith, Egypt replied positively to the Jarring
aide-memoire of 8 February 1971 and made definite
14

commitments to implement resolution 242 (1967). The
Egyptian move was universally hailed as a breakthrough.
Resolutions by the United Nations and other international
organizations commended Egypt on its positive, constructive and forward-looking move. But Israel, which gave at
that time the impression that it was engaged in serious talks
through Jarring, balked and never since made an attempt to
participate in the reactivation of the Jarring mission or in
any constructive initiative to break the deadlock.
128. If an earnest and detached summing up of Minister
El-Zayyat’s statements in the Council is made, we cannot
escape coming to the conclusion that Egypt is in earnest
search for a peaceful solution within the framework of the
United Nations based on the principles of the Charter,
reiterated and amplified many times by various resolutions
and declarations of the United Nations.

resources and energies to assure their future generations a
better and brighter life.
133. The PRESIDENT (franslation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Lebanon,AmbassadorChorra, for his
statement and for the wordsof friendshipaddressed
to me,
and also those referring to the developmentof friendly
relations between our countries.For my part I shouldlike
to associatemyself with that view, and to expressmy
satisfaction at the state and the developmentof relationsof
friendship and co-operation betweenour two countries,
134. The representative of Israel hasaskedto be allowed
to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and the
representative of Egypt hasaskedto be allowed to makea
statement. I intend to call on them both. I call on the
representativeof Israel.

129. The Arab countries want peace and need peace.
Contrary to Israeli propagandists, they do not wish any
nation ill. They look forward to co-operation hoping that
no nation wishes them ill.

135. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The representativeof France
referred to the continuation of the Israeli presence in
territories held since 1967. In connexion with that, it is
necessaryto bear in mind the following.

130. The financial crisis, the energy crisis, the traditional
bonds of friendships and co-operation existing in trade,
education, tourism, are positive elements to further
improve and develop relations between the Arab countries
and the industrially and technologically developed countries, many of them represented around this table. The
future holds tremendous possibilities for improved relations
and closer co-operation. In soberness, wisdom and a
determined will to act that future would be made brighter
on the basis of understanding and respect for the Arab
legitimate rights and aspirations. Mutually beneficial relationships could be further developed on the basis of
fairness, impartiality and justice. The disruptive forces of
the Israeli policy of militarism, adventurism, intransigence
and unbridled ambitions should not be allowed to operate
in such a way as to jeopardize those objectives. The
consequences of the disruptive Israeli forces could not and
should not be underestimated.

136. First, Israeli forcesfind themselvesin the areaswhich
cameunder Israel’scontrol in 1967 asa result of a war of
aggressionpursued by the Arab States againstIsrael since
1948 and as a result of the attempt madein 1967by Egypt
and by other Arab States under Egypt’s direction to
liquidate Israel, as announced at the time by President
Nasser.

13 1. We quite agree with President Nixon when he speaks
in his report to Congress on United States foreign policy for
the 197Os, dated 3 May 1973, about the
“

economic relations among the
. . . outward-looking
Middle East, North Africa, the European Community and
the United States. This”-he said, requires “stable and
dependable relations between suppliers and consumers of
energy.”
The President set as one of the tasks of his policy the
strengthening of United States ties
I‘ . . * with all its traditional friends in the Middle East
and restore bilateral relations where they have been
severed”.
132. Lebanon’s policy has always had as its axis peace,
friendship and co-operation. It is our sincere hope that the
actions the Council is called upon to take will enhance its
effectiveness in promoting, achieving and effecting peace in
the Middle East as to enable its peoples to dedicate their

137. Second, the Israeli forces remain on the present
cease-fire lines in accordancewith the Security Council’s
cease-fireresolutions.
138. Third, the provision for withdrawal from thoselines
is, asindicated aIso by the representativeof France,linked
to and contingent on the provision regardingthe establishment of secureand recognizedboundaries.
139.. Fourth, those boundariesare to be established
under
resolution 242 (1967) by agreementbetweenthe parties.
There has thus far been no Arab willingnessto negotiate
suchagreementwithout prior conditionswith Israel.
140. Fifth, the requirementto determinefor the first time
between Israel and the Arab States secureand recognized
boundaries is of a generalcharacter. It doesnot exclude
Egypt. AU the armistice agreementswith Jordan, Syria,
Lebanon and Egypt specifiedthat the armisticelines were
provisional lines and should not in any way prejudicethe
rights, claims and positionsof either party in the ultimate
settlement. The Egyptian-Israeli Armistice Agreementwent
further. It stated specifically that the demarcationline “1s
not to be construed in any senseasa political or territorial
boundary . . .“.I0
141. There could be no more unequivocala fOrrdatiOn~
Israel and Egypt have clearly undertaken not to regardthe
old military lines as a territorial boundary. Israelcannot be
expected 25 years later to give a different interpretation to
10 see

official Records

Special Supplement No. 3.

O/

the Security

Council, lk~urfh Year,

that commitment and to accept that there was a territorial
boundary between Israel and Egypt when the existence of
such a boundary was specifically declared by both parties
not to be.
142. I took note of the observation made by the representative of France regarding the possibility of agreed changes
in the old lines. But 1 took particular note of the specially
significant statement made by the representative of the
United Arab Emirates that in fact the Arab delegations
were told and knew in November 1967 that resolution
242 (1967) provided for the possibility of such changes in
the old lines. This is the fundamental, the decisive principle.
The determination and precise extent of those changes
must, of course, come through agreement between the
parties. It is good that we found corroboration of this
cent&l principle of change of the old lines in the statement
of an Arab representative.
143. We heard today from three additional Arab representatives. Their interpretations of the war waged by the Arab
States against Israel for 25 years, just like the interpretations of the Arab speakers who had preceded them,
brought to mind the story of how Nasrudin created truth.
The story goes as follows.
“ ‘Laws as such do not make people better,’ said
Nasrudin to the King; ‘they must practise certain things,
in order to become attuned to inner truth. This form of
truth resembles apparent truth only slightly.’ The King
decided that he could, and would, make people observe
the truth. He could make them practise truthfulness. His
city was entered by a bridge. On this he built a gallows.
The following day, when the gates were opened at dawn,
the Captain of the Guard was stationed with a squad of
troops to examine all who entered. An announcement
was made: ‘Everyone will be questioned. If he tells the
truth, he will be allowed to enter. If he lies, he will be
hanged.’ Nasrudin stepped forward. ‘Where are you
going? ’ ‘I am on my way,’ said Nasrudin slowly, ‘to be
hanged.’ ‘We don’t believe you! ’ ‘Very well, if I have told
a lie, hang me! ’ ‘But if we hang you for lying, we will
have made what you said come true! ’ ‘That’s right; now
you know what truth is-YOUR truth! ’ ”

146. For years representatives of Lebanon assured tile
United Nations and the world-as did Ambassador Ghorra
today-that their country is Innocent, peace loving and not
involved in the Arab warfare against Israel. Is that the
truth? Or is the truth to be found in the statement made
on 30 May 1967, on the eve of hostilities with Israel, by the
Foreign Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Hakim, who said: “In a
total war, the Arabs will use all means. It would be a long
war, with no cease-fire until final victory.” Or is the truth
about the peace-loving intentions of Lebanon toward Israel
to be found in the fact that in recent years Lebanon has
served as a principal base for the murderous Arab terror
operations against Israeli civilians and against innocent men,
women and children outside the Middle East?
147. Could credence have been given in the past to the
Lebanese statements in the Security Council-in this Council-when they denied the presence in Lebanon of any
concentrations of terrorist groups and the existence of any
of their camps, training centres, information offices and
headquarters? Was it right at the time that certain members
of the Security Council accepted those unfounded claims at
face value, only to be confronted with the real facts when
the terrorist organizations themselves began to issue official
communiquCs openly describing their presence on Lebanese
soil, their attacks from Lebanon against Israel and their
encounters with Israeli forces in Israeli defence actions
directed against the terrorist centres and bases and causing
casualties among the terrorists themselves?
148. Members of the Security Council still remember the
Lebanese representative’s emotional accusations that Israel
was attacking innocent refugees in refugee camps. Was that
the truth? Or is the truth revealed in the recent attacks of
the Lebanese armed forces on terrorist bases located right
inside the refugee camps?
149. We have heard the Lebanese representative claim
repeatedly in this Council chamber that there are 300,000
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. Should the number given
by him be accepted as correct, or the one appearing in the
Secretary-General’s report, now before this Council, which
is 160,723-only half the Lebanese figure?
150. Was the representative of Lebanon telling the truth
when he used to claim plaintively that the presence of
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon made terrorist operations
against Israel from Lebanon inevitable? Is not the truth
rather to be found in the statement of Lebanon’s President
Franjieh, who on 4 May 1973 said, with reference to the
murder groups, “We cannot accept an army of occupation”? Is not the truth rather in the fact that for years and
years Lebanon, with the Palestinian refugees within its
borders, remained completely outside the sphere of terrorist operations, and its frontier with Israel served as an
example of tranquillity?

That is my reply to the statements by the Arab representatives today.
144. As an example of the kind of truth that is being
produced by this method I would mention an interview by
Amir Taheri with King Faisal of Saudi Arabia, published in
an Iranian newspaper, Taihan 6iternarionaZ, on 18 March
1972. I shall quote only two statements by the Head of
State of Saudi Arabia. First, “The Zionists were responsible
for unleashing upon mankind the torrential invasions of the
Mongols.” Secondly, “Marx, Engels Lenin, Trotsky and
Stalin were all Jews and Zionists.”

151. In the light of all that, what value can be attached to
the statements, claims and disclaimers, accusations and
protestations voiced today by the Ambassador
of
Lebanon? If Lebanon is really interested in peace, why
does it not set an example to others?

145. As far as Lebanese truth is concerned, what in the
Lebanese representative’s pronouncement should in fact be
accepted as truth and what as deliberate misrepresentation? What is fact, and what fiction? What is the real
position of the Lebanese Government, and what is merely
propaganda phraseology?

152. There are no territorial problems between Israel and
Lebanon. Why does not Lebanon enter into negotiations
16

with Israel and conclude a peace agreement with it? Why
has it preferred to stay out of the orbit of the peace-making
efforts? The reason is obvious. Despite its allegations of a
desire to attain peace with Israel, Lebanon will do nothing
to make peace a reality.

based on the. history of the land of Israel or on climatic and
agricultural seasons which prevailed there in the land of
Israel. Forbidden by their faith to intermarry with nonJews, they remained a distinct people transmitting their
national heritage from generation to generation. Persecuted
by their neighbours on account of their Asian origin and
Oriental civilization, the Jews knew and felt that they were
Strangers and that their home remained in Israel. Through
the centuries they strove to return to it, individually, in
groups, in mass movements. That was Zionism, their love of
Zion, their national liberation movement. Day after day,
three times a day, they prayed that they may go back to
the land of their fathers and reestablish their in&pendence .

153. SO much distortion and sometimes absurdity has
been heaped by Arab representatives on this Council-as,
for instance, by the representative of the United Arab
Emirates, regarding the Jewish people, the history of the
Jewish State, Jews, Palestinian Arabs and Palestine-that it
is important that the record of this debate should reflect
also the true facts on these matters.
154. It was at the dawn of time when peoples, States,
civilizations and religions were still in a formative stage that
a nation was born, destined to preserve its identity and
survive through the ages till our days, It was a time when in
most parts of the world the concept of community was
confmed to the tribe or to the city. The political unit was
based on loyalty to a king or emperor rather than on ethnic
affinity. It was then that the Jewish people emerged as a
nation, distinct not only in its political personality but also
as a separate cultural and religious entity. For more than a
thousand years this people maintained its sovereignty over
the land of Israel.

160. For the attachment to their nation, for the bonds
with their homeland they paid with their lives. The
Crusaders butchered them in all parts of Europe, The
Spanish Inquisition burnt them at the stake. They were
slaughtered in the Russian pogroms, and gassed and
annihilated by the millions in the Nazi holocaust. Yet they
never surrendered; they never abandoned their heritage, and
always remained a nation proud of its identity, linked to its
land by myriad bonds.
161. During this time the land of Israel stood desolate. Its
successive conquerors saw in it occupied territory. It never
became a sovereign State again. The Arab and other Moslem
rulers never considered its ancient capital Jerusalem even as
an administrative centre throughout history. Those of the
conquerors who settled in the land were few, their
populated localities sparse. They never saw themselves as
being different from the inhabitants of the neighbouring
lands. They never produced a national culture of their own.
They never aspired to be regarded as a separate political
entity.

155. When the Roman Empire conquered nation after
nation the Jewish people stubbornly resisted, clinging to its
independence, its faith and civilization, and it was the last
people in the Mediterranean basin to be subdued in the year
70 A.D. Part of the nation was uprooted by the conqueror
and carried away into bondage in distant lands, Those who
rem.ained continued to resist and to rebel again and again.
156. In the year 132 they succeeded in restoring their
independence for several years, only to be crushed once
more by the Romans. The conquerors tried to suppress
Jewish sovereignty even by erasing the name of the country
and they, the conquerors, renamed the country Palestine.
The Jews refused to give up their struggle.

162. Travellers who visited the area described it always as
a dying land. The Frenchman Volney who toured Palestine
in 1785 wrote that it was “desolate”. A. Keith, writing
some decades after Volney, commented: ‘“In his [Volney’s]
day the land had not reached its last degree of desolation
and depopulation”. By 1883 Colonel Condor, author of
Heath and Monb, calls Palestine “a ruined land”. Mark
Twain was shocked by the land’s “desolation” as he
described it in Innocenfs Abrmd. In the nineteenth century
there were only about 150,000 settled inhabitants and an
equal number of nomads.

157. In the year 352 they rose again in revolt against
Roman rule. In 614 they raised an army which, together
with Persia, put an end to the domination of the Roman
empire in the Holy Land. Thereafter, waves of invaders
swept across the country. First came the Arabs, ~110 ruled
until the year 1072. Then the Seljuks, and after them the
Crusaders. The latter took Jerusalem in 1099 and massacred the Jews of the city. After the Crusaders appeared
the Mamelukes, and in 1517 the Ottomans, who remained
in power for four centuries.

163. Indeed, until the mass return of Jews at the end of
the last century and especially since World War I, the
picture of Palestine is one of a wasteland inhabited by
clusters of impoverished peasants in debt to absentee
landlords residing in Beirut, Damascus or Cairo.

158. The Jewish population dwindled under the impact of
massacre and exile. However, the land remained the centre
of Jewish life and learning, producing works of great
national and cultural significance.

164. The population began to increase and the country to
develop only with the beginning of organized Jewish retam
a century ago. In 1922 the Arab population of the whole of
Palestine was 565,000. By 1947 At grew, largely by Arab
immigration from abroad, to 1.2 million, an increase of 100
per cent. During the same period Egypt, for instance, saw
its population increase by only 25 per cent. In Tramjordan, which was separated in 1922 from Western Palestine
and was closed to Jewish immigration, the Arab Population
remained static.

159. In the meantime, the Jews exiled to foreign lands
preserved their identity as a nation and remained bound to
their homeland by the civilization and religion of which
they were bearers. Their faith, culture, customs, food and
even their clothing made their lives a continuation of the
existence in their homeland. They celebrated holidays
17

165. In information
reports:

173. In history this has been recognized by the Arabs
themselves.The Koran stateswith reference to the Jews:
“Enter, 0 my people to the Holy Land which God hath
destined for you.” The Arabic name for Jerusalem,
El Quds,is derived from el-Maqdus,which is the Arab fonn
of the Hebrew Hamikdash-meaning the Holy Temple.
WhoseHoly Temple? The JewishTemple.

bulletin No. 6 of 1962, UNRWA

“A considerable movement of people is known to have
occurred, particularly during the Second World War years
when new opportunities of employment opened up in the
towns and on military works in Palestine. These war-time
prospects and generally the higher rate of industrialization in Palestine than in neighbouring countries
attracted many immigrants from those countries, and
many of them entered Palestine without their presence
being officially recorded.”

174. On 23 March 1918 Sharif Hussein, the ruler of
Mecca,publishedan article in AZ Qible in which he said:
“ . . . we sawthe Jewsfrom foreign countriesstreaming
to Palestine. . . The causeof the causes
would not escape
thosewho had the gift of a deeperinsight; they knew that
the country was for its original sons for all their
differences,a sacredand beloved homeland. Experience
hasmovedtheir capacity to succeedin their energiesand
their labours. . . The return of these exiles lo their
homelandwill prove materiallq~and spiritually an experimentalschoolfor their brethren (the Arabs). . .“.

166. Thus it is clear that the majority of the Arab
inhabitants of Palestine at the time Israel attained its
independence, were immigrants who had come from neighbouring Arab States in a migration that paralleled the
arrival of Jews in the country.
167. In these circumstances it was not surprising that .Arab
nationalists did not regard Palestine as a separate national
or political personality,

175. Emir Feisal,the father of modem Arab nationalism,
declared on 12 December 1918 in an interview with
Reuters:

168. As late as May 3947, Arab representatives informed
the United Nations in a formal statement:

“The two main branchesof the Semite family, Arabs
and Jews, understandone another, and I hope that as a
result of an interchangeof ideasat the PeaceConference,
which will be guidedby idealsof self-determinationand
nationality, each nation will make definite progress
towards the realization of its aspiration. Arabs are not
jealous of Zionist Jews and intend to give them fair
play. . .“.

“Palestine was part of the Province of Syria . . .
Politically the Arabs of Palestine were not independent in
the sense of forming a separate political entity.”
This was an Arab statement before the United Nations.
169. In 1952 the well-known Arab statesman and scholar
Charles Ma.% wrote in the quarterly Foreign Affairs:

176. On 3 January 1919 Emir Feisalsignedon behalf of
the Arab Kingdomof Hedjaz the celebratedagreementwith
Dr. Weizmann, representing the Zionist Organization in
which provisionswere madefor co-operation between the
Arab State and JewishPalestine.

“Greater Syria was dismembered, the southern and
northern parts being put under different administrations.”
170. On 31 May 1956 Ahmed Shukairy, the founder and
head of the Palestine Liberation Organization, announced
in the Security Council: “It is common knowledge that
Palestine is nothing but southern Syria”, [724th meeting,
para. 44.1 This has been the traditional Arab view of
Palestine.

177. The attitude changedwith a changein Arab Ieadership.The facts of the situation did not alter but the policies
of certain Arab leadersdid. Brotherhood and co-operation
were replaced by hostility and violence. Enmity toward
Jews was so extreme that in later years some of these
leadersbecameNazi sympathizersand collaborators, and
spentthe war period in Berlin advisingHitler and Eiclunann
on the genocideof Jews. Arab leaderswho today invoke
human rights and seek the support of African and Asian
Stateshad no inhibitions about associatingthemselvtswith
the Nazi policiesand actions regardingAfricans and Jews.

171. As recently as 17 October 1966the representativeof
Syria, Ambassador Tomeh, declared in the Security
Council:
“We as Syrians consider Palestineto be, and to have
been,historically, geographically’andfrom every point of
view a part of Syria , , . When we speakof Palestinewe
feel we are speakingabout part of our own country.”
11308th meeting,para. 130.1
172. Indeed, the Arabs never looked upon Palestineas a
land with a distinct politica personality, or upon its
inhabitantsas a separatepeople. Throughout history, it was
only in the eyes of one people and one people alone-the
Jewish people-that the land was different and separate
from other lands, that it was the cradle of its national
aspirations.
18

178. It wasby the use of force that these Arab leaders
tried to deprivethe Jewishpeopleof its inalienablerights as
a nation. The methodsusedby them were terrorism against
civilians and aggressionby regular armed forces. These
methodswere applied to prevent Israel’sindependenceand
to destroy Israel as a sovereignState once independence
wasachieved.
179. In the United Nations Arab representativesaccompany their denialof the historic justice of Israel’srebirth by
incessantdistortions and vilification of the Jewish people.
The history of the Jewish people is falsified beyond

c

recognition, irs religion abused, its culture deprecated. The
Jewish people is portrayed in fact as a non-people.

population of Pa&tine exercises its right to political
independence within a sovereign Palestinian Arab entity.
On 14 January 1963 King Hussein declared: “Jordan is
Palestine, and Palestine is Jordan”. Mr. Anwar Nuseibeh, a
former Jordanian Defence Minister, who now lives h
Jerusalem, stated on 23 October 1970:

180. Thus a fantastic proposition is put forward alleging
that the conversion to Judaism of the Khazar King and
4000 of the nobles in the Volga region, about 800 years
before the first Jews began to arrive in Russia by way of
Germany, Poland and Lithuania, turns the entire Russian
and even European Jewry into descendants of the fiuars,
To this is attached the claim that for some inexplicable
reason these alleged descendants of the Turkic Khaars
abandoned their own language and chose for their vernacular a German dialect-Yiddish.

“The Jordanians are also Palestinians, This is one State,
This is one people. The name is not important. The
families living in Salt, lrbid and Karak maintain not only
family and matrimonial ties with the families in Nablus
and Hebron. They are one people.”
189. Mr. Sharaf, Jordan’s representative, declared in the
Security Council on 1 I June 1973: “The new Jordan,
which emerged in 1949, was the creation of the Palestinians
of the West Bank and their brothers in the east.” [I7ZIst
meeting, para. 1SO.]

I8 1. NO less absurd is the reference to Israel as a foreign
European State, though it is common knowledge that even
today, even if we disregard the thousands of years of
historic bonds with the Iand of Israel, the majority of
Israel’s citizens are Israeli born and almost half of them are
Jewish refugees from Arab lands and their families.
Besides, it is an irony of fate that Jews, oppressed and
discriminated against by Europeans for being of Semitic
Asian stock should be vilified as Europeans by their own
Semitic brethren.

190. It is clear, in the light of those facts, that the
allegations that the Palestinian Arabs have not yet vindicated their inalienable rights to self-determination and
statehood are without foundation. The Arabs of Palestine
exercise these rights in the Palestinian State of Jordan.
They are free, of course, to decide on the .name and
political structure of their State. Their rights cannot,
however, put in question the Jewish people’s rights to
self-determination and independence in their ancient homeland, just as the fact of Jewish statehood does not and
cannot be interpreted as having created a so-called problem
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians.

182. Freed of distortion, acrimony and abuse, treated in a
spirit of mutual respect and understanding, the problem of
Jewish and Arab rights in Palestine becomes a tractable one.
183. There are a number of basic, undeniable facts.
184. First, the re-establishment of Jewish independence,
after centuries of struggle to overcome foreign conquest
and exile, is a vindication of the fundamental concepts of
equality of nations and of self-determination, To question
the Jewish people’s right to national cxistcnce and freedom
is to deny the central precepts of the United Nations.

191. The PRESIDENT (transhtion
on the representative of Egypt.

from Russian): I calI

192. Mr. EL.ZAYYAT (Egypt): I promise that I am not
going to go back to the dawn-or even the noon-of history,
1 am not going to take you on an Odyssey into the land of
myth, and I am not going to filibuster. I have three points
which I think I should make, but I cannot begin without
reacting to two points that have just been made.

I85, Second, throughout history, only the Jewish people
saw the land of Israel as a distinct political entity, as the
centre of its national existence and of its civilization. All
other inhabitants who settled there, after the Jews had been
uprooted by foreign invaders, regarded themselves and the
country as integral parts of larger entities, political, national
and religious.

193. First, I wonder what the .?strangers” living as citizens
of the 15 States represented at this table would have to say
about the description of them as “strangers living in foreign
lands”, What would the Jews living in India, in Indonesia, in
Kenya, in Panama, in Peru, in the Sudan, in the Soviet
Union, in the United Kingdom, in the United States, in
Yugoslavia, in Australia, in Austria, in China and in France
say about this? It is not up to me to say.

186. Third, the Arab inhabitants of the land have always
considered themselves to be part of the larger Arab nation,
which has vindicated its rights to self-detennination and
independence in 18 sovereign Arab States, with several
more on the way to achieving independence.

194. Second, I should like to plead not guilty to the
accusation that we vilify people when we call them
In our dictionary “European” is not an
“Europeans”.
insult.

187. Fourth, within the area of Palestine itself, the
aspirations of the Arab people to sovereignty have been met
twice by the international community. In the period of the
League of Nations, Transjordan was cut off from the
remaining part of Palestine, the West Bank, closed to the
Jews and established as a separate Palestinian Arab entity.
The United Nations responded again lo Arab claims and
tailed for the establishment of a second Arab State in
Palestine, alongside the Jewish State.

195. What is really serious is that a new theory has just
been set forth in this Council, and we Cannot let it go
unchallenged. Somehow this Council is accused of apparently having ordered the occupation of Egypt, Syria and
Jordan, this occupation to remain in effect until Israel desires
to change the lines of the occupation. The Council does not
need any protestation from my side against this absurd and
ridiculous, if revealing, theory. That is the first point.

188. Fifth, the existence in Palestine today of one rather
than two Arab States does not alter the fact that the Arab
19

196. The second point is this. I do not really know
whether the representative of Israel has such a low opinion
of your intelligence and ours. I hope he does not. He keeps
speaking about the lines of the Armistice Agreements and
keeps forgetting about the international borders between all
the land of Palestine under British Mandate and the then
neighbouring States. The international borders, if not
sacred, are certainly protected by the law of nations, and
any infringement of those borders is pure aggression and an
act of war. The partitioning of Palestine and the moving
lines which were frozen in 1949 in the Armistice Agreements were of course not territorial or political boundaries.
We in Egypt have insisted on giving the quotation that has
just been cited-not to protect Egypt but to protect the
Palestinians, who may or may not exist in the mind of
Mr. Tekoah but who do exist in the world of reality. It is
up to them, if and when they desire, to put the territorial
and political boundaries between them and the Jewish
State-if and when they desire to accept the partition
resolution of 1947, which they deem to be unjust. The
pitiful efforts again to confuse this Council and its
representatives do not need any reply on my part.

201. I call on the representativeof Saudi Arabia.
202. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I think it will take
me some time to correct certain assertionsmade by
Mr. Tekoah, especiallybecausethey are in my field: tllis
historical field. While he came to Palestine-I have
researched
this, and if I am wrong I stand to be correctedfrom somewherein the Balkansor southernRussiaby way
of Shanghai,I have beenseizedof this question sincebefore
he was born and am familiar with the historical area;I
know somethingabout it. Now, there were many, many
mistakesin his statement, and it will take me time to take
them up point by point. Of course,he madethose points to
bolsterhis argument.
203. I do not wishto keep my colleagueshere around this
table for another three-quartersof an hour, or even half an
hour, and my good friend the Minister of State,
Mr. Al-Pachachi, might take another 10 ,minutes, which
would make an hour. I think it would defeat our own
purposeto keep you here that long. So I would proposea
compromise-althoughit is not up to me to do so, it is by
your consentthat I appearat this table-namely, that, with
the consent of the members, you give me the floor,
MT. President, the next time you meet, regardlessof
whetherit is this afternoon or tomorrow. I would certainly
be agreeableto that, and anyway I will obey you. If you
want me to speakthis afternoon, I will do so, becauseI
have a great deal of respect for you, Sir; and I must also
haveconsiderationfor the others.

197. My third and last point is this. As we see in the
verbatim records of the I722nd and 1723rd meetings, they
claim-and they have claimed again today-that the only
door that might lead to peace in the Middle East is the door
of negotiations without any prior conditions. I have a text,
and only one, to reply to this. It says that there are two
points to make: the first a military point: the second a
psychological one. And it goes on:

204. Mr. SEN (India): We are all interested in history,
logic, truth and justice, but I think we are alsointerested in
our hunger,particularly asthere is a socialengagementWith
the Foreign Ministers and others present. So I would
suggest
that, if it suitsall the other membersof the Council,
we adjourn now and perhaps meet later, at any time
suitableto you, MT. President,and the other members,and
listen to all these historical dissertationsand the various
aspectsof justice and truth.

“We cannot be expected to negotiate while fingers are
put across our throat to throttle us. And there is, more
importantly, the psychological aspect: you do not go into
a room to negotiate an agreement with somebody who
has just taken your pocketbook out of your pocket. You
say to him: ‘Look, you put that pocketbook back first to
create the minimal conditions necessaryfor us to reach
viable agreements
in the future’.”
198. The statement I have just read is not a replica of
another statement I made in the past, or of another long
dissertationon how to forge history; this text is from the
record of a WNBC television network programmeof 24
September 1970, broadcast at 8 a.m. It was said by
Mr. Abba Eban, the Foreign Minister of Israel, in an
interview with PaulineFrederick andothers.

205. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): As I
understandit, the representativeof Saudi Arabia does not
object to being given an opportunity to speak at the next
meeting.At the sametime, the representativeof the United
Arab Emirateshas told me that he wishesto make a very
short statement of five minutes. If it lasts five or ten
minutes,we can sit here for another five or ten minutes.
Accordingly, perhapswe could call on him and hear the
representativeof Saudi Arabia tomorrow. I see no objet.
tions. I invite the representative of the United Arab
Emiratesto take a seat at the Council table to make his
short statement.

199. We feel a bit ashamedof ourselves,
Mr. President: we
are not askingthe thief to put the pocketbook back into
our pocket before having anything meaningful;in our reply
to AmbassadorJarring we simply and modestly askedfor
an honourablecommitment that this pocketbook would be
put back into our pocket.

206. MT. AL-PACHACHI (United Arab Emirates): I apolo.
gize to you, Mr. President,andto the other membersof the.
Council,particularly my friend the representativeof India,
with whom I sharea feeling of hunger. Personally, I would
have preferred to speakat another meeting, but since, Sir,
you haveseenfit to call on me now, I will be very brief, asI
promised.

200. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
representativesof the United Arab Emirates and Saudi
Arabia have askedto be allowedto speakin exerciseof the
right of reply. One of them hasmentionedthe possibility of
convening an afternoon meeting in order to enable the
Council to hear those speakers.On the other hand, the
presentmeetingcould be continuedin order to enablethem
to state their views now; an afternoon-or rather, an
evening-meetingwould not then be convened.

207. I saidearlier in the day, in my first statement, that
apparently MT. Tekoah immensely enjoys making state20

merits in this Council. I think he has proved it beyond any
doubt this time by inflicting upon us a long historical
dissertation at a most inconvenient time. But he made one
or two points in reference to me personally to which I
should like to reply.

peoplescame into Palestineafter the Jewswent out of it.
Therefore, it is necessary to remember this: that the
important factor is that the people who inhabit the land
should be given the right of self-determination,not the
peoplewho inhabited that land nearIy 2,000 yearsago. And
in 1918, after the First World War, 93 per cent of the
population of PalestinewasArab. More than 99 per cent of
the land was owned by Arabs. The country had been
predominantly Arab in culture and languagefor nearly
1,400 years.

208. The first point related to my statement that Arab
delegations were privately informed in November 1967
when the sponsors of the resolution tried to explain the
omission of the words “all” and “the” in paragraph 1 of the
resolution, saying it was done to open the possibility of
agreed minor modifications that might be mutually convenient to the parties. Now, that is a far cry from the
occupation of Sharm-cl-Sheikh, Gaza, the Golan Heights,
Arab Jerusalem and other parts of the West Bank, which
Israeli leaders have openly claimed. Therefore, I was
surprised-perhaps
pleasantly surprised-when
Mr. Tekoah
said that if that was our understanding, then perhaps the
situation could be looked at in a different light.

213. Mr. Tekoah made a great deal of the fact that
Palestine at various times in history was administeredas
part of Syria. Well, we do not deny that. But Syria is an
Arab country, and the fact that Palestinewasconsideredas
an integral part of an Arab country doesnot put it outside
the Arab nation and the Arab world. On the contrary,
Palestine, whether as part of Syria or independent, has
always been part of the Arab world since the seventh
century of the Christian era.

209. Does that mean that Israel is prepared to agree to the
principle of withdrawal
from the occupied territories
subject to such minor modifications to be agreed upon for
mutual convenience? If that is the case, then I think the
Israelis should inform the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General without any delay that they agree ta
withdraw
from the territories occupied in June 1967,
subject to such minor modifications. They should also
mention what minor modifications they have in mind. But,
as I said, this is a far cry from the announced policies of
expansion made by the Prime Minister of Israel and several
of her Ministers in which they mentioned specifically that
Israel would not relinquish control of Sharm-el-Sheikh, of
Gaza, of the Golan Heights, of Arab Jerusalem and certain
parts of the West Bank itself.

214. In fact, far greater numbersof Jews lived in my
country of birth, Iraq, than in Palestine over many
centuries. In fact, in Iraq, the Jewish community, which
wasone of the oldest in the world, flourishedandmany of
its great prophets and great theologianslived and worked in
the valley of the two rivers. Also, it is a fact that the Jews
always flourished under Arab rule, especiallysoin the Arab
Caliphateof Cordoba in Spain.
215. Mr. Tekoah mentioned the SpanishInquisition and
the Crusades,It is a fact that the Arabs sufferedunder the
Spanish Inquisition and the Crusadesas much as, if not
more, than the Jews. I would also add another historical
instancein which the Jewsand Arabsstood togetherto try
to repel the Mongolian hordeswhen they invadedBaghdad
in the thirteenth century, When Baghdadwas finally taken
by the grandson of Gengbis Khan, Kublai Khan, and
destroyed, and the population put to the sword.

210. Now, Mr. Tekoah also accused us of considering the
Jews as a non-people. It seems to me that practically half of
his statement was devoted to the task of proving that the
Palestinians were a non-people, that somehow they did not
exist, that there is no country called Palestine, that it has
always been part of some other administrative area in the
Arab world. The fact of the matter is that since the Arab
conquest, and in fact before the Arab conquest, there has
been large-scale Arab immigration into Palestine from
Arabia. But with the Arab conquest in the seventh century
the whole country became Arabized. Its language became
Arabic, its culture became Arabic, and this was the
situation for 1,300 years.

216. But the basic fact of the matter isthat Palestineand
its peoplehave been an integral part of the Arab nation for
more than 13 centuries, and that givesthem rights, asany
other people in the world, to exercise their right of
self-determination in their ancestralhomeland.Take, for
example, the people of Latin Americadr the United States.
Now, the European inhabitants of this WesternHemisphere
came only 500 years ago, lessthan half of the period during
which the Arab people of Palestinelived in Palestine.Does
that mean that they shouldhaveno rightsin the country of
their birth? Constant generationsof Arabs lived in Palestine and they should be given the right of self-determination,

211. Now surely a country which has been a predominantly
Arab country for 1,300 years cannot overnight be turned
into an alien immigrant population, because if we are going
to rewrite history and give rights to people who enjoyed
them 2,000 or 3,000 years ago, one can imagine what
complete chaos there would be in the world. The fact is
that independent Jewish sovereignty in Palestine has not
fasted more than 700 years during a long history of nearly
4,000 years.

217. Mr. President, I promisedto makea short statement.
I could go on to discussthe historical aspectsof this
question, but I am surethat Mr. Baroody will be ableto do
that far better than I can at tomorrow’smeeting.

212. There were peoples in Palestinelong before the
ancient Hebrews made their appearancethere, and other

The ineetingroseat

21

2.40p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may
be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et 10s agences
depositaims
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
cle las Naciones
Unidas est;in en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccien de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-820014une

1979-2,200
