S/2020/1020

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 October 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 15 October 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 11 of Security Council resolution 2320
(2016) on strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union in peace and security, in which the Council requested that I report to it
following the completion of an assessment of United Nations-African Union
cooperation and the structure and capacity of the United Nations Office to the African
Union (UNOAU) to meet the growing demands of the partn ership.
An independent team leader, Said Djinnit, was selected to lead this assessment.
He was supported by an interdepartmental team that included representatives from
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of Peace
Operations, the Department of Operational Support, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Development Coordination Office. A wider consultative
group in New York included the Department of Global Communications, the
Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance, the Office of Counter Terrorism, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Entity f or Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women).
Evolution of the partnership
The assessment team recognized that the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is one of the most important relationships, particularly
in the domain of peace and security, today. It confirmed a broad consensus that a
strong partnership between the United Nations and the African Union was essential
to addressing the range of peace and security challenges in Africa. The assessment
team noted that in this regard, most partners considered the 2017 Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security
to be an important tool for the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission in deepening their cooperation. It also affirmed that the efforts of the
current leadership at both organizations to deepen the partnership were widely
appreciated. However, many interlocutors underscored the need to focus the
partnership on the implementation of joint efforts and initiatives at the country and
regional levels.
Interlocuters also stated that cooperation on cross-cutting issues, such as women
and youth, as well as on the nexus between peace and development, should be further
strengthened.

20-13723 (E)

221020

*2013723*

S/2020/1020

The assessment team highlighted that the past five years have seen a significant
improvement in the working relations between African Union and United Nations
envoys, including in field missions and non-mission settings. However, it noted that
the time had come to institutionalize the partnership at all levels of the two
organizations to ensure systematic cooperation that can withstand future changes in
leadership in either one or both organizations.
The assessment team identified that at the subregional level, the best e xamples
of collaboration between the United Nations, the African Union and regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms with regard to conflict prevention
were with United Nations regional offices, such as the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa. In
crisis situations, they have demonstrated a comparative advantage in the timely
harmonization of positions between the United Nations, the African Union and the
relevant regional economic community/regional mechanism, while working closely
with United Nations Headquarters.
Furthermore, the assessment team commended the support provided by the
United Nations to the operationalization of the African Union Mediation Support Unit
and the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation, as well as
the work of the African Women Leaders Network, which was launched in 2017.
The assessment team recognized that collaboration between the United Nations
and the African Union in support of African Union peace support operations had
progressively increased over the past decade and was a strong component of the
partnership. In his report on options for authorization and support for African Union
peace support operations (S/2017/454), the Secretary-General provided detailed
recommendations on the planning and oversight of those operations. That report
followed up on the report of the joint African Union-United Nations review of
available mechanisms to finance and support African Union peace support operations
authorized by the United Nations Security Council (A/71/410-S/2016/809), which
concluded that while preventive efforts had failed, the two organizations had
effectively worked together to deploy peace support operations, including in Burundi,
Darfur, Somalia, Mali and the Central African Republic. However, the United
Nations-African Union partnership on peace support operations was fac ed with a
range of unprecedented challenges for which both organizations adopted context specific mechanisms for cooperation. The review also noted that both organizations
recognized the value of developing a general framework for joint planning, mandating
compliance and oversight of African Union peace support operations.
On the other hand, the past decade has also witnessed an increase in ad hoc
security arrangements comprising mainly military forces deployed to stabilize
conflict zones in a subregion, such as the Multinational Joint Task Force deployed to
respond to Boko Haram, and the Group of Five for the Sahel deployed to combat
various non-State armed groups across the Sahel. These coalitions of States, based on
collective self-defence, operate outside of the official framework of the regional
economic communities/regional mechanisms.
The assessment team affirmed that these coalitions posed particular challenges
for the United Nations and the African Union as they operated largely in their own
territories and have the potential to conduct cross-border operations in hot pursuit;
were established outside of the geographical boundaries of the African Union regional
standby force; were based on voluntary contributions, which challenged command
and control by the United Nations or the African Union; and had no reporting or
accountability to either the United Nations Security Council or the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, despite having been authorized by both.

2/8

20-13723

S/2020/1020

The assessment team also noted that the United Nations management and peace
and security reforms of January 2019 helped streamline the interface between United
Nations Headquarters and the African Union. The reforms created an Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa in the regional structure responsible for peace and
security, matching the geographical coverage of the African Union. There is one
office responsible for providing strategic, political and operational backstopping of
the partnership, namely the African Union Partnersh ip Team. Reform of the United
Nations also created a Support Partnerships Service in the Department of Operational
Support which serves as the focal point for support to non-United Nations peace
operations, including African Union peace support operations.
Key factors that affect the partnership
The assessment team underscored that the United Nations-African Union
partnership was affected by several structural factors and organizational culture. It
identified the relationship between the United Nations Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union as one of the most important engagements
in this partnership, but also noted that despite a decade of discussions and annual
meetings, this engagement still had room for improvement. Challenges centred on the
working methods governing the engagement of the Councils, including joint visits,
the response to the situation in Libya and the financing for peace support operations.
The assessment team noted that these differences were root ed in mutual
misperceptions regarding the roles and responsibilities of the United Nations Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union respectively; and a
perceived disregard for the views of the Peace and Security Council.
As a result, achieving strategic convergence between the United Nations
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union will not be
easy, and this may continue to affect the cooperation between the two organizations.
Nonetheless, all interlocutors expressed the need to deepen cooperation between the
Councils, including through better engagement of the three elected African Member
States of the United Nations Security Council. Joint United Nations -African Union
action to prevent and respond to conflict is complicated by ambiguity over the
application of the principle of subsidiarity between the United Nations, the African
Union and its regional economic communities/regional mechanisms.
The assessment team called for increased interlinkages and operational
coherence of the several frameworks between the United Nations Secretariat and
African Union Commission. The assessment team also recognized that in spite of the
joint work by both organizations to strengthen humanitarian response, hu man rights,
development, peace and security, the cross-pillar linkages required further
articulation.
With regard to peacebuilding, while the United Nations and the African Union
were working on increasing their operational coherence, the assessment team
suggested that the lack of joint integrated analysis and planning undermined the
coherence of multilateral peacebuilding efforts and did not meet the expectations of
the African Union with regard to it playing a more prominent role in peacebuilding.
While noting the progress made by African countries in organizing elections,
the assessment team identified two areas where challenges remained: the limited
capacity of electoral management bodies and constitutional courts; and the weak
management of political transitions following successful elections.

20-13723

3/8

S/2020/1020

United Nations Office to the African Union
UNOAU was established on 1 July 2010 by the General Assembly in its
resolution 64/288 to streamline the presence of the United Nations Secretariat in
Addis Ababa working on peace and security matters; enhance the United Nations
partnership with the African Union in the area of peace and security; and provide
coordinated and consistent United Nations support to the African Union on both shortterm operational support matters and long-term institutional capacity-building.
The assessment team noted that while this broad mandate still remained valid,
the role of UNOAU had evolved with the partnership, and more so with the signing
of the aforementioned Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. Since its establishment, the strength of the Office
has focused on providing support for the planning and management of existing
African Union peace support operations and other missions and the development of
institutional policies and practices in conflict prevention, mediation, rule of law,
human rights, security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. The assessment found widespread appreciation for UNOAU and its role
as the primary daily interface with the African Union. Most partners expressed
support for the strengthening of the Office and noted the exemplary role that the
leadership of the Office has played in engaging with partners and increasing the
frequency of briefings to the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and its
senior officials. Accordingly, the assessment team recognized the need to strengthen
the coordination role of UNOAU in peace and security.
With regard to the peace and development nexus, the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes that support the African Union in peace, security and
development matters requested more consistent coordination between UNOAU and
the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) on the peace and development nexus.
The assessment team concurred with the directive issued by the Chef de Cabinet on
21 March 2019 on the coordination of the political, peace and security and
development pillars through UNOAU and ECA, respectively.
To ensure coordinated backstopping of UNOAU, the assessment team
recommended the creation of an interdepartmental mechanism that connects focal
points from the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of
Peace Operations and the Department of Operational Support, and other departments
and agencies, with the aim of providing harmonized and holistic support to UNOAU.
Recommendations
Following consultations with various key stakeholders, the assessment team
recommends, inter alia, the reprioritization of areas of cooperation. It recommends
that in the short- and medium-term, both organizations prioritize a limited number of
areas that could lead to tangible cooperation at the country and regional levels. In this
regard, it recommends reprioritizing the scope of the Joint United Nations -African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security to focus on
prevention, mediation and sustaining peace and peace support operations, while
strengthening cross-cutting areas, including those related to gender and women, peace
and security, as well as the peace and development nexus. The assessment team
further recommends the harmonization of the United Nations-African Union
partnership through the development of an overarching United Nations-African
Union strategy encompassing the various existing frameworks, as that would improve
the internal coherence and coordination of the United Nations with the African Union.
It also recommends that the United Nations reinforce its support to African Union
continental frameworks, initiatives and mechanisms and strengthen their capacity to

4/8

20-13723

S/2020/1020

enhance women’s participation and protection at the local, national and regional
levels.
The following actions are also recommended by the assessment team, as set out
below.
1.
Strategic convergence between the United Nations Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. The assessment team
recommends that the two Councils align and sequence their programmes of work to
facilitate the positions taken by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and inform the decisions taken by the United Nations Security Council on the same
topic. It recommends that UNOAU facilitate regular informal interactions between
representatives of Security Council Member States in Addis Ababa and the members
of the Peace and Security Council, with the aim of improving understanding and
cooperation between the two Councils. This can be complemented by similar
initiatives in New York, facilitated by the Permanent Observer Mission of the African
Union to the United Nations. Furthermore, in consultation with the African Union,
the United Nations should institutionalize the workshop of the Committee of Experts
of the Peace and Security Council in New York to discuss Security Council working
methods on an annual basis, and consider facilitating reverse visits by experts of the
Security Council to the Peace and Security Council.
2.
Conflict prevention. The assessment team recommends that the two
organizations leverage their existing systems to produce monthly early warning
analyses and options for early action. Horizon-scanning meetings should include,
when feasible, regional desks at United Nations Headquarters and United Nations
regional offices, as well as specialized and thematic offices and regional economic
communities/regional mechanisms, together with UNOAU and the African Union
Commission in Addis Ababa. The assessment team also recommends the
establishment of more fully fledged United Nations regional offices to facilitate
prevention and mediation efforts, where feasible. In addition, it recommends that the
two organizations develop a joint report on the status of prevention in Africa,
including enhancement of local, national and regional prevention capacities in Africa.
3.
Election and governance. The assessment team suggests that the United
Nations and the African Union explore ways through which they can jointly
strengthen the capacities of national electoral management bodies and consti tutional
councils. It encourages the United Nations and the African Union to consider options
to support and advise States on how to develop frameworks that facilitate democratic
transitions from one elected government to the next.
4.
Support to African Union peace support operations. The assessment
team recommends that the United Nations develop a support model that draws on
lessons learned from existing United Nations and African Union operations in
complex conflict environments, ensuring that the United Nations is both a partner and
a service provider to African Union peace support operations. It encourages
accelerated efforts by the United Nations and the African Union to further develop
consultative decision-making (joint planning, reporting, review processes); financial
management (joint budget submissions, reporting); and African Union compliance
frameworks (international humanitarian law, human rights, conduct/discipline). The
assessment team further recommends that the United Nations strengthen its efforts to
assist the African Union in the development of policies and strategic guidance on the
conduct of peacekeeping operations, specifically force generation, predeployment
planning and training requirements, to ensure adequate operational readiness a nd
command and control.
5.
Emerging ad hoc security arrangements. Drawing on lessons learned
from missions such as the United Nations Support Office in Somalia and the United
20-13723

5/8

S/2020/1020

Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, as well as the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
the assessment team recommends that the United Nations and the African Union
consider a joint review of ad hoc security arrangements, including enabling factors
such as unity of command, use of force and options for support from the United
Nations and the African Union.
The assessment team advocates that the United Nations and the African Union
further increase their engagement with regional economic communities/regiona l
mechanisms, and that these ad hoc security arrangements promote adherence to the
procedures and standards required of all troops, units and individuals serving in
African Union-mandated and authorized peace support operations.
6.
Peacebuilding. The assessment team identifies the need to move beyond
project-focused collaboration with the African Union towards the effective
coordination and implementation of structural prevention at the country level. The
assessment team also recommends that the United Nations advocate with the World
Bank and the European Union for the full integration of the African Union into
multilateral peacebuilding assessments and planning processes, such as recovery and
peacebuilding assessments, to strengthen ownership and coherence.
7.
Clear and predictable application of the principle of subsidiarity. The
assessment team recommends strengthening continental cohesion through the
inclusion of the heads of regional economic communities/regional mechanisms in
United Nations-African Union high-level meetings held on a biannual basis. It further
suggests that the engagement of the United Nations with both the regional economic
communities/regional mechanisms and the African Union would encourage
continental cohesion and ensure adequate coordination.
Observations
I wish to convey my deep gratitude to the African Union Commission, members
of the United Nations Security Council, the Group of African States, representatives
of the European Union and other international partners for the strong collaboration
and support extended to the assessment team.
I fully concur with the conclusion of the assessment team that the United
Nations-African Union partnership is one of the most important relationships in the
domain of international peace and security and a cornerstone o f multilateralism.
Current peace and security challenges on the African continent are extremely complex
and neither the United Nations nor the African Union can address these on their own.
Partnership is therefore essential.
Moreover, I take note of the recommendation of the assessment team that the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union need to align and sequence their programmes of work as much as possible in
order to facilitate the positions taken by the Peace and Security Council and inform
decisions taken by the Security Council on the same topics. In this regard, I welcome
the implementation of the commitment made by the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council at their twelfth joint annual consultative meeting, held in New
York on 19 July 2018, in particular their intention to agree on the modalities for joint
visits in Africa. The United Nations Secretariat stands ready to provide support in this
regard. The three elected African Member States of the United Nations Security
Council could play a key role in promoting coherence between the two Councils.
I believe that both our organizations and our action in Africa would benefit from
the further institutionalization of collaboration between our organizations at all levels
and, to this end, following the election of the commissioners of African Union
6/8

20-13723

S/2020/1020

Commission, I will explore with them the possibility of convening a senior leadership
retreat between the African Union and the United Nations to strengthen the
partnership.
These efforts should be complemented by the sustainment of our commitment
to work together, including through joint assessments, planning, retreats, joint work
streams and workshops. We should also explore the possibility of expanding the
knowledge and expertise exchange programme, currently focused on enhancing
cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations in the area of
operational support matters, to other disciplines.
Furthermore, I endorse the recommendation for reprioritizing the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security
to focus on prevention, mediation and sustaining peace and peace support operations,
while strengthening the involvement of women and yout h in the peace and security
agenda, as well as other cross-cutting areas, such as climate change. I concur that
fully fledged United Nations regional offices would be valuable in order to facilitate
prevention and mediation efforts in coordination with the broader United Nations
system, the African Union and regional economic communities/regional mechanisms.
In this regard, I have decided to establish an inter-agency task force on the United
Nations-African Union partnership to follow up on the implementati on of the
recommendations of the assessment team, including with regard to strengthening the
peace and development nexus, supported by human rights and humanitarian activities.
I agree with the recommendation to develop an overarching United Nations African Union strategy encompassing the various United Nations-African Union
frameworks to improve the internal coherence, coordination and cross -pillar approach
of the United Nations with the African Union.
In this regard, I concur with the recommendation of the assessment team that
UNOAU would benefit from additional capacity in order to enable it to more
effectively perform that coordination role. I also take note of the capacity
misalignment between the two organizations and the burden of cooperation place d on
the African Union and I intend to conduct a mapping exercise of the existing
cooperation and coordination mechanisms to determine areas for streamlining and
simplification.
Taking into account that access to assessed United Nations contributions in
support of African Union peace support operations will remain a challenge, I believe
that our ability to effectively respond to threats to peace and security on the continent
would greatly benefit from a more structured approach to burden -sharing. In this
respect, I am pleased to note the expansion of the United Nations operational support
role from a partner to both a partner and a service provider to the African Union and,
to that end, investment in the development of a support model for African Union pea ce
support operations.
Irrespective of the tool, it is imperative that this objective be achieved, either
from voluntary contributions or assessed contributions from the United Nations. I am
hopeful that, following the present assessment report, an arran gement to this effect
can be agreed upon by the United Nations Security Council, one that meets the
legitimate expectations of the African Union and the troop-contributing countries that
have been making enormous sacrifices in the pursuit of peace and secu rity in Africa.
In the meantime, I intend to develop a United Nations support model for African
Union peace support operations jointly with the African Union, within existing
mandates.
Sustainable partnership must be grounded in the trust between the two
organizations, and it will require improved collaboration among key actors, including
20-13723

7/8

S/2020/1020

the United Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission. I
fully support the proposal to conduct a regular joint United Nations-African Union
review of the partnership. Joint monitoring and review of the partnership will likely
enable both organizations to generate accelerated progress and elicit additional
support. In the interim, I intend to share an executive summary of the independent
strategic assessment with the leadership of the African Union Commission to solicit
their feedback and commitment in implementing the recommendations.
It is my sincere hope that the partnership between our two organizations will
continue to be strengthened. Much has been achieved, but much also remains to be
done. I therefore urge the Security Council to continue to support the strengthening
of this partnership and in particular the recommendations of this assessment report.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

8/8

20-13723
