18

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

in their international relations from the threat or use of force
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of any State,
Reaffirming further the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose their
own economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind
whatsoever,
Gravely concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principles, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Noting the increasing concern of the international community over the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and over the magnitude of social and economic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the presence
on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 25 particularly of the appointment of his Personal Representative,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political solution
of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
1. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and non-aligned
character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful solution
of the problem;
2. Reaffirms the right of the Afghan people to determine
their own form of government and to choose their economic,
political and social system free from outside intervention,
subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan;
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work for the urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance with
the provisions of the present resolution, and the creation of
the necessary conditions which would enable the Afghan
refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in safety and
honour;
5. Renews its appeal to all States and national and international organizations to continue to extend humanitarian
relief assistance, with a view to alleviating the hardship <,i'
the Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General in the search for a solution to the problem
and requests him to continue those efforts with a view to
promoting a political solution, in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution. and the exploration of
securing appropriate guarantees for non-use of force. or
threat of use of force, against the political independence.
sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of all neighbouring States, on the basis of mutual guarantees and strict
non-interference in each other's internal affairs and with full
regard for the principles of the Charterof the United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
the progress towards the implementation of the present rP,solution and to submit to Member States a report on the
situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity:

25

A/36/653-S/14745. For the printed text. see Official R,•cords o/ 1h1•
Security Council, Thirtv-sixth Year. Supp/emem fi,r Oc10ber. Nm•emh,·r
and December I 98 I .
·

8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security·'.
62nd plenan· meeting
rn Novemher 1981

36/38.

Twenty-fifth anniversary of the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee

The General Assemhlv,
Noting with appreciation the contribution of the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Committee in the field of progressive development and codification of international law.
Considering that the co-operation during the last twentyfive years between the United Nations and the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee has been highly fruitful.
Desiring to strengthen further and to widen the scope of
this mutually beneficial relationship between the two
organizations.
I. Extends its congratulations to the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee on its twenty-fifth anniversary
for its highly commendable work in promoting interregional
as well as international co-operation supportive of the efforts
of the United Nations in this regard:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out consultations with the Secretary-General of the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee with a view to further
strengthening the co-operation between the two organizations and widening the scope of this co-operation;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled ''Co-operation between the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee··.
63rd plenary meeting
/8 November 198/

36/39.

Enlargement of the International Law Commission: amendments to articles 2 and 9 of the
Statute of the Commission

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of the International Law Commission as the main permanent subsidiary organ of the General Assembly entrusted with the promotion of the progressive
development of international law and its codification.
Recalling its resolution 1647 (XVI) of6 November 1961.
by which the membership of the International Law Commission was established at twenty-five members.
Noting that the membership of the United Nations has
grown substantially since the adoption of that resolution,
Conscious of the increased interest shown by Member
States, particularly those admitted to membership in the
Organization since 1961. in the Commission's work on the
progressive development of international law and its
codification,
I. Decides to amend article 2, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International Law Commission to read as follows:
"The Commission shall consist of thirty-four members
who shall be persons of recognized competence in international law":
2. Also decides to amend article 9. paragraph I. of the
said Statute to read as follows:
"Those candidates. up to the maximum number prescribed for each regional group. who obtain the greatest

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

number of votes and not less than a majority of the votes
of the Members present and voting shall be elected'';
3. Decides further that the thirty-four members of the
International Law Commission shall be elected according
to the following pattern:
(a) Eight nationals from African States;
(b) Seven nationals from Asian States;
(c) Three nationals from Eastern European States;
(d) Six nationals from Latin American States;
(e) Eight nationals from Western European or other
States;
(fJ One national from African States or Eastern European States in rotation, with the seat being allocated to a
national of an African State in the first election held after
the adoption of the present resolution;
(g) One national from Asian States or Latin American
States in rotation, with the seat being allocated to a national
of an Asian State in the first election held after the adoption
of the present resolution;
4. Decides, by way of exception and in consequence
of the enlargement of the Commission, to request the Secretary-General to include in the list of candidates for the
election to be held at the current session, in addition to the
nominations already received, such names as shall have
been communicated to him in writing before 21 November
1981.
63rd plenary meeting
18 November 1981

36/64.

Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December
1972, 3 I 48 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3 I 87 (XXVIII)
of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of 19 November 1975,
31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/ l 8 of 11 November 1977,
33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of 29 November 1979
and 35/127 and 35/128 of 11 December 1980,
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, 26 adopted on 14 November 1970 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Emphasizing that the cultural heritage of a people conditions the present and future flowering of its artistic values
and its over-all development,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report submitted by
the Secretary-General in co-operation with the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 27
Aware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is of fundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that they may
constitute collections representative of their cultural heritage,
Noting with satisfaction that the countries of origin have
already reinforced the steps they have taken for the organization and maintenance of their museums, in order to accommodate their cultural treasures, and for the classification, restoration and conservation of their objets d'art with
national experts of international repute,
26
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session, vol. 1. Resolutions.
pp. 135-141.
27
A/36/651.

19

Noting also with sati:,faction that some countries have
taken positive steps for the return or restitution of museum
pieces, archives and objets d'art to their countries of origin,
Deeply concerned at the persistence of the illicit traffic
in cultural property. which continues to impoverish the cultural heritage of all peoples.
I. Renews its support for the solemn appeal launched
on 7 June 1978 by the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
the return to those who created it of an irreplaceable cultural
heritage;
2. Reaffirms that the restitution to a country of its objets
d'art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts,
documents and any other cultural or artistic treasures contributes to the strengthening of international co-operation
and to the preservation and flowering of universal cultural
values through fruitful co-operation between developed and
developing countries;
3. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Intergovernmental
Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit
Appropriation on the work they have accomplished, particularly through the promotion of bilateral negotiations, for
the return or restitution of cultural property. the preparation
of inventories of movable cultural property, the development of infrastructures for the protection of movable cultural
property, the reduction of illicit traffic in cultural property
and the dissemination of information to the public;
4. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to intensify its efforts to help the
countries concerned to find suitable solutions to the problem
relating to the return or restitution of cultural property and
urges Member States to co-operate with that organization
in this area;
5. Invites Member States to take adequate measures to
prohibit and prevent the illicit import, export and transfer
of ownership of cultural property. and to put an end to the
illicit trafficking in priceless objets d'art and museum pieces
by all necessary measures within each country's jurisdiction
with the full co-operation of the courts and customs
authorities;
6. Also invites Member States to draw up, in cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization. systematic inventories of cultural
property existing in their territories and of their cultural
property abroad;
7. Appeals to museums and public and private collectors
to return totally or partially. or make available to the countries of origin, particularly the items kept in the storehouses
of such museums, and to help the countries of origin, with
the co-operation of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in their endeavours to
prepare an inventory of those collections;
8. Reminds Member States of the need to strengthen
museum infrastructures, in particular conservation techniques, museographic facilities and procedures adapted to
local conditions and the training of qualified personnel;
9. Calls upon the United Nations Development Programme to continue to assist the development of national
capacity in respect of museum infrastructures and invites
Member States as well as national agencies and regional
organizations to strengthen their technical co-operation in
this area;
_10. Appeals to Member States to co-operate closely
with the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation and to conclude
bilateral agreements for this purpose;
