UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
REC

OFFICIAL

,. .‘,, ,,

th
MEETING: 14 JUNE 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
.... .,... .. ... ... ... .... .. ....

I

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(b) Report of of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution
331(1973)(S/lfJ929) I.........,.......,..................

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l726)

S/PV. 1726 and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 14 June 1973, at 3 p.m.
President:Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Pt~sent:

The representatives

of the following

2. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): My Government views this meeting of the Council as a challenge and
an opportunity. It is a challenge to deal responsibly with
one of the most important-and one of the most difficultof the problems facing the world community. It is an
opportunity of a kind we have not had since November
1967, when the Council last met to review the whole
problem of the Middle East. It is thus more than just an
occasion to hear the complaints of one side against the
other. It is an opportunity to create circumstances in
which, at long last, Arab and Israeli might engage in a
genuine negotiating process.

States:

Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l726)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 33 1 (1973) (S/ 10929).

3. In the more than five and one half years since the
Council last dealt with the issue in a comprehensive manner
many, many words have been spoken and many resolutions
have been passed. In some ways the problem is more
difficult today than it was five and one half years ago. Time
has a way of giving an aura of permanence to what once
seemed transitory. This meeting should be first of all,
therefore, an opportunity to reaffirm that we do not
consider the present situation in the Middle East either
natural or permanent. WC should leave no doubt that it is
neither natural nor permanent.

The meeting was called to ortIer at 3.25 p.m.

Adoption of the Agenda
7%e agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
(u) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
@I) Report of the Secretary-General under
Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973) (S/l 0929)
I.

The PRESIDENT

4. Time also has a way of subtly altering how we perceive
problems and their solutions. This meeting is therefore an
opportunity as well to review our perceptions, to see
whether they have changed over the past five and one half
years. This meeting should be an opportunity, in short, to
recapture the hope and to reaffirm the resolve which
inspired the Council on 22 November 1967 to give its
unanimous approval to resolution 242 (1967). That decision was recognized at the time as a landmark in the long
history of this problem in the United Nations. It remains a
landmark today.

(translation from Russian): In accor-

dance with the decisions taken by the Security Council at
previous

meetings, I intend, with the consent of the
to invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, the United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Nigeria, Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates,
Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania, Kuwait, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Iran and Bahrain to take part,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s consideration of
the situation in the Middle East.

Council,

5. Resolution 242 (1967) reflected the Council’s view that
the time had come to move expeditously toward a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East after three wars with their
great toll of human tragedy and devastation and their threat
to world peace. The resolution recognized that such a peace
Inust be based on a just settlement not only of the
problemsarisingout of the hostilitiesof June 1967but also
of the underlying causesof the Arab-Israeliconflict asthey
haveexisted now for over aquarter-century.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(Egypt),
Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel), and Mr. A. IX Sharaf
fJordan)
took places at the Council table; and Mr. S. A.
Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr, H. G. Ouangmotthing (Chad), Mr. H. Keluni (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. E.
0. Ogbrr (Nigeria), Mr. A. Boutej%hz (Algeria), Mr. AL
Zentar
(Morocco),
Mr, A. Al-Pachachi (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia), Mr. R. E. Jackson
(Guyana), Mr. M. El Hassen (Mauritania), Mr. A. Y. Bishara
(Kuwait),
Mr. J. Y. Jatnal (Qatar), Mr. 0. Sokkaf (tiudi
Arabia), Mr. I?. Ghorra (Lebanon), Mr. I? Hoveyda (Iran)
and Mr. S. M. Al-Saffar (Bahrain) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. What were the essentialelementswith which we began
the searchfor peacein 1967?
7, First, it is important to rememberthat in calling for a
cease-fireto end the fighting in June 1967the Council did
1

14. Finally, resolution 242 (1967) calls for agreement, In
the context of the resolution this clearly means agreement
between the parties concerned. Ambassador Jarring, to
whom I wish to pay a special tribute today, was subse.
quently selected to assist the parties to this end. My
Government has never seen how such agreement would be
possible without an ongoing, serious negotiating process
either direct or indirect, which engaged the parties them.
selves. We believe each member of this Council should do
everything possible to encourage the parties to engage in
such a dialogue. The recess in these deliberations which
now lies before us provides each and all of us with an
opportunity to take stock and to consider what can be
done to bring about forward movement.

not address the question of who was responsible for the
outbreak of that fighting. Nor did it call for unconditional
Israeli withdrawal.
8. Secondly, it is important to remember the nature and
essential elements of resolution 242 (1967) as they were
generally understood at the time. The resolution was the
result of compromise by all concerned, and that means that
any settlement based upon it must reflect that spirit of
compromise. Resolution 242 (1967) did not define the
terms of settlement. In the language of the resolution itself,
it defined a set of “provisions and principles” which
constitute a framework for the terms of a final settlement.
It is only fair to note that the terms to be negotiated must
therefore be consistent with those provisions and principles-not with just some of them, but with all of them
taken together. If the terms of a settlement do not meet
that test, they cannot, in our view, form part of the just
and lasting peace we seek. Too often one side or the other
has sought to emphasize certain elements of resolution
242 (1967) while ignoring others.

10. First, it includes in its preamble the words “the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war and
the need to work for a just and lasting peace in which every
State in the area can live in security”. We accept that
principle asimportant and significant.

15. In the days just passed, several speakers have attri.
buted to the United States a certain partisanship in its view
of the Arab-Israeli dispute. Perhaps in doing so those
speakers were reflecting a certain partisanship of their own.
In any case, I wish to dismiss these allegations without
exception. Like my predecessors, I represent to the best of
my ability the interests of the United States, and not those
of any other single State. In the Middle East, the overriding
interest of the United States is in peace-a peace that will
end the fear and uncertainty of the past quarter-century,
The interests of the United States demand that we press
ahead to seek that peace-a peace that will allow Arab and
Israeli alike to reside within secure and recognized boundaries. The United States urgently desires friendly and
enduring relations with all countries of the Middle East.

11. Secondly, resolution 242 (1967) affirms that peace
should include the application of two co-equal principles.
One is “withdrawal of israel armed forces from territories
occupied” in the 1967 conflict. My Government endorses
that principle in the context of the resolution as a whole.
But the principle of withdrawal cannot be separated from
the next, balancing, paragraph, which affirms the principle
of “Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and
respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of every
State in the area and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or acts
of force”.

16. In his recent report to Congress, President Nixon
solemnly stated, “I have said that no other crisis area of the
world has greater importance or higher priority for the
United States in the second term of my Administration”. I
can assureyou that Mr. Nixon’s judgement and his resolve
are unchanged. Our determination to serve this interest has
only been strengthened by the passage of time. The
disappointments of the past have strengthened the impera.
tive to seek peace. Neither the United States nor any other
Power or combination of Powers can negotiate such a
peace. Only the parties can do that. But let there be no
doubt about our determination to contribute whatever we
can to the creation of circumstances in which the parties
can achieve peace and security through negotiations.

9. What are the main provisions and principles of resolution 242 (1967)?
-

12. Thirdly, resolution 242 (1967) affirms the necessity
for guaranteeing freedom of navigation and for guaran.
teeing the territorial inviolability and political independence of every State in the area. Clearly, the specific
measures by which these important interests of the parties
are to be guaranteed must be part of the detailed terms of a
final settlement. They must be part of the structure of
peace.

17. We note, as other speakers before us have noted, that
in today’s world security means more than territory, more
than the stockpiling of armaments and more than merely
the absence of belligerency. Security-real security for all
the parties-depends on willingness to put aside bitter
quarrels, prejudices, fears and misapprehensions of the past
and to look ahead positively to developing a broad range of
mutual interests which gives each party a vested interest in
preserving peace.

13. Fourthly, resolution 242 (1967) affirms the necessity
“for achieving a just settlement of the refugee problem”.
That too must clearly be part of the structure of peace. My
Government has on a number of occasions made clear our
view that no structure of peace in the Middle East can be
just and lasting if it does not make provision for the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians. In our view it is
for the parties to work out what that means in specific
terms.

18. What are the key issues with which such negotiations
must come to grips? In simplest terms they arc the issues
of sovereignty and security. The parties must find a way to
reconcile the two. One aspect of this problem is the
question of boundaries. There are many strongly held views
about where the final boundaries between Israel and its
neighbours should be drawn. Resolution 242 (1967) has
often been cited to support one view or another. But the
2

fact is that resolution 242 (1967) is silent on the specific
question of where the final border should be located. It
neither endorses nor precludes-let me repeat, neither
endorses nor precludes-the armistice lines which existed
between Israel, Egypt, Jordan and Syria on 4 June 1967, as
the final secure and recognized boundaries. Everyone knew
when resolution 242 (1967) was adopted that this was an
area of ambiguity. This was part of the compromise to
which I have referred.

do its part to facilitate and sustain objectively and fairly
any such process of negotiation until the goal the Council
set for itself more than five and one half years ago is
achieved. This we will do in the interests of true and lasting
peace in the Middle East for all concerned in this and future
generations.
23. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (inferpretarion from Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on presiding
over the Security Council during the month of June.
Knowing full well your parliamentary ability, your wide
experience in the work of this Organization and the respect
felt for you by all those sitting around this table, I am
convinced that you will discharge successfully the very
heavy historic responsibility that has fallen on your
shoulders. The delegation of Panama, which every day
enjoys increasingly cordial relations with the delegation of
the Soviet Union, is pleased to offer you all its co-operation
in the fulfilment of your duties-among other reasons, as
proof of our appreciation for the outstanding assistance
that the Soviet Union gave us and your own brilliant
participation in the memorable series of meetings that the
Council held in Panama in March of this year.

19. The central message of resolution 242 (1967) is that
there should be a fundamental change in the nature of the
relationship of the parties with each other; a change from
belligerency to peace, from insecurity to security, from
dispossession and despair to hope and dignity for the
Palestinians. Let me say again: it seems clear to us-logically, politically, historically, realistically-that the question
of agreement of final boundaries must be viewed in the
context of the total thrust and intent of resolution
242 (1967). This question must therefore be resolved as
part of the process of reaching agreement on all the
complex factors governing a new relationship among the
parties which would replace that defined in the 1949
Armistice Agreements.

24. We should like also to express our appreciation to the
outgoing President, Ambassador Rahmatalla Abdulla of the
Sudan, for the very wise and correct way in which he
presided over our meetings last month.

20. I have recalled the history of our efforts in 1967 not
to argue the past but because I believe we need to restore
our perspective as we look to the future. Many sincere
efforts have been made, by Ambassador Jarring and by
Governments including my own, to help the parties find a
way to negotiate the detailed terms of a final peace
agreement. Whatever may have been their merits, none
succeeded. We are therefore left with resolution 242 (1967)
as the only basis thus far accepted by both sideswith regard
both to substance and to procedure. The principal parties
concerned have accepted that basis, each in its own way,
and this is what makes it uniquely important.

25. From the sixth of this month the Security Council has
been holding special meetings to examine the situation in
the Middle East. The Secretary-General, Mr, Kurt
Waldheim, has submitted and very satisfactorily introduced
a very detailed report [$/lo9291 on the efforts made by
the United Nations since 1967 to deal with the difficult
situation confronting that region of the world. In that
report very justifiable stress was laid on the outstanding
role played by Ambassador Gunnar Jarring as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in the fulfilment
of the mission entrusted to him to ensure that the existing
tension in the Middle East is ended-a region where we can
safely say that the people are living in a situation that is
neither peace nor war.

21. The Council faces a great responsibility, We can by our
actions wreck the basis for agreement which now exists
with all its conscious ambiguities, or we can preserve that
basis and try to move forward with renewed energy. My
Government strongly believes that we must take the latter
course. We are prepared to support a fresh attempt by
Ambassador Jarring based on his mandate in Security
Council resolution 242 (1967).

26. After having listened very carefully to the very
complete statement of the Foreign Minister of Egypt,
Mr. El-Zayyat, who on behalf of his country asked for this
series of meetings, we have heard the Foreign Ministers of
Nigeria, the United Republic of Tanzania, Guinea, Algeria
and the Sudan, designated by the Organization of African
Unity as spokesmen for Africa, who made very moving and
eloquent statements.

22. We shall be guided by this approach in judging
whatever proposals may ultimately be placed before us. We
agree with those who have argued that the Council has a
responsibility to help bring about the implementation of
resolution 242 (1967). Implementation requires agreement,
and agreement requires a process of negotiations. This is
what the Council must encourage and facilitate. Such a
process, in our view, must involve a patient, practical
step-by-step approach. It could begin, as we have long
favoured, with an agreement on some Israeli withdrawal in
the Sinai and a reopening of the Suez Canal within the
context of an extended cease-f3re,as the first stage on the
road to a final settlement. Such a first step would be firmly
linked to a final agreement settlement. But whether a
beginning is made in this or some other way is less
important
than that such a process be started without
delay. I assure you that my Government is fully prepared to

27, We have also listened with great interest to the
important statements made daily by Mr. Tekoah, representing Israel.
28. The members of the Council who have participated in
our deliberations on the Middle East have spoken with great
erudition, as have also the representatives of the Members
of the United Nations that have been invited to participate
in the debate. We are very happy to express the view that
this debate has been a constructive one and that the Parties
to the conflict, without ceasing to defend their interests,
3

reason that we shall always endeavour calmly to find just
and equitable solutions within the framework
of the
principles and tenets of the United Nations Charter and in
keeping with the norms of international law.

have nevertheless attested to the sincere desire of the
inhabitants of the region to arrive at a just and equitable
solution that will allow them to live in peace.
29. On 30 June 1967 the Latin American Group of the
United Nations presented to the General Assembly at the
fifth emergency special session a draft resolution1 dealing
with the situation in the Middle East on which the
Assembly was called upon to vote. The operative part of
that draft resolution read as follows:

38. The Jews of Panama have contributed significantly to
the nation’s economic development and to its social and
cultural progress; they constitute a highly respected community in our country, and one that exerts considerable
influence on important facets of the life of the country.

f Tlze speaker read out the text of the operative part of
the draft resolution.]

39. The Arabs of Panama, because of their own attributes,
because of the many customs they have inherited from
Spain, and because they are hard-working and industrious
and have mixed with the other people of the country, have
earned the affection of the Panamanians. The nationalist
policy of that great leader Garnal Abdel Nasser, with regard
to the Suez Canal, and also his ideas regarding the
permanent sovereignty which our peoples have a right to
exercise over their natural resources, captured the imagination of the majority of Panamanians, by virtue of the great
similarity that exists between his country and my own
because of the Panama Canal, which bisects our nation.

30. By one of those ironies of fate, this draft resolution
was not supported by the Arabs.
31, Panama was a member of the working group that
prepared the rough draft of the Latin American draft
resolution, which, unfortunately, was not adopted by the
General Assembly. However, as far as my country was
concerned, the fact that the draft resolution was rejected
did not leave us in a political vacuum. In the years that have
elapsed since June 1967 we have always defended the basic
principIes underlying that Latin American draft.

40. We know that in matters of war and peace it is very
difficult to avoid an exacerbation of passions, while we
prudently try to find acceptable solutions. The Government
of Panama, guided by the fundamental principles that have
always dictated our behaviour in the international field,
principles such as that of the non-use of force and the
refusal to accept the negative results that such use might
produce, and as a good friend of the parties in conflict, is
desirous that a solution be reached that will avoid future
explosions of violence in the Middle East.

32. Now that the problem of the Middle East is once again
being considered by the Security Council, since in the past
six years no adequate solution has been found to it, the
Government of Panama wishes to state that in all this time
it has spared no effort to help to find a solution that will
bring peace and stability to the countries of the region, so
that all the members of the region may soon be able to
enjoy the benefits of co-operation and understanding.
33. Without setting aside any of the fundamental principles expressed in the Latin American draft resolution, we
should like the Security Council to explore all avenues that
might lead us to the establishment of the conditions
necessary for peace in the Middle East.

41. That is why we repeat that the Latin American draft
resolution seems to us to contain the necessary ingredients
and constructive suggestions which might, in our opinion,
help us to interpret resolution 242 (1967) in a clear and
balanced way so that a just and equitable solution can be
found to the problems confronting the Middle East.

34. We believe that resolution 242 (1967), adopted on 22
November 1967 by the Security Council, possesses the
elements which, through negotiations and agreements,
might enable the parties to reach an acceptable solution in
the search far peace. And if we have referred to a number
of aspects of the Latin American draft submitted at the
emergency session of the General Assembly, it has been
primarily to make clear Panama’s position regarding our
interpretation of resolution 242 (1967).

42. Speaking in favour of the Arab thesis in 1973 as it did
in 1967, Panama believes that it is prudent to reiterate that
we support the principle of the inadmissibility of the
annexation of territories by force or military conquest.
43. Speaking in favour of Israel’s claim to the right to live,
and without wishing to lay down conditions, Panama
believes that the Arab States, simultaneously with the troop
withdrawal, should reach agreement with Israel on the way
in which to guarantee to Israel not only recognition as a
free and sovereign State, but its right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries.

35. Through its most important organ the United Nations
must prove itself capable of playing an effective role in the
search far peaceful solutions.
36. The Palestine problem is an explosive situation that
could threaten the peace and security of the world, and is
one of the most difficult situations that has confronted the
United Nations since its very foundation, both in the
General Assembly and in the Security Council, as well as in
a number of subsidiary bodies.
37. Panama considers itself linked by special ties of
friendship to both parties to the conflict, and it is for that

44. The refugee problem should be approached by Israel
with its Arab neighbours with all the special interest which
such a situation merits, a situation in which more than
2 million human beings are clamoring for an equitable and
permanent solution. This is not only a political problem,
but also one of human rights.

1 See Official
Special Session,

45. As you all know, the overwhelming majority of the
Panamanian people is of the Catholic religion, and it is for

Records of the General Assembly,
Fifth h%nergency
Annexes,
agendaitem 5, document A/L.523/Rev.l.

4

that reason that my Government feels obliged to concern
itself over the fate of the Holy Places. Thus we are at one
with the aspirations and appeals of the Holy See for the
necessary guarantees of freedom of access to the Holy
Places of Jerusalem, not for devout Catholics alone but also
for the believers of the three greatest religions in the world.

kind words with which he referred to my country. Like
him, I too note with satisfaction the development of good
relations between the Soviet Union and Panama, and I hope
that they will continue to develop favourably in the future.
53. The next on the list of speakers is Qatar. I invite the
representative of Qatar to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

46. My delegation believes that solutions to the Middle
East situation must be based on general rather than partial
agreements. Therefore the spirit of belligerence existing in
Israel and the Arab States must come to an end.

54. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): Mr. President, allow me to
extend to you and to the distinguished members of this
august body my thanks and appreciation for permitting my
delegation to participate in the discussion concerning the
situation in the Middle East. I would, furthermore, like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. I am sure that, with your able
guidance and wide experience, you will successfully lead
the Council’s deliberations to the right path of finding a
just solution to the complex issue of which the Council is
now seized.

47. Surely sufficient time has already elapsed for us to feel
deeply concerned over the fact that this objective has still
eluded peaceful achievement, and Panama firmly believes
that a just settlement of controversies of this nature must
be achieved without resort to the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence 01
any State.
48. We would not want this series of meetings of the
Security Council, which has been called to examine the
situation in the Middle East, to end without a practical
conclusion, since we believe it our bounden duty to prove
to the world that the United Nations--specifically
through
the efforts of the Security Council-can play an effective
role in the search for peaceful solutions.

55. I should also like to extend a warm and sincere
welcome to the distinguished African Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, who have eloquently pronounced the African
solidarity with the just cause of the Arab people.
56. Turning now to the Secretary-General’s report, I
should like, with your permission, to voice my Government’s views on the subject of the report. At the outset I
wish to extend to the Secretary-General our sincere thanks
and appreciation for his efforts to secure a just and
meaningful settlement to the situation in the Middle East.
His comprehensive report bears witness to his concern over
the gravity of the situation and his dedication to the
continuing search for a lasting peace in that troubled area
of the world.

49. I sincerely believe that, little by little, the appeals for
the elimination from the hearts of Arabs and Jews of the
hatred and belligerency that have caused so much pain and
suffering and mourning in the Middle East are reaching
their targets.
50. With the industrial energy crisis which is besetting the
modern world, and in the light of the enormous oil
resources possessed by the Arab nations, surely the most
intelligent and human thing would be for us to help in
finding permanent peace, which will allow the full social
and economic development of the countries of the region.
Mankind cannot complacently stand aside while these
resources are being squandered on arms expenditures which
can only result in pain and death, when we know that,
properly exploited, they might well serve the Arabs and
Jews alike, helping them fulfil their creative purposes, living
as good neighbours in a new era for civilization.

57. My delegation has carefully examined this report in an
attempt to appraise the progress achieved so far towards
reaching a peaceful settlement. It is regrettable to note that
after six years of negotiations and tireless mediation carried
on by the various instrumentalities of the United Nations,
the Secretary-General’s report reveals the discouraging and
disturbing fact that the negotiations for a peaceful settlement of the Middle East question have reached a dead end.
We, however, wish to express in this connexion our
appreciation for the admirable and tireless efforts of
Ambassador Jarring, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his attempts to carry out the
difficult task with which he was entrusted.

51. With affection, understanding and friendship for both
Arabs and Jews, the delegation of Panama would like to
serve as a bridge so that those friendly delegations might
enter into more direct contact with one another
and thus start towards the permanent solution to the
Middle East crisis. We agree with what the SecretaryGeneral states in his report:
“The Security Council is, as far as I know, the only
forum where all the parties to the conflict have been able
to meet together in the same room. In the forthcoming
debate it is to be hoped that this advantage may be used
for constructive moves towards a settlement.” [S/10929,
para. I I6.1

58. In pondering the various chapters of the report, the
Council can easily indicate which party has failed to
co-operate with Ambassador Jarring or has put obstacles in
his way to the reaching of a suitable solution. The Arab
Governments, on their part, have always demonstrated a
keen interest in a peaceful settlement. They have responded
in a positive and co-operative manner to Ambassador
Jarring. They have shown in their replies to the Special
Representative’s aide-m&moire proof of a genuine and
constructive attitude and a sincere search for a peaceful
settlement.

52. The PRESIDENT (translation jbm Russian): I thank
the representative of Panama for his statement and for the

59. At its twenty-sixth
session, the General Assembly, in
resolution 2799 (XXVI), noted with appreciation “the
5

positive reply given by Egypt to the Special Representative’s initiative for establishing a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East”.

64. My Governmentbelievesthat there will be no peacein
the Middle East as long as Israel is arrogantly occupying
Arab territories and denying the Arab people their fundamental right to freedom and self-determination, It is not
the intention of my delegation to cite all the resolutions
passedby variousbodiesof the United Nations condemning
Israel for its continued aggressionagainstthe Arab countries and its flagrant violations of the basicprinciplesof the
Charter and the fundamental norms of international law.
Thishasbecomea matter of commonknowledge.

60. The Arab people, over the long history of mankind,
have always maintained the best relations with other
nations, and have always been known as peace-loving
people. Nations with a long history of civilization, from
Ancient Greece to the Roman Empire, witnessed the great
and leading role of the Arabs in promoting culture and
science for the benefit of mankind. This role has established
a firm basis on which science and technology presently
stand. The Arabs have continued to contribute to the world
development in different fields. The Arab countries entertain the most cordial and close ties with the greater number
of countries all over the world: in Africa, Asia and Latin
America and in Eastern and Western Europe. These are
clear indications that the Arab people are peace-loving
people, and that their search for a peaceful settlement is
not unfounded.

65. I should only like, in this context, to point out that
the United Nations is not the only forum in which Israel
hasbeen constantly condemnedfor its continued occupation of Arab territories. A resolution adopted by the
Conferenceof Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries,
held in Georgetown, Guyana, from 8 to 12 August l972,
expressed,inter alia, the solidarity of non-alignedcountries
with Egypt, Jordan and Syria in their legitimate struggleto
recover by every means their territorial integrity. The
Conferencefurthermore acknowlegedthat the acquisition
of territory through force is wholly impermissible[see
S/l 09441.

61. These are the Arab people, and this is their attitude
towards a peaceful settlement. But let us for a moment
consider the stand of the other party to the conflict. Israel’s
evasive replies to Ambassador Jarring’s aideamemoire and its
negative attitude needs no evide,nce. The SecretaryGeneral’s report, now before this Council, is a clear
testimony to this fact. But what is more disturbing is the
negative attitude which Israel has consistently taken towards the United Nations and its various bodies. The
General Assembly, expressing its anxiety over Israel’s
attitude towards peaceful negotiations, deplored, in resolution 2949 (XXVII),
the non-compliance of Israel with
General Assembly resolution 2799 (XXVI), which in particular called upon Israel to respond favourably to the peace
initiative of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to the Middle East.

66. In the last few weeks the Heads of State and
Governmentof 41 independentAfrican Statesmembersof
the Organizationof African Unity (OAU) who met in Addis
Ababa unanimouslyadopted a resolution which, inter aliu,
strongly condemnedthe negative attitude of Israel, its acts
of intimidation and its obstruction of all efforts aimed at a
just and equitable solution of the problem. The African
countries further called upon Israel to withdraw immediately and unconditionally from all occupied African and
Arab territories. They drew the attention of Israel to “the
dangerthreatening the security and unity of the African
continent asa result of its continued aggression
and refusal
to evacuatethe territories of the States victims of that
aggression”.
The African countries declaredin this regardand I quote from the sameresolution-“that the attitude of
Israel might lead OAU member States to take, at the
African level, individually or collectively, political and
economic measuresagainst it, in conformity with the
principles contained in the OAU and the United Nations
Charters.”[See S/10943.]

62. I do not think I need to elaborate on the miserable
and inhuman conditions which the Palestine refugees are
experiencing. This has become a matter of common
knowledge and the subject of countless United Nations
resolutions. The Arab people who live in their own homes
in the occupied Arab territories are in no better a
condition. The Israeli authorities have consistently denied
them their basic human rights. The letter dated 26 October
1970 transmitting the report of the Special Committeee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Population of the Occupied Territories stated:

67. The time has now come for the world family to
proceedin a more effective andpositive mannerin working
out a formula whereby a meaningful result could be
achieved. Such a formula should take into account the
diverse and complex issuesthat have various historical,
humanitarianand political dimensions.I can find no better
expressionof the complexity of these issues and the
diversity of their dimensionsthan the words of the
Secretary-Generalin introducing his report:

“The evidence given before the Special Committee has
revealed the grim situation of the refugees living inside
the occupied territories. The Special Committee visited
some of the refugee camps outside the occupied territories and was deeply moved by the unhappy plight of
their occupants”2

“In the Middle East we see in an acute form the
interaction of historical developmentsand situations of
various kinds giving rise to emotion and resentment, to
fear and conflict, to a vicious circle of action and
reaction, violence and reprisal, and to a series of
seeminglyinsurmountable obstaclesto the process of
conciliation and settlement.” [I 717th meeting, para. 17.1

63. By what standards can we tolerate such inhuman
conditions; and by what scale of justice can we justify the
right of a certain people gathered from all over the world to
create the so-called “Jewish Home” in Palestine while
denying such a right to the Palestinian people?
2 Ibid.,
A/8089.

Twenty-fifth

Session, agendaitem

68. The gravity of the situation in the Middle East not
only threatenspeaceand security in that areabut contains

101, document

6

a far-reaching threat to the peace and security of the whole
world which is attaching many hopes and aspirations to the
efforts of this august body whose main task is the
maintenance of international peace and security. Let us not
fail to live up to these hopes and aspirations. Let us make
the year 1973 a year of peace and development. During this
year the world has witnessed an important encouraging
achievement in which peace has been restored in one
troubled area of the world. Viet-Nam, which has for
decades experienced the ugliest scourge of war, has now
approached a happy settlement. Let us add another
achievement by restoring peace in the Middle East. In doing
so, the United Nations, whose involvement in the Middle
East dates back more than a quarter of a century, should
not forget its special commitment to finding suitable terms
for a lasting peace in the Middle East. This involvement
started with the General Assembly’s famous resolution
which partitioned Palestine and resulted in the illegitimate
birth of Israel. Since then, the United Nations has adopted
numerous resolutions in an attempt to find a just and
lasting peace for the Middle East. The fact that these
resolutions have not as yet borne their fruits should not
discourage us from continuing our search for a lasting
peace.

73. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, we after you our
warmest congratulations on and our best wishes for you as
President of the Council for June this year. For you, with
your long years at the United Nations, this responsibility
can be taken as a matter of course, but for us it is most
fortunate that during the debate of one of the most
important subjects before the Council we shall have the
fullest benefit of your experience and knowledge, In paying
you compliments several speakers have mentioned bilateral
relations with your country. I do not think it is necessary
for me to elaborate on Indo-Soviet relations, for they are
some of the best. We assureyou of our fullest co-operation.
74. We should also like to express our appreciation for the
calm and competent manner in which the outgoing President, Ambassador Abdulla, conducted our proceedings in
May. We are grateful.
75. We welcome the presence of so many Foreign Ministers from African and Arab countries; this is indeed a
measure of the interest and concern with which the. tense
situation in the Middle East is viewed in various parts of the
world. In consonance with that outlook, the Council
decided at its 1710th meeting on 20 April, on a suggestion
by the Foreign Minister of Egypt, that it should review
comprehensively the situation in the Middle East since June
1967 on the basis of a report to be prepared by the
Secretary-General and in the presence of his Special
Representative, Ambassador Jarring.

69. In considering a just and equitable formula, due regard
must be given to the right of the Palestinian people to
return to their homeland. In a revealing remark in the letter
of transmittal of the report of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Population of Occupied Territories, the Chairman of
the Special Committee stated:

76. We now have before us the excellent, clear and astute,
if indeed depressing, report of the Secretary-General. We
congratulate the Secretary-General on it. We are fortunate
also to have the benefit of Ambassador Jarring’s being with
us, both inside and outside the Council Chamber. We
welcome and wish to record our appreciation of the
determination, objectivity and devotion with which he has
tried to carry out his most complex and difficult mission. If
successhas eluded him, and many other men of goodwill, ln
the effort to bring to an end this nearly insoluble and
dangerous problem of the Middle East, the responsibility
for such a lack of successis certainly not that of Mr. Jarring
or of other people who have also tried, but tried unsuccessfuliy. But we cannot relax our efforts, and must continue
to hope that, given the good intention of the main parties,
this Council must still find a solution. This task is urgent, as
indeed the situation is critical. The Secretary-General has
reported that 17 complaints were taken up by the Security
Council since July 1967-16 from the Arabs and 1 from the
Israelis-and yet he states that most important violations of
the cease-fire did not come before the Council. One needs
little imagination to realize what the situation will be if the
:ease-fire becomes untenable in the absence of any prospects of a solution without much delay.

“The plight of the refugees-persons who have been
deprived of their homes and denied the right to return to
them and who are, therefore, victims of the violation of
the most fundamental of human rights-and the tone of
bitterness and despair which marked every reference of
theirs to the United Nations’ failure to protect their
human rights, have created a profound and disturbing
impression on the Special Committee.“3
70. In considering alternative solutions to the refugees’
plight we should not be misled by the erroneous and naive
thinking once expressed by the representative of Israel
before the Council that if 1 per cent of the Arab resources
are utilized for the settlement of the Palestinian refugees,
the Middle East problem will come to an end. Let us make
it clear that the Palestinian people will not accept anything
less than their own homes and the return to their country,
Palestine. Those people can no longer tolerate living on
international charity, whatever its source may be.
71. Let us now move in a more positive way to alleviate
the miseries and injustice suffered by the Arab people. Let
us avoid disappointing those people, or for that matter the
whole world, by living up to their expectations and
aspirations for a just and meaningful solution to the Middle
East problem.
72. Finally, we sincerely hope that the United Nations Will
spare no effort in reaching a peaceful settlement lest the
whole world witness another catastrophe.

77. The Council’s resolution of 22 November 1967 stands
by itself and was the basis of action during the last six
years. It contains two basic principles which were accepted,
so at least it would seem, by the principal parties. But when
it comes to implementation, we are confronted with an
Israeli interpretation which makes further progress impossible. Ambassador Jarring, after most careful study and
detailed discussion with the parties, formulated his aidmemoire of 8 February 1971 /S/10403, annex 11 to which

3 Document A/8389 and Corr.1, pertaining to agenda item 40 of
the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly, issued separately
(offset).

7

the Israelis objected as, in their view, it went beyond the
mandate given to the Special Representative, and as also,
again in their view, it was counter to the interpretation
Israel had given to resolution 242 (1967). Ambassador
Jarring’s initiative was therefore unacceptable to Israel.
Israel later went to the extent of suggesting that the
aide-mbmoire should be withdrawn.
’
78. Those developments require closer scrutiny. We have
heard much about the omission of the definite article “the”
and of the adjective “all” or of the mention of any date
regarding the line to which Israeli troops should be
withdrawn. I may add in parenthesis that at least one of
those omissionsis not noticeablein the Frenchtext, which
is equally authentic. But, apart from thosete,chnicalities,
let
us take the words asthey are, asindeedIsraelwould wish
us to do. Paragraphl(i) of the text reads:“Withdrawal of
Israel armed forcesfrom territories occupiedin the recent
conflict.” What territories could have beenmeant except
the Arab territories? No one has suggested
that Israeli
armedforcesoccupiedlandsin other territories.What could
be meant by “the recent conflict”? If it were not the
conflict of six daysin June 1967,could it be interpretedto
refer to conflicts which might have occurredeven before
5 June? Even if suchan interpretation weremostwelcome
to the Arabs, neither the recordsof the Councilof 1967
nor the present membership would give resolution
242 (1967) this interpretation. So, the “recent conflict” in
this resolution could only refer to the conflict of the six
daysin June 1967.

82. Thus, Israel told the Special Representative that it
would no longer respectthe international boundarieseither
in Egypt or in Syria, or anywhere else where it had
occupied territories beyond the old Mandated Territory.
That attitude, taken together with Israel’s refusal to
confirm the principle of the inadmissibility of acquisition
of territory by war is inconsistentwith the Israeli claim that
it hasacceptedresolution242 (1967). It is &O inconsistent
with the presentIsraeli assertionthat all claims of either
sideare open to negotiations-at least, that is the impressionwe receivedfrom the Israelistatementsof 6 and 7 June
to the effect that everything is negotiable. That is perhaps
what led the representativeof France yesterday to state the
followingin the Council:
“That is why the Israeli response to Mr. Jarring’s
aide-memoireconstitutesa prior condition which nothing
canjustify. The dialogueshouldbe stated on a footing of
equality and not on a footing of relations of force. In
stating that it will not withdraw to the lines obtaining
prior to 5 June 1967 Israel is undermining the balance in
resolution242 (1967).” [1724tlz meeting, para. 57.1
83. Much wasalsosaid about this resolution providing for
negotiationsbetween the parties. Since we are examining
the resolution as it stands, without any additions or
subtractionseven of a dot or a comma, it is worthwhile to
point out that the word “negotiations” doesnot occur in
the resolutionat all. Paragraph3 simply
“Requeststhe Secretary-Generalto designatea Special
Representativeto proceed to the Middle East to establish
and maintain contacts with the Statesconcernedin order
to promote agreement and assist efforts to achieve a
peacefuland acceptedsettlement in accordancewith the
provisionsand principlesin this resolution”.

79. Then we are given a secondline of argumentwhich
maintains that all the boundaries of Israel since its
establishmentinside the mandatedterritory of Palestine
had been in the nature of military lines-cease-fireline,
armistice line and truce line. This would seemto us a
That was AmbassadorJarring’s task, and he set about
dangerousargument,evenfrom Israel’spoint of view.
assiduouslyand delicately to bend all his efforts to carry
out his most explicit mandate. Me failed becauseof the
80. But I supposeit is so strongmilitarily that it findsno
Israeli attitude. Perhapscontacts have been maintained all
danger to its negotiating position with a completely through theseyears, but very little progresscould bemade
undetermined border. However, this argumentof Israel’s beyond clearingup the issues.
that no boundary for it has ever been worked out is not
84. During these years many attempts were nevertheless
valid. First, the boundariesof Israel were defined by the
madeto have indirect negotiations, but all of those failed
United Nations with precisionwhen Palestinewaspartitoo, becauseof Israel’srefusalto vacate the Arab territories
tioned. That was acceptedby Israel. Secondly, the interacquiredasthe result of the 1967 conflict. I need mention
national frontiers betweenthe old Mandated Territory of
only threesuchattempts:the goodoffices of certain Headsof
Palestine and the neighbouring territories of Syria,
State
or Governmentof African countries; the suggestionof
Lebanon, Transjordan,SaudiArabia and Egypt were never
“proximity”
talks; and what has come to be known as the
in question or doubt. Israel wasto be carved out of the
Rogers Plan. These days, Ambassador Jarring is being
Mandated Territory of Palestineand at no point-at no
criticized for having interpreted resolution 242 (1967) in
point, I repeat-were its boundariesto be outsidethe old
the
only possible way, and yet the Rogers Plan was
frontiers of the MandatedTerritory of Palestine.
essentiallybasedon the sameinterpretation of this resolution. The four great Powerssupported AmbassadorJarring
81. Consciousof that fact, and without apparently cornin his interpretation of resolution 242 (1967) and on the
meriting on the Israeli claim that the political bordersof
nature of his mandate. Only this morning /1725th meetIsrael have never been defiled, AmbassadorJarring carefully drafted his aide-mkmoireof 8 February 1971 and ing], the Secretary-General once again confirmed that
attitude of the four great Powers.Thus, so far asis known,
askedIsrael to “give a commitmentto withdraw its forces
Israelalone, amongall 132 Membersof the lfnited Nations,
from occupied United Arab Republic territory to the
interpreted Ambassador Jarring’s activities in s difformer international boundary between Egypt and the
ferent way.
British Mandate of Palestine”. Israel’sreply was a blunt
“ISrae
Wil
not withdraw to the pre-5 June 1967 lines”.
85. Meanwhile, the four great Powers were making their
[Ibid., annex IX]
own efforts, and many of ushad hoped that at least one of

8

them would be able to persuade Israel to be more
reasonable. That was not an idle hope. When a country has
so many special ties with a great Power there are many
ways of persuasion. That has happened in the past
elsewhere, and even in the Middle East-for example, the
abandonment of the River Jordan scheme-and therefore it
was reasonable to expect that if, on whatever grounds,
sense of justice, national interests or the wider cause of
international peace and security, a change of course was
decided upon. Israel could be expected to co-operate, not
as a matter of coercion or imposition but as a result of
persuasion that Israel’s interests too were best served by
such a change. We still hope for such a change in attitudes
and policies.

is also subject to challenge by the Arabs. But we do not
wish to enter into these legalistic arguments.
94. Eighth, Israel’s increase in military strength and its
capacity to strike at will anywhere it likes in the Arab
world.
95. Ninth, its desire for time, which allows it to consolidate its hold and to plan further ahead. It has already
had six years.
96. Tenth, its refusal to abide by innumerable United
Nations resolutions.
97. Eleventh, its desire to treat the Jews everywhere as its
responsibility in spite of what Mr. Sharett had to say on
this subject at the time of Israel’s admission to the United
Nations.

86. We are always in favour of negotiations, and we were
pleased to hear from the Egyptian Foreign Minister, to
whom a special word of welcome is due, that his country
would be ready and willing to negotiate, provided there
were no pre-conditions. But, pre-conditions apart, the
objective circumstances are as follows.

98. Twelfth, Israel’s policy of retaliation and reprisal, and
its failure to punish the guilty.

87. First,
242 (1967).

99. Thirteenth,
heard so much.

Israel’s

refusal

to

implement

resolution

88. Second, Israel’s assertion that it must have Jerusalem;
a good part if not the whole of the West Bank; the Golan
Heights; Sharmel Sheikh and many other selected Arab
lands. It gives the impression that its full hand will be
shown only at the negotiating table, but Israel’s intention
has been made clear through many authoritative statements.

Israel’s ideology, about which we have

100. In these prevailing circumstances, therefore, the call
for negotiations rightly appears to the Arabs as a call for
surrender, or at least as a call for more time to continue
with the present stalemate, which inevitably brings advantage to Israel.
101. On the other hand, we believe that the present policy
of laissez-faire-laissez-passer is of the utmost danger. Some
may calculate that, given time, Israel will settle down in its
newly annexed lands and, with the Arabs admittedly
weaker and seemingly divided, a stage will come when they
will accept Israel in its present grandeur. Fortunately, we
do not share that view, and if any one of us feels that the
present situation is moving towards some form of stability,
the statements made before the Council by a succession of
Arab representatives must have dispelled such feelings and
theories.

89. Third, its settling of Jewish populations in the
captured lands at the cost of the Arabs, with many
fundamental changes, of which the United Nations has
disapproved, in the texture of life and economy of these
territories.
90. Fourth, its importation of more Jews-will
that lead
to the doctrine of Zebensruum being put into effect?
91. Fifth, its policy of having more Arab lands with as few
Arabs as possible coming with them.

102. What then can be done? We believe that in spite of
Israel’s reservation,
if not rejection, of resolution
242 (1967) it can still serve as a basis for progress. We
should therefore suggest a few immediate measures.

92. Sixth, its refusal to recognize Palestinian rights.
Without a settlement of this problem, a permanent solution
of the crisis in the Middle East will not be available.
Rhetoric will not disperse this issue. It is immaterial
whether these people are called Palestinians or by any other
name. The fact is that this is where they have lived for
untold centuries, and unless their fundamental civil, religious and political rights are protected, and unless every
effort is made to facilitate their return home in full dignity,
the problem will not be solved and the troubles will
continue.

103. First, we would recommend a declaration, in formal
and unequivocal terms, by Israel, accepting the principle of
inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by force, and, as a
consequence, committing itself to withdraw from all Arab
lands it occupied as a result of the June 1967 conflict.
104. Secondly, we would suggest that the Arab countries
concerned make a declaration, again in formal and unequivocal terms, committing themselves to respect and acknowledge the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of every State in the area and their right to
live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free
from threats or acts of force.

93. Seventh, Israel’s refusal to settle the refugee problems
in accordance with United Nations resolutions it has
accepted. The resolutions of the General Assembly may not
be binding, but no country can say that some of those
resolutions are binding and the others are not. If Israel
claims that the resolution on the refugees is not binding, it
must concede that the resolution on the admission of Israel

105. Thirdly, both Israel and the Arab countries concerned should, simultaneously but separately, declare that
9

all of them would respect the rights of the Palestinian
people in every field.
106.. It is both unjust and unacceptable to expect nonJewish people to live with any degree of security or peace
of mind in a Jewish State that affords them no legal or
constitutional protection from the arbitrary exercise of
power.
107. As for the Palestinians living in exile, there is simply
no incentive for them to return, which sadly confirms the
hope of the Israeli authorities that they will, in fact, not
return home, and that others, who remained in both Israel
and the occupied areas, will follow them into exile.

112. Fourthly, the Secretary-General or his Special Repre.
sentative could publish a document containing the points
on which both sideshave agreed in response to Ambassador
Jarring’s aide-m&moire of 8 February 1971. Such a docu.
ment should specifically cover the solution of the problem
of refugeesas decided by the United Nations resolution, the
opening of the Suez Canal, transit facilities and demilitarized zones.
113. As soon as these declarations have, been made,
particularly the first and the second, indirect negotiations
can begin, as a first step, between the interested parties
with the help of the Special Representative. Once an
agreement has been reached, the Palestinians should be
brought into the negotiations, so that any final settlement
may be satisfactory to all the parties concerned.

108. Israel must be fully aware that constant postponement of the Palestine problem is no solution at all.
Inevitably, Israel, if it intends to be a democratic State, will
have to accommodate these Palestinians by guaranteeing
them basic civil liberties and political rights. By simply
placing non-Jews under their arbitrary authority, Israel is
bound to exacerbate the situation and hasten those very
problems which it surely wishesto avoid.

114. We are not making any formal proposals but would
hope that between now and our next meeting, which 1
believe will be no later than 16 July and presumably still in
New York, some progress along these lines may still be
possible.
115. Many speakers have referred to the concept or the
principle of a secure and recognized boundary. This is
mainly a political concept and only secondarily a military
affair. In the geographical position of Israel and in the
context of modern arms, a secure boundary is only feasible
for all the States of the Middle East, and not merely of
Israel, by mutual respect, friendship, co-operation and
understanding. In the absence of such a development, the
military aspects, however insignificant in themselves, are
bound to be exaggerated, particularly in the eyes of the
military men. Possibly because of its armed victory, lsrael
expects some return from the Arabs. But the Israelis have
already obtained it-perhaps the most glittering prize of any
military action-that is, the possibility of livhg in peace
with one’s neighbours.

109. For years now Israel has been claiming that those
Arabs living in Israel or Israeli-occupied territories are
economically better off than at any time previously. This
statement or this argument is as relevant as the South
African claim that the blacks in South Africa are better off
than the blacks in the neighbouring independent countries.
Such an attitude reflects a simple-minded approach and
fails to recognize the tragedy of these people and the agony
of their plight. They, and we, are interested in their rights,
their human values, and not merely in their creature
comforts, however welcome and useful they may be.
110. Since so much has been made of it, I should like to
draw the attention of the members to a full account of the
conditions of the Arabs in the occupied lands, published in
the magazine section of the Daily Telegraph of London on
1 June 1973. This article, with several pictures and a good
map, is described by the journal, as a part of its
advertisement, no doubt, as “The first detailed story of the
disputed areas”, The author is Mr. John Bulloch, who
observes: “The Israeli occupation of the Arab lands is no
better and no worse than any other occupation. Sympathizers who believe that the Israelis are more benevolent
than other countries are wrong; detractors who believe
them more ruthless are equally wrong.” All this simply
means that these unfortunate Palestinians are under military occupation, have no rights and can only receive what
treatment the conquerors may decide to give them in their
homeland.

116. In the Tel Aviv museum hall, Mr. David Ben Gurion
read on 14 May 1948 the Proclamation on the Rise of the
State of Israel and said:
“Accordingly we, the members of the National Council,
representing the Jewish people in Palestine and the
Zionist movement of the world, met together in solemn
assembly today, the day of the termination of the British
Mandate for Palestine; by virtue of the national and
historic right of the Jewish people and of the resolution
of the General Assembly of the United Nations; hereby
proclaim the establishment of the Jewish State in
Palestine-to be called Israel.”
I have many other clearer and stronger statements on the
subject from other Israeli sources, but I thought 1 should
quote from the most ceremonial document adopted at the
birth of the State of Israel.

111. There must be an accommodation between the Arab
rights and the. Israeli rights, whereby they live together. No
one is suggesting that the Israeli rights should be unilaterally sacrificed in order to safeguard Arab rights or vice-versa.
Just as the Israelis have their homeland, as defined in the
United Nations decision, in part of the old mandated
territories, the Palestinians have a right to their homeland
and self-determination in the rest of the Mandated Territory
partitioned in 1947.

117. Nevertheless, Israel often states that if it has been
condemned or its actions deplored or criticized in the
United Nations, it is partly because of the structure of the
United Nations, especially of the Security Council, and
partly because of the influence the large number of Arab
States and their friends have in this Organization-because of
10

Arab is always the enemy, to be made to submit to
Israel’s demands by ruthless force, will grow increasingly
militaristic and less inclined to the solving by negotiation
of external probIems. The Sabra, or the Israeli who has
come to the country as a young child, shut in as he is on
all his borders by hostility, and precluded from travel
abroad by lack of money, does not know much of the
world beyond the bounds of Israel and does not at all
care about its opinion. And so, born of the successof the
campaigns of 1948 and 1956, there is a certain arrogance,
an *ability to see that Israel should yield anything for
peace, an inability to compromise. Such an attitude in
what will soon be the majority of the population does not
promise a peaceful solution of Israel’s problems, or a
peaceful future for the Middle East,”

what it calls a mechanical majority. Apart from the
pertinent question why so many States-non-aligned countries, socialist, practically all Asian, all 41 African, several
European and Latin American States and several others
besides-support and sympathize with the Arabs in varying
degrees, the fact remains that when Israel was established
by the United Nations and admitted to this Organization,
there was considerable sympathy for it, as is evident from
the voting figures, but it has forfeited that sympathy by its
own actions and attitudes. Many of the resolutions critical
of Israel were passed at a time when even Israel could not
complain, and did not in fact complain, of Arab influence
and of a mechanical majority. And yet Israel failed to carry
out several decisions taken in good faith and in a friendly
atmosphere by the United Nations in order to render easier
its continued and assured existence in the middle of Arab
lands, and in conditions of peace and security of all the
States in the Middle East.

121. The victories of 1967 strengthened these attitudes.
Unless this process of continuous generation of hate, this
ignorance and this arrogance is reversed and replaced by
healthier trends, our efforts, however made, will make no
headway. Many speakers have mentioned the duties and
responsibilities of the Security Council, as also of its
permanent members. We believe that the world has a right to
expect fair and timely decisions from the Council, but it
cannot be unaware that these decisions are not possible,
because of the Charter provisions, and also that, even when
such decisions are taken, they cannot be implemented in
the absence of great-Power agreement. Becauseof the daily
awareness of these circumstances, the Council entrusted to
the great Powers some informal tasks of negotiation to
supplement and complement the efforts of Mr. Jarring, but
these Powers failed to achieve any results, for reasons well
known to us, and for nearly two years now they have not
met at all-not even the four of them-and a mentality of
“time alone will solve the problem” has developed. In our
view, this is a most dangerous trend.

118. But Israel does not draw any particular lesson from
this experience. It falls back on the racial pride of suffering
through the ages, of struggling as a minority, surrounded by
a vast hostile majority. “This condition is not new. We have
lived with it throughout the ages. We have always been
small in number. That has never weakened our determination to survive. There is no solitude when justice and
history are with us.” The Jewish people are not alone in
believing that, with justice and history beside them,
irrespective naturally of what conception of justice and
history one may have, they can ignore solitude and struggle
on. But this sentiment, which we must all admire, loses
some of its romance when we recall that Israel has, at least
in recent years, received the unquestioned support of the
most powerful country in the world today. In the circumgthhces, solitude may not be all that unbearable. Besides,
this rugged determination to fight on, even in isolation, has
always the danger of being perverted.

122., We have heard much about history, History has been
pushed and prodded here, there and everywhere, and she
has spoken to her votaries in voices they wished to hear,
The other deities who were so served and who wereequally
accommodating were Truth and Justice. The debate provided the protagonists with an opportunity to recount
historical events which cannot be attributed to the present
generation and which fmd their roots in a rather vague and
distant antiquity. All these expensive historical lessonsmay
have a purpose and some of them may even be interesting,
but our work is much more urgent, for we are dealing with
a grave situation in which the safety and welfare of
countless millions is involved. Unless we proceed with a
sense of fairness and practical sense, we shall only contribute to tension and despair.

119. Starting off with the doctrine that nothing good can
be achieved without sacrifice, we are apt to delude
ourselves that sacrifice itself means achievement. But Israel
does not have to be in such a self-lacerating mood. It has
won a spectacular armed victory and obtained most
remarkable prizes-the most important of which is that the
Arab States have now solemnly offered to live in peace and
harmony with it, as soon as it has withdrawn from its
territory, which it must do by all rules of law. Must Israel
throw away this golden opportunity and relapse into a
sullen posture of denouncing everyone else for its misfortunes? Or will it allow its appetite to grow with what it
feeds on? The answer is for Israel to give.
120. We should not like General Burns’s gloomy analysis
to come true. General Bums, who wasChief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in the
Middle East from August 1954 to November 1956, saysin
his book BetweenArab and Israeli:4

123. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):I thank
the Ambassador of India for his statement and for his
words about me. I fully share the high opinion he expressed
of the state of friendly relations between the Soviet Union
and India, and 1 sincerely hope that the relations of
friendship and co-operation between our two countries will
continue to develop in the future.

“It is not unreasonable to deduce that a society whose
young elements have passed their most formative years in
an atmosphere in which the military virtues and especially

&gressiveness are given the highest values, and where the

124. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (interpretufio!? fiorn
Chinese): The Chinese delegation has studied the Secre-

4 Clarke, Irwin & Co. Ltd., Toronto, 1962.

tary-General’s report submitted in pursuance of the Secur11

boundaries” is tantamount to recognizirig the Israeli Zionist
aggression and expansion as totally legal and recognizing all
aggressors as having the right to the acquisition of others’
territories by force at any time. This, of course, is
absolutely intolerable.

ity Council resolution of 20 April 1973 and has listened
attentively to the statements made by the Foreign Ministers
and representatives of a number of Arab and African
countries aswell as other members of the Security Council.
We now would like to state our views and position on the
Middle East question.

128. The facts are clear: The essence of the Middle East
question is aggression versus anti-aggression and a question
of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples fighting for
national liberation. There is certainly no room for corn.
promise on this question. The restoration of the Palestinian
people’s right to national existence and the Arab countries’
struggle to recover their lost territories constitute an
integral whole. As long as the lost territories of the Arab
States are not recovered and the Palestinian people’s
national right is not restored, there can be no true
settlement of the so-called Middle East question.

125. For many years, people have set forth one argument
or another on the Middle East question. However, anyone
facing up to the reality cannot but admit that the history of
the Middle East over the past two decades and more since
the Second World War is one of repeated aggression and
expansion carried out by Israeli Zionism with imperialist
support and of resistance to aggression and expansion put
up by the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. The
reactionary Zionist movement was a product of the
imperialist policy of aggression in the Middle East. The
large-scale immigration to Palestine has long been carried
out by the Zionists with the support and abetment of
imperialism. In 1947 the General Assembly, under the
manipulation of imperialism, rejected the Arab countries’
demand for terminating the British Mandate and declaring
the independence of Palestine and adopted the plan on “the
partition of Palestine”. Since the establishment of the State
of Israel, Israeli Zionism, with the support of the United
States Government, has carried out repeated aggression and
expansion and within the short space of two decades
unleashed three large-scale wars of aggression, occupying
large tracts of Arab territories and driving the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples who had lived there for generations
out of their homeland. Displaced and homeless, they have
been leading a most miserable life. In their speeches quite a
few Arab representatives gave a true picture of the suffering
and misery of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. While
maintaining in their speeches that Israel must withdraw
from all the Arab territories it has occupied, quite a few
representatives have strongly held that the legitimate right
of the Palestinian people to national existence must be
restored. This is perfectly just.

.

129. For centuries, the Middle East has been a place of
rivalry between the imperialist Powers. Today imperialist
rivalry in the Middle East has taken a new form, in which
new tactics have been employed. As pointed out by the just
Arab public opinion, today the two super-Powers have
taken the place of former imperialist Powers as the
principal rivals for hegemony in the Middle East. The 1967
war of aggression was launched by the Israeli Zionists with
the support, connivance and acquiescence of one or two
super-Powers. Thereafter, echoing each other, they have
been spreading the idea that the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples must not wage armed struggles against Israeli
aggression, that resistance would Immediately lead to a
world war, and that whoever supports such armed struggle
against aggression is provoking confrontation between the
two super-Powers. In other words, only the aggressors are
allowed to commit wanton expansion, while the victims of
aggression are not allowed to resist. The Palestinian and
other Arab peoples, as well as all the people who support
the struggle against aggression, are to be bound, hand and
foot, so that the two super-Powers can do whatever they
please to manipulate and dominate the situation. In recent
years, the two super-Powers have been both contending and
colluding with each other, taking advantage of the temporary difficulties facing the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples to make dirty political deals at the expense of their
right to national existence and their territories and sovereignty. Thus the two super-Powers are deliberately creating
and maintaining a situation of “no war, no peace” in the
Middle East so as to facilitate their contention for important
strategic points and oil resources and the division of spheres
of influence there. Everyone can see that herein lies the crux
of the prolonged non-settlement of the Middle East
question.

126. Since the 1967 war, the Israeli Zionists have hung on
to the large tracts of occupied Arab territories, where they
have been energetically pushing their plan of Zionization.
Truculent and unreasonable, they have incessantly perpetrated fresh military provocations and armed aggression
against the neighbouring Arab States under this or that
pretext, in an attempt to stamp out by armed force the just
struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples against
aggression and to create a fait accompli so as to perpetuate
their occupation of the Arab territories and realize their
ambition for further expansion. The theory of so-called
“secure boundaries” they have been advertising so vigorously is a typical theory for expansion.

130. However, the time has gone when imperialism could
run amuck and rule the fate of other peoples at will. The
Palestinian and other Arab peoples have taken up arms in
face of the armed aggression by the Israeli Zionists,
determined to fight to the finish against aggression and for
their national liberation. The Palestinian and other Arab
peoples persevering in struggle will surely take their destiny
into their own hands. Is not the history of the two decades
and more after the Second World War replete with brilliant
events in which the Asian, African and Latin American
peoples took up arms, persevered in struggle and eventually

127. In fact, this theory of “secure boundaries” of the
Israeli Zionists is not their creation. Did not the Hitlerite
Nazis put forth the notorious theory of what they called
lebensraum-living space-long ago? And even today are
there not people who clamour for extending their so-called
‘&secure boundaries” to this or that ocean? In order to
realize their wild designs, all aggressors and expansionists,
whether in the past or at present, invariably pick up similar
gangster’s logic of jungle law to serve their aggression and
expansion. To accept the argument of the so-called “secure
12

won their national liberation after defeating imperialist and
super-power aggression and interference?

contributions to the Asian, African and Latin American
peoples’ cause of unity against imperialism, and they have
gained increasingly wide sympathy and support from the
revolutionary
people all over the world. Although the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples are facing protracted
and arduous struggles, and there might be twists and turns
and even reversals of this or that kind on their road of
advance, yet so long as they rely on and mobiliie the broad
masses of the people, strengthen their anti-imperialist unity
and persevere in protracted struggle, they will, with the
sympathy and support of all the justice-upholding countries
and peoples of the world, surely defeat the Israeli aggressors, restore their national rights, recover their lost territories and win complete victory in their struggle for
national liberation.

13t. The Chinese Government and people have always
fumly opposed and strongly condemned the Israeli Zionist
aggression and expansion against the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples. We are not opposed to the Jewish people or
the people of Israel; but we are firmly opposed to the
Israeli Zionist policies of aggression and expansion.
132. We have cherished profound sympathy for the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples who are subjected to
aggression and bullying. We resolutely support their just
struggle to resist aggression, recover their lost territories and
restore their right to national existence. This position of
ours is firm and unshakable.

138. The PRESIDENT (transhtion from Russian): The
next speaker on the list is the representative of Bahrain,
whom I invite to take a place at the Councti table and to
make his statement,

133. The United Nations has been discussing the Middle
East question for more than 20 years. Regrettably, however, under the manipulation and domination of the
super-Powers, the United Nations has failed to adhere to
principles and uphold justice and failed to fulfil its duties
under the Charter. It has failed strongly to condemn and
firmly to put an end to the Israeli Zionist expansion and
aggression, nor has it given its due support to the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples. Evidently, this is unfair
to the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. Today, when the
Middle East situation is being reviewed in its totality, the
Security Council should truly act upon the principles of the
Charter, draw a clear distinction between the right and the
wrong, uphold justice and speak up for the right.

139. Mr. AL-SAFFAR
(Bahrain) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to thank
you and the other members of the Security Council for
having given me the opportunity
to take part in this
discussion. It is an honour and a great pleasure for my
delegation to participate in the discussions on the subject of
the Middle East under your presidency.
140. My delegation has listened attentively to the voice of
Africa as reflected in the speeches made by several Ministers
from African countries. We have also been listening to the
voice of the third world. All these countries have called for
the evacuation of all the Arab territories occupied by Israeli
force. Is the Israeli Government going to heed these appeals
and put into effect the resolutions adopted by the United
Nations on this subject?

134. The Chinese delegation firmly holds that the Israeli
Zionists must be strongly condemned for their prolonged
aggression against the Palestinian people and other Arab
countries and peoples; the Israeli authorities must be asked
to withdraw immediately from the Egyptian, Syrian and all
the other Arab territories they have occupied; the right of
the Palestinian people to national existence must be
restored; all Governments and peoples should be called
upon to give firm support to the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples in their just struggle to resist aggression, recover
their lost territories and restore their national rights.

141. Previous speakers have dwelt at len th on the
problem of the Middle East. I would like simp Ky to submit
the opinion of my Government on this problem. I shall be
very brief.
142. My country has much confidence in the Security
Council, whose role is to strengthen international peace and
security in spite of all the obstacles it meets in the
performance of its task. If Bahrain has become independent
and a Member of the United Nations, it is thanks to the
efforts of the Secretary-General of this Organization, for in
March 1970, under the aegis of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, the people of Bahrain were able
to exercise their right to self-determination and decide in
favour of a sovereign and independent State. In this way,
the historic dispute with Iran was settled, a dispute which
had lasted for so long. By this solution, foreign influence,
which had lasted a century and a half in Bahrain, also
ended.

135. We firmly maintain that the destiny of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples can only be decided by
themselves, and we are firmly opposed to anyone making
political deals behind the backs of the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples’ at the expense of their territories and
sovereignty and their right to national existence. In our
opinion, the adoption of any resolution which in effect
shields the Israeli Zionists and encourages aggression in the
name of “maintaining peace” is in violation of the United
Nations Charter and will bring new disgrace upon the
United Nations and the Security Council and is, therefore,
impermissible.
136. The Arab nation is a great nation; the Arab and
Palestinian peoples are heroic peoples. For many years,
they have waged heroic and tenacious struggles for their
national liberation. Neither the military suppression, nor
the political deception by the enemies could subdue them.

143. I sl~oulcl like now to say that your great country,
Mr. President, was one of the first to recognize our
independence and congratulate us upon it. The tiovernment
and people of Bahrain are gratefill to your country. I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
efforts of the Secretary-General in his search for inter-

137. On the contrary, their just struggle is developing in
depth. Through their struggles they have made important
13

national peace and security. Of course, if the parties
concerned had not demonstrated their good will in the
search for a solution, such a settlement would not have
been possible.
144. Today, we are faced with a dangerous situation in
which the mission of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the Middle East has been blocked by
the intransigence of a party to the conflict. Egypt and
Jordan have demonstrated their good will in applying
resolution 242 (1967) adopted by the Security Council in
November 1967. That resolution, asis well known, affirms,
among other things, the need for bringing about a settlement of the problem of the refugeesand the withdrawal of
the armed forces of Israel from the Arab territories
occupied during the 1967 conflict. While the Government
of Israel states that it accepts this resolution, it nevertheless gives a different interpretation to the last paragraph to
enable itself to amputate some of the territories which it
had acquired during the six-day war. The Government of
Israel would like to have it believed that resolution
242 (1967) is in favour of the definitive occupation of part
of the territory of its Arab neighbours-Egypt, Jordan and
Syria-in order to resolve the problem peacefully.
145. To the Israeli authorities, the preJune 1967 frontiers
no longer exist. They want to drawnew frontiers which will
promote their policy of expansion. They even go so far as
to call for the legalization of the occupation of the
territories they invaded. We hope that the Security Council
will assume its responsibilities and bring about respect for
and the implementation of the resolutions adopted on this
problem so as to bring about the reign of peace and
stability in the area.
146. Indeed, there is nothing to show that Israel intends
to implement those resolutions. It has even opened these
territories to foreign investors, to exploit natural resources
and to make use of the labour of their inhabitants. In this
way the Israelis are proposing to develop the occupied
territories and raise the standard of living of the inhabitants.
147. Even if one accepts this argument as valid, this can
not justify the occupation of the territory of others.
Otherwise, colonized peoples would owe thanks to their
colonizers. By refusing to evacuate the occupied Arab
territories Israeli leaders seem to prefer territory to peace,
because no people can consent to the occupation of its
territory. Many Israelis are today asking whether their
leaders do not prefer, in the final analysis, territories to
peace.
148. Mr. Annon Rubinstein, Dean of the Law Faculty in
the University of Tel-Aviv, has written in the important
independent daily Huaretzthe following:

territories, play for time and accustom the world to our
domination of these territories.”
149. Indeed, for six years the Government of Israel has
tried to win time in order to consolidate its position in the
occupied territories. In our view to defend the present
policy of Israel is to defend all its conquests; and the
countries which encourage this policy are, practically
speaking, making of it an anti-Arab policy.
150. The Israeli Government is always Claiming
the right
of the Jewish people to live in peace and security. But has it
recognized the right of the Palestinian people to live in
peace and security? It completely disregards their existence. Throughout this debate the representative of Israel
has never mentioned this people. For him, perhaps, only
the Jewish people has the right to live in peace. Only
yesterday again, the representative of Israel developed a
new argument by which he attempted to deny the right of
the Palestinians to a land where they have lived for
centuries, a right recognized by all international communities. As the debate continues the expansionist intentions of the Israeli authorities become clearer. The systematic raids of the Israeli forces into the Palestinian
refugee camps in neighbouring countries are designed to
terrorize and eliminate the Palestinian people. Repeatedly
this Council has met to hear complaints with regard to
Israeli aggression. The people of Palestine have the same
right as all other peoples of the world to live on their soil in
peace.
151. The Israelis must recognize the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and to a national life,
like all other peoples. No solution of or answer to the
problem in the Middle East is possible without the
recognition of the fundamental and undeniable rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, and consequently its right to
return to the land of its birth.
152. On 7 May last Israel celebrated the twenty-fifth
anniversary of its creation in the Middle East; in spite of all
the protests of the inhabitants on the West side of the
Jordan and the resolutions of the Security Council adopted
in previous years the Israeli authorities organized a military
parade in the Arab part of Jerusalem. At that time
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians, driven from their
homes, were crouching in their tents, in misery, bitterness,
despair and frustration. This should prompt the Members of
our Organization, particularly those States which defend
the policy of Israel, to give some thought to the lot of this
people and to do something positive to relieve their
wretched and inhuman plight.
153. In our view the situation in the Middle East is a single
problem. The basis of this problem is the question of the
Palestinian people driven from its homeland. The wnr of
June 1967 wasonly an aggravation of the situation through
the occupation of the territories of Egypt, Jordan and
Syria. In 1947 the United Nations adopted the resolution
to partition Palestine between Palestinian Aratjs and Jews.
Well, where is this Palestinian State? The Israelis have not
only usurped the land of the Palestinian people but also
occupied other territories in neighbouring countries. Have
the States Members of the United Nations which recognhe

“Instead of taking the path, doubtless arduous and
hazardous, which may lead to peace, the Government of
Israel is making a fetish of territory.
“We should not be surprised that many people are
convinced today that the policy of Israel is pursuing a
very well-defined objective: to cling to the occupied
14

the State of Israel asked themselves what are the boundaries
of this State? We wonder whether the Israelis themselves
have ever made them clear. Without any doubt the
boundaries of the State of Israel do exist in the minds of
the Zionist leaders, just as, in April last, the Israeli
representative stated in this same room that the State of
Israel has existed in the minds of Israelis for 2,000 years.
Now the Government of Israel seeks to Impose on the
neighbouring Arab countries acceptance of the frontiers of
this State.
154. We hope that the members of the Security Council
will bring the Israeli authorities to declare unequivocally
their support of the principle of the non-acquisition of
territory by force stipulated in the Charter of the United
Nations, to withdraw their troops from all the Arab
territories occupied during the six-day war and to recognize
the right of the people of Palestine to self-determination.
Without that, peace will not be established in the Middle
East.
155. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
next on the list of speakers is Israel. I call on the
representative of Israel.
156. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have asked to be allowed to
speak in order to make a brief statement and I shall not

therefore use this opportunity to exercise my right of reply
to the speeches delivered by the Chinese and Indian
representatives. The abuse of fact and logic, of history and
of law contained in these two statements is enough to leave
them in shambles. To both of them I would simply recall an
old Chinese proverb: “Slander cannot destroy an honest
man, When the flood recedes the rock is there.”
157. It was Egypt’s initiative that brought about this
debate, Israel has always held the view that public polemics
cannot contribute to the solution of the complex Middle
East situation. In fact, despite the effort made by my
delegation to channel the discussion into meaningful
exchanges we were soon confronted by the usual vituperation, calumny and one-sidedness. The debate has made it
clear once more that serious, constructive examination of
the situation must be conducted through quiet diplomacy
and not in public arenas of recrimination. Nevertheless, the
debate has thrown light on a number of impofiant
questions.
158. Egypt has charged that Israel undermined the peacemaking efforts of the last six years. The Egyptian Foreign
Minister had undertaken to reveal Israel’s responsibility for
the failure of these efforts. However, the analysis of
developments since 1967 presented in my delegation’s
opening statement on 6 June [I 717th meeting] and corroborated by the Secretary-General’s report demonstrated
that it was Egypt that, at one stage after another, prevented
progress toward peace, Egypt brushed aside all Israeli peace
proposals, It resorted to violence and force. It rejected
Ambassador Jarring’s invitation in 1968 to hold conferences in Cyprus, thus blocking the initiation of negotiations
and thereby dooming the Special Representative’s mission.
Egypt’s only counter-argument was that Israel refused to
accept the Egyptian position on withdrawal transmitted in
the 8 February 1971 aide-memoire, a position which had

been rejected by the Security Council repeatedly in 1967.
Neither Egypt’s Minister for Foreign Affairs nor any other
representative found it possible to seriously challenge this
analysis and its central theme that had Egypt responded
favourably to the many opportunities offered it by Israel
and by the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
peace might have already been attained in the Middle East.
159. Minister El-Zayyat set out to prove that under
resolution 242 (1967) Israel wasto withdraw to the old line
of 1967 and to accept that line as the secureand recognised
boundary between th.e two States. The Security Council
records will show that a thorough examination of this
question was made in the course of this debate and that
nothing that transpired in it has cast doubt on the fact that
resolution 242 (1967) had left the secure and recognized
boundaries undefined so that they could be determined, for
the first time, through agreement between the parties. Even
the Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates, who was
present at the Security Council deliberations in November
1467, confirmed that the Arab delegations had in fact been
informed at the time that the purpose of the omission, in
the resolution, of the words “all” and “the” before the
term “occupied territories” was to leave the possibility of
frontier rectifications. This understanding was confirmed
also on 22 November 1967 by India’s representative on the
Security Council, when he voted for resolution 242 (1967),
though his successor today, for obvious reasons,chose not
to mention it in his somewhat surrealistic interpretation of
truth and history. The extent of the border changeswill be,
of course, determined through agreement between the
parties. Thus the Egyptian thesis on the alleged immutability of the old line has crumbled, and Egypt’s demand
that the Security Council call specifically for Israeli
withdrawal to that line was shown to be nothing but a
demand for a basic change in resolution 242 (1967).
160. Egypt’s Foreign Minister put forward another.
demand to change resolution 242 (1967). He asked for the
introduction into the resolution of what he called the
problem of inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
live m secure and recognized boundaries. The true nature of
this demand became evident when it was shown to imply
the dismemberment of Jordan and the protests this demand
has provoked in Jordan speak for themselves.
161. Egypt’s Minister claimed that it was incumbent on
the Security Cound to impose on Israel the Egyptian
&tat.
Soon it became apparent that our deliberations
focused not on the the question of Imposition from the
outside, an idea that faded out, but on negotiations
between the parties. Egypt alleged that Israel’s refusal to
restore the old vulnerable line and Israel’s insistence on
establishing secure and recognised boundaries constituted a
prior condition preventing negotiations. Israel made it clear,
however, and I reiterate, that it desires free negotiations
without preconditions and that it does not ask of Egypt to
accept in advance any Israeli view or position. Egypt
further claimed that negotiations were impossible because
Israel remained in the territories held by it since 1967 and
that the occupation per se constituted another Israeli
pre-condition. It has been demonstrated that withdrawal
could come only after agreement and therefore after
negotiations. Moreover, attention was drawn to the fact

:

i’

tion who have accompanied our deliberations and have
made it possible for world public opinion, reflecting the true
conscience of mankind, to realize that peace is within the
reach of the nations of the Middle East if they free
themselves of the errors, obstacles and failures of the past
and join hands to construct peace through respect for each
other, through mutual understanding and accommodation,

that the only agreements between Israel and the Arab
States, concluded in 1949, had been the result of negotiations which the Security Council had called for, and that
those negotiations took place while parts of Israeli territory
remained under Egyptian, Syrian and Jordanian occupation.
162. In the light of these facts Egypt’s refusal to negotiate
with Israel appeared in this debate again as an indication of
the continued non-acceptance of the justice of Israel’s
rebirth as a sovereign nation. The Egyptian Foreign
Minister’s references to Israel’s attainment of independence
as “the original sin” and his repeated declarations that
Israel’s recognized boundaries were those of 1947, have
strengthened the doubts and’ suspicions regarding Egypt’s
ultimate objectives.

168. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
last speaker on the list for today’s meeting is the representative of Saudi Arabia, who wishes to speak in exercise of
the right of reply. I invite the representative of Saudi
Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
169. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): As usual, after
listening to Ambassador Tekoah very carefully and intently,
I find myself constrained to set the record straight-be it
the historical record, the political record or even the
religious record.

163. These are the salient facts and conclusions which
emerge from the debate. In furtherance of its case Egypt
can point only to statements of political support. These
statements, however, do not add any new element to the
situation. I repeat, for this is the crux of the reality with
which we are dealing: all are aware that Israel is permanently outnumbered by the Arab States. This does not affect
the merits of Israel’s position or our determination to
safeguard Israel’s fundamental rights and legitimate
interests. Such statements cannot alter the situation. The
only way to bring about a transition from the present
impasse to an accepted peaceful settlement is by negotiations between the parties.

170. I do not say Mr. Tekoah wilfully distorts the truth.
He may do so inadvertently, because I have no doubt that
since youth he has been indoctrinated with the Zionist
ideology. Therefore I do not take exception to what he says
in the sense that he wilfully distorts the truth. But since
Ambassador Tekoah in the last part of his speech said that
he should thank the mass media of information for having
covered this debate I should like to draw his attention and
the attention of the members of the Council to the fact
that to a large extent the mass media of information in the
Western world are manipulated by the Zionists, and many
newspapers are owned by them.

164. I understand that the debate is about to be adjourned
as the eyes of the world turn to a meeting between the
leaders of two great Powers. Their example is one of
resolving differences and achieving understanding by means
of constructive dialogue. In the forthcoming weeks let us all
ponder the question whether the Middle East conflict can
remain the only one in the entire world in which a process
of negotiation has not yet been initiated. Let us give
thought to the facts highlighted by this debate and to the
inevitable conclusion to be drawn from them, namely, that
negotiations between Israel and the Arab States are long
overdue and are ‘essential to end the present deadlock, as
has been pointed out by several members of the Council.

171. Nowadays we find scarcely any reference to what
Arab representatives say on this subject. In fact, the press
has engaged in what, at Lake Success in 1952, when we
were engaged in writing the draft convention on freedom of
information, I once referred to as the three “S’s”: slanting
the news; scissors-in other words, cutting out what does
not suit certain parties; and the conspiracy of silence.
172. Of course Mr. Tekoah had to thank the international
press, the mass media, including radio, television and other
mechanical media for transmitting news. As I have mentioned, 10 or 15 per cent, and sometimes perhaps 20 per
cent, of news space in this host country is allocated to the
question of Israel or related subjects.

165. Israel again calls on the Arab Governments to join it
in building peace, for that is the only way in which peace in
the region can be achieved.
166. At this stage I should like to express appreciation for
the opportunity that has been given my delegation to
present to the Security Council a full view of the situation
and to indicate the road that would lead to peace, Israel’s
most cherished hope and objective. I should like to thank
also those members of the Security Council who have, each
in his way, contributed to a deeper understanding of the
crucial fact that peace between the parties can be attained
only by agreement between them on all the outstanding
questions and that the central aspect of the settlement-the
establishment of secure and recognized boundaries-cannot
be artificially excluded from the process of agreement.

173. Yesterday I asked to be allowed to speak today in
order to correct certain statements made by Mr. Tekoahespecially when he delved into the historical background of
Palestine.
174. I shall not proceed chronologically because my
intervention might become tedious were I to do so. But if I
remember correctly, and I am paraphrasing, Mr. Tekoah
said that Palestine had been barren. He mentioned something about a land without a people-meaning that the
Zionists came to occupy a land without a people.
175. I need not at this stage go into the genesis of the
presence of Jews-or call them Hebrews-in Palestine. I shall
do that later. Suffice it for me to mention that in 1839 Sir

167. I should also like to address a word of gratitude to
the representatives of the international media of informa16

Moses Montefiore, a well-known British Jew, wrote: “In the
Holy Land the Jewish settlers would find a greater certainty
of success.Here they will find wells already dug, olives and
vines already planted and a land so rich as to require little
manure.”
176. The well-known Zionist writer Ahad Haam, who later
changed his views about Zionism, wrote on this subject in
1891, before Theodor Herzl wrote his Zionist manifesto in
1896 in Paris. At that time the Dreyfus affair had divided
France in two and there was a lot of anti-Semitism. That is
what drove Herzl to write his Zionist manifesto. That was
in 1896 and the well-known writer Ahad Haam wrote the
following in 1891:
“We abroad have a way of thinking that Palestine today
is almost desert, an uncultivated wilderness, and that
anyone who wishes to buy land there can do so to his
heart’s content. But that is in fact not the case, It is
difficult to find any uncultivated land anywhere in the
country, We abroad have a way of thinking that the Arabs
are all savageson a level with the animals and blind to
what goes on around them. But that is quite mistaken.
The Arabs, especially the townsmen, see through our
activities ln their country and our aims, but they keep
silent and make no sign because, for the present, they
anticipate no danger to their own future from what we
are about. But if the time should ever come when our
people have so far developed their life in Palestine that
the indigenous population should feel more or less
cramped, then they will not readily make way for us.”
177. Since we are in the host country, my good friend
Mr. Scali, I shall tell you what someone said in 1911, when
I was six years old. You were not born then. The famous
American geographer, Ellsworth Huntington, described
Palestine as follows in Palestine and its Transformation:
“The fertile well-watered strip of the Philistine coastal
plain +” He also said: “The modern Arab fellah”-meaning
peasant-“like the peasant of the past, raises his grains and
figs with no water except that furnished by rains, but for
oranges, lemons and other more valuable crops he must
have moisture during the long dry summer. Accordingly, he
digs .numerous wells and from them obtains a continuous
supply by means of pumps.”
178. I shall not go beyond 1911, but the first time I
personally visited Palestine was in 1925. I was told that 85
per cent, if not more, of the famous orange orchards
belonged to the indigenous people of Palestine. Mr. Tekoah
says, “It is a desolate land, desert”.
179. Now we come to ancient history. Ambassador
Tekoah mentioned that Jerusalem was called El Quds,
which was from the Hebrew word Hemikdash, meaning the
Holy Temple. “Whose Holy Temple? The Jewish Temple.“,
he said,
180. Mr. Tekoah should know that when our Jews came
to Jericho and Jerusalem there was a city, one of the most
ancient in the world, called Unr Salim. “Uru” is a Semitic
word, like Ur of the Chaldees-Uru Salim, the land of
peace. Egyptian sources dating from 1400 BC speak of that
city of Uru Sallm, or City of Peace, that existed before our

Jews-not the Khazar Jews, from which our colleague is
descended and whose ancestors embraced Judaism .& the
eighth century AD in what today is southern Russia, about
200 years before Rurik came and unified the land. That
Rurik was, as you know, the precursor of the Romanoffs. I
stand to be corrected if I am wrong. Then Mr. Tekoah
forgets that during the days of the Romans our Jews-and
there were no Khazars then, of course, for that was eight
centuries before some European tribes were converted to
Judaism-spoke Aramalc; they did not speak Hebrew. He
tells us what El Quds means and that it is derived from
Hebrew. The word “El Quds” is an Arabic word, from
Kadassah. The word “El Quds” is a substantive. Arabic is
one of the most ancient languages, one of the six basic
languages, and by “basic” I mean that there was an
interrelationship between verbs and substantives. It means
“the sacred”. “Kadis” means “saint”. “Kadassah” means to
pray in sacred places. The word happens to be Arabic, but
it does not precede “Uru Salim”, which is of Semitic origin
and not of Hebraic origin. It existed with Jericho, before
the sons of Jacob started to come from the Ur of the
Chaldees in Western Iraq, because they were tribal and
followed the pasturage, which was the common thing to do.
When there was drought they came from Western Iraq and
descended through the Hauran to the land of Canaan. If
you read the Bible-I do not know if you do, becauseyou
are too busy, but I still read it-look at Genesis, how the
sons of Jacob, farther north from Jericho or Jerusalem,
took a small town. Those towns were called city-states,
with a king, The twelve sons l?f Jacob came. Jacob is one of
our prophets. Do not think that I am quoting now from the
Bible. If anybody has the Bible, I will read chapter and
verse from it. I think it is either the 32nd or the 34th
chapter of Genesis. I do not commit myself. The sons of
Jacob came down to the land of Canaan-I am paraphrasing
now, it is not word for word-and the son of the King, it
seems, fell in love with one of their sisters, Dina. There is
nothing wrong with that. A young man fell in love with a
young girl. Benjamin was the last son of Jacob. I know you
are secular, but you can be religious too-it does not
matter. The mothers of the 11 sons were Aramaic or from
other tribes. Jacob had many concubines in those dayswives and concubines-according to the Bible, and but for
the mother of Benjamin they were not Jews. I do not
know, because the Jews say that if you are a Jew you have
to be born from a Jewish mother. What would you say
about the mothers of the I1 sons, because,according to the
Bible, there were 12 sons of Jacob, and Benjamin was the
youngest?
181. Mr. TEKOAH
Judaism.

(Israel): They were converted to

182,. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): We will convert you
to be an Arab one of these days. That will solve the
problem. One day-1 will not be around-you will be Arabs,
ail of you. It is like what happened to those Crusaders.The
Sulbiya tribe, who live in northern Arabia, were Arabized.
We assimilated them. But you are diverting the attention of
the Council. What are you laughing about? This is history,
Sir. I take it from the Bible.
183. In those days, you know, they were conservative
people and tribal. They went to the king and told him,

the fall of Jerusalem-and I mean the fall of Jerusalem
when Nebuchadnezzar conquered Palestine in 586 B.C.
That lasted464 years. Then there was a revival during the
MaccabeanKingdom: 166 to 63 B.C., 103 years.

“Your son molested our daughter, Dina.” Then it seems
that by that time the son had told his father, the king, that
he was in love and would like to marry the girl. So the sons
of Jacob, without their father’s knowledge, according to
Genesis, were taken aback. They wanted to pick a quarrel
with the king, to fight. The king told them, “Why don’t
you come and settle amongst us, we marry your daughters
and we give our daughters to you in marriage? “. It seems
that they needed labour. They were urban, and the others
were tribal. What did the sons of Jacob say? They said,
“Please give us time to think these things over.” Then they
came two or three days later and said, “We cannot give our
daughters in marriage unless the males are circtlmcised.”
That is in your Bible. Are you ashamed of the Bible? So
the town-crier was sent out and he said: “The king and his
son are going to be circumcised-what
about you people of
the town-and
let these people live amongst us.” They
circumcised them, and on the third day, when the pains
were at their height, the sons of Jacob put those Canaanites
to the sword and killed every one of them. These are some
of the tricks that were used in those days, not only by Jews
but perhaps by tribes in order to seize part of the land of
Canaan. When Jacob found out, according to the Bible, he
was so upset, because he was an honourable man, that he
said, “Let us get out of here, because tomorrow their
relatives will come, and perhaps they will put us to the sword
too.” Then they moved southward and later they took
Jericho and then Uru Salim-before it was called “El Quds”,
which means “the Holy City”, owing to the fact that it was
the first Qibla in Islam, before Mecca. The Moslems, when
they prayed, turned their faces to El Quds, to Jerusalem.
The word is not Hebraic-Jerusalem: Uru Salim. I grant that
Hebrew, Arabic and many tongues of tribes of the area
were interrelated. We have nothing against the Jews. Our
problem is with Zionism, a political movement based on
Judaism.

187. But let US seehow many years some of the other.
conquestslasted. Look at the Roman conquest of Jerusalemand the fall of paganismin 63 B.C. It lasted 386
years.Then, from the Constantineto the Persianconquest,
291 years. The period of Persian rule was 14 years.
Reconquestby the Byzantine, 11 years. Conquest by
Moslem Arabs, 435 years. Rule by Moslem Turks,
1072A.D. to 1092 A.D.: 20 years. Reconquest by Arabs:
1092A.D. to 1099A.D.: 7 years. Then the Crusading
Kingdom: 88 years. Reconquestby the Arabs: 42 years,
And then the City ceded by treaty-that is Jerusalem-to
Frederick II. He was one of the Crusaders.Revived Arab
rule: 278 years.And Jerusalemunder the Ottoman Turks,
who wereMoslems:400 years.
188. So if you add up the Moslemand Arab rule, it comes
to 1,000 years.The others cometo 500 and someyears. So
regardingthis fallacious argument “we were in Palestine”,
wherewereyou in Palestine?In Judeaand in Samaria.And
you call that Israel? They were small enclaves-and it was
not you, but our Jews. And you say that the Jewshave
flocked from all the Arab lands. To where? To the land of
Palestine,becauseof your Zionism.You created a problem
in the Arab world and outside the Arab world, incloctrinated those people to come. They were happy. 1 lived
with them. We were classmates.We spoke Arabic. We ate
the samefood. Incidentally, I did not eat pork either. So
you do not have to worry about your diet. I know Jews
who eat pork. I say that becauseMr. Tckoah said that
Judaismis a way. of life, and a question of food..There are.
many Jewswho eat pork and do many other things. They
are marrying Shiksas,Gentile girls. Therefore, Mr. Tekoah,
please do not talk as if you did not know what is
happeningnowadays.

184. As you remember, the First World War was fought
allegedly to save the world for democracy. It was not
against German militarism but against German mercantilism. People have to find a motivation. The European
Zionists had an excuse. They were persecuted in Europe.
But what had WC to do with it in our area? We had nothing
to do with it in our area. So they had to have a motivation,
and Herzl thought that the only way would be to go to
Palestine and establish a State, but he forgot-and probably
Mr. Tekoah wishes to forget--that, ironically, many of the
indigenous people of Palestine were originally Jews. Who
were the disciples of Christ? Were they Romans? They
were Jews. They embraced Christianity and later, because
of the tyranny of Byzantium in the area, many Christians
embraced Islam, but ethnologically the original Jews are
our Jews. It does not matter whether they are Jews,
Moslemsor Christians.They are Semites.Zionism sprang
from Eastern and Central Europe. Many Jews who are
friends of mint are opposecl to Zionism and say, “The
Zionists are besmirchingour religion”.

189. I am not trying to make a historical dissertation.We
are seizedhere of a problem that has perpetrated tragedy
on Jew and Gentile alike, and I would like at this meeting
to attack that problem from the humanitarian point of view
aswell as from the pragmaticpoint of view, to usea phrase
of William James,an American: Pragma, from the Creekthe practical, the way that the problem could be perhaps
attacked andsolved.
190. I think that my colleague,AmbassadorHuang-and
although I do not usehis terminology, he is entitled to use
it-was correct. I understood him to be making the
assumption, or perhaps the assessment,that the ‘two
super-Powers-ifyou do not like to be called super-Powers,
that is your privilege, but I think that you the superPowers-meaningthe United States and the Soviet Unibnhave it within your meansto solve this problem if you
want to.

185. I hove nothing againstEuropeanJews,do not get me
but once you become an aggressorwe have to
defend ourselves.

191. As I saidin a previous intervention, I was presentat
Lake Success.Israel wascreatedby the two super-Powers.I
shallbegin with the United States.I have here the memoirs
of the late PresidentTruman, and I shalt quote from them:

WWII~,

186. Now, here I havethe record of our oriental Jewswho
~:ameto Palestine,as 1 have told you many times before,
Trcir11
Western Iraq. There is the Davidic Kingdom down to

“Shortly before noon, Dr. Stephen S. Wise, Chairman
of the American Zionist EmergencyCouncil, camein to
18

talk to me about the Jewish victims of nazi persecution
and the serious problem of resettlement of the refugees,
which led, naturally, to a discussion of a proposed Jewish
State
and homeland in Palestine. I had before me
President Roosevelt’s record and statements regarding
Palestine, and the Secretary of State had sent me a special
communication
two days before expressing the attitude
and the thinking of the State Department on Palestine:
“ ‘It is very likely’, this communication read, ‘that
efforts will be made by some of the Zionist leaders to
obtain from you at an early date some commitments in
favour of the Zionist programme which is pressing for
unlimited
Jewish immigration into Palestine and the
establishment there of a Jewish State. As you are aware,
the Government and people of the United States have
every sympathy for the persecuted Jews of Europe and
are doing all in their power to relieve their suffering.
The question of Palestine is however a highly complex
one and involves questions which go far beyond the
plight of the Jews in Europe. There is continual
tenseness in the situation in the Near East, largely as a
result of the Palestine question, and as we have interests
in that area’ ” -you mentioned interest today,
Mr. Scali-“ ‘which are vital to the United States, we
feel that this subject is one that should be handled with
the greatest care and with a view to the long-range
interest of the country.’ ”
That is the end of the quotation from the State Department
communication.

“The spokesman for the group, George Wadsworth,“who, incidentally, at one time was United States Ambassador to Saudi Arabia-“presented orally an agreed
statement in about 20 minutes”-on behalf of the United
States Ambassadors in the region.-“There was little
discussion, and the President asked few questions in the
meeting, whose minutes had been carefully guarded by
the Department of State. Finally, Mr. Truman summed
up his position with the utmost candour: ‘I’m sorry,
gentlemen, but I have to answer to hundreds of thousands
who are anxious for the successof zionism. I do not have
hundreds of thousands of Arabs amongst my constituents.’ ”
In other words, if there had been enough Arabs amongst
Mr. Truman’s constituents, the question would have been
different. There is no justice here; it is a matter of votes.
194. Now, Mr. Tekoah, you have probably read the book
by Mr. David Horowitz, because he wrote it in Hebrew. It
was translated into English in 1953, and I believe it was
Alfred Knopf who published it that year in the United
States. The name of the book is State in theMaking.
195. I want to show you how the State of Israel was
created amongst us-and I shall quote David Horowitz, an
executive of the Jewish Agency, who indicates how the
initial disillusionment with the Committee vote was dispelled and how the period of feverish activity commenced:
“The fighting spirit rose in us. We met at the Agency
offices and consuited on ways and means to turn the
wheel of events once more. The struggle began. The
telephones rang madly. Cablegrams sped to all parts of
the world. People were dragged from their beds at
midnight and sent on peculiar errands. And, wonder of it
all, not an influential, Jew, Zionist or non-Zionist, refused
to give us his assistance at any time, Everyone pulled his
weight, little or great, in the despairing effort to balance
the scales in our favour.”

192. Mr. Truman continues:
“Since I was in agreement with the expressed policy of
the Roosevelt Administration on Palestine, I told Rabbi
Wise that I would do everything possible to carry out that
policy. I had carefully read the Balfour Declaration, in
which Great Britain was committed to a homeland in
Palestine for the Jews. I had familiarized myself with the
history of the question of a Jewish homeland and the
position of the British and the Arabs. I wassceptical as I
read over the whole record up to date about some of the
views and attitudes by the ‘striped pants boys’ “-

196. And then, when Forrestal, on 13 December, spoke to
then Governor Dewey, who was a candidate for the
presidency, about removing Palestine from the realm of
partisan politics, the Governor said that while agreeing in
principle with Forrestal, ,he was sceptical that the. Demo.
crats would really abide by any such ‘decisions. This’ is ‘.
taken from Forrestal’s diary.

meaning the “boys” of the State Department; unlike today,
they used to wear striped pants in those days.’
“in the State Department. It seems to me that they did
not care enough about what happened to thousands of
displaced persons who were involved. It wasmy feeling
that it would be possible for us to watch out for the
long-range interests of our country while at the same time
helping these unfortunate victims of persecution to find a
home. And before Rabbi Wise left, I believe I made this
clear to him.”

197. And then at Lake Success-I witnessed this-my
friend Mr. Gromyko, now the Soviet Foreign Minister, and
Hershel Johnson-I think it was Hershel Johnson; he was
the deputy of Senator Austin, the first Permanent Repre.
sentative of the United States to the United Nations, and
had made three speeches on behalf of partition in
1947-asked that the partition question be put to the vote
forthwith. At one time Mr. Austin, after consulting with
the State Department, had thought we might place Pales.
tine under the authority of the Trusteeship Council pending
search for a soIution to that problem. But Mr. Truman
precipitated a vote, and none other than my good friend
General Romulo-he is still alive; may God prolong his life:
he is a fine man-made a speech against partition that lasted
for an hour. And then, according to General Romulo, who

193. Now, there is a revealing quotation from someone
who was in the State Department, whom I happened to
know personally: his name was Colonel William Eddy.
Colonet Eddy was sent by United States ambassadors in the
area-in
the region of the Middle East-to brief the
President about the Palestine question before partition. He
writes:
19

told me this, Mr. Truman called the President of the
Philippines on the telephone and told him: “If you do not
ask your representative at the United Nations to vote for
partition, American aid will not be forthcoming.”
198. That is why I am addressing you, Mr. S&i:
Government is responsible for the creation of Israel.

your

199. And I do not not know what made Mr. Gromyko
vote for partition. He probably felt sorry for the Jews, as
we all did, after all. Both major Powers voted for the
partition of Palestine, but the major efforts were on the
part of the United States. Later the Soviet Union found
itself left out in the cold by the Zionists; the Zionists
turned their backs on the Sovi$ Union-and began to do
what? To work with the United States, probably because
they had the money, while the Soviet Union was emerging
from the war: it had lost 20 million lives in that war; of
course it had to reconstruct the country. All this probably
contributed to the Soviet Union’s disillusionment. I do not
know; I am just thinking aloud.
200. But anyway you are the two major Powers in the
area and, as Ambassador Huang mentioned, I think you
should be considered responsible for finding a prompt
solution to this problem. I am not going into the words of
resolution 242 (1967). I told you in this Council that the
result would be zero, and I circled my hands in the air. It is
below zero now.
201. Mr. Scali had a well-balanced speech today, and that
reminds me of Ambassador Goldberg’s famous phrase, “We
want to treat this question even-handedly”. The United
States, the arbiter of the destiny of peoples. They have a
scale 6,000 miles away from Palestine, even-handedly. What
for? Mr. Truman wanted the votes. He probably also was a
good man and felt sorry for the Jews. But why did he not
feel sorry for the indigenous people of Palestine? Are they
subhuman? This is logic. We felt sorry, everybody felt
sorry for the persecution of the Jews.
202. Mr. Tekoah always speaks about Haj Amin Husseini
going to Germany during the Hitlerite rBgime. There was a
price on his head. Where did you want him to go? Did you
want him to go to New York or to London?
203. Mr. TEKOAH
Nazis.

(Israel): He collaborated with

the

204. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Collaborate? You
collaborate with everybody to seek your own ends.
Rosenberg wrote that book about the racial superiority of
the Nordic people, He was a Jew, or descended from Jews.
205. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is a German name. He was
not a Jew. You do not know your history.
206, Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): The history is clear.
I was told many years ago before Hitler why the German
Jews got German names, which is human. They were
disabled in many parts of Europe and all of them were
called either Isaac or Jacob or other Biblical names, and
when the tax collector wanted to levy taxes and some of
them perhaps wanted to evade these taxes, so they were
20

asked to choose German names so as to be able to identify
those who paid their taxes.
207. I have treated this subject for so many years. I spare
you a reading of The Jewish Mystique, which bolsters a lot
of my arguments. The author is a Jew, an objective Jew, I
have nothing against the Jews or Judaism.
208. In a few days the illustrious Mr. Brezhnev is meeting
with another illustrious gentleman by the name of
Mr. Nixon in Washington. They are not only going to wine
and dine, they are going to discuss various questions and 1
think that the Middle East is high on the list of their
discussions according to various semi-official communiqu&
which we read in the press of this country and in
newspapers from abroad.
209. Who is Baroody to make remarks to Nixon and
Brezhnev? Baroody is a human being with two ears, a
tongue and two eyes, descended from a people with a long
heritage-with ail due respect to. the Russians, who are more
ancient than the Americans. So Baroody has something to
say through you, Sir, here in the Council. For those who
have ears, let them hear, and those who do not want to
listen can block their ears. It is their privilege to do so. But
there will be no peace in Palestine if those two gentlemen
do not adopt a new pattern of policy that is in contradiction with the ancient policy predicated on the balance
of power.
210. The United States has certain interests in the area, we
know that, but more so Europe in so far as the oiI is
concerned, because after all I think that the American and
British concessionaires there sell only 5 per cent of the oil
to this host country. The Arab world is the hub of the
Moslem world. If you draw a straight line from Morocco,
which is on the Atiantic, it goes through all of North Africa
which is Moslem and happens to be Arab. Then it extends
to the confines of China. You have Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq,
Pakistan, Afghanistan, and from the north you have Turkey
and Iran and you go down and reach the Sudan. I am not
talking about our Moslem brothers who live in enclaves and
are not in a majority in certain African countries. There are
600 million Moslems. Do you mean to contain them, you
two super Powers? We do not threaten anybody. Six
hundred million Moslems in a rectangular bloc that is one
of the largest on this earth. They mean well by everybody,
They mean well by the Soviet Union just as they mean well
by the Western world. Even if we wanted to we are not in a
position to wield power, to go against the Soviet Union or,
for that matter, the Western world. But in that rectangle,
that big territorial geographical rectangle, Israel was estaba
lished by the United States to become a pretext for
intervention inasmuch as this has been an antiquated policy
of States since the days of Plato’s Republic. Balance of
power. If Mr. Brezhnev and Mr. Nixon are going to shelve
this problem because the balance of power policy still
obtains, the world will come to an end, not because of
Palestine, although Palestine will be a catalytic agent that
may perhaps set the spark of a conflict that may draw the
big Powers. Who wants a conflict? We do not want the
Jews to be erased from the world, but they might do
something like the Biblical Samson if and when there
should be a revival amongst the Arabs-not to wield power

for aggression, but there are many other ways and means
they can wield power. I am not going to mention them lest
it be said that Baroody is threatening, but do not
underestimate the Arabs and the Moslem world.
211. Are you-the United States and the Soviet Uniongoing to jeopardize your security becauseof miscalculation? We know where the spheresof influence are. I do
not have to namethem. I do not wish to embarrass
someof
my brothers who are here. Some are with this camp and
others are with that camp. And what are you doing, Sir?
We sell you oil and you sell us military hardware.To fight
whom? Of course,to fight the United Statesinterests,if it
is provided by the Soviet Union, or to fight the Soviet
Union interests if the arms are provided by the United
States.

212. Your secret agencieshave evolved from agenciesof
collecting information for self-defence-whichis legitimate,
espionagefor self-defence.Theseagencieshaveevolved into
organizations that can bring about coupsd’Btat, useagejzts
provocuteurs. I am saying this advisedly, drawing it from
books that were written by those who were agents.We are
living in curious days. You should bc proud, Mr. Scali, of
those journalists who uncover many things. You, yourself,
are a journalist; you are seekingafter the truth. Of course,
the Russianshave an older civilization than yours. They are
more circumspect. Former membersof the KGB-or whatever you call it-do not do the sameas the former CIA
workers who have left the service and write their memoirs.
213. Billions are used, not to collect news,but to subvert
people when it suits you. And I am sorry to say,in fairness
to you, that the smaller Powers are aping you, doing the
same thing. While this is taking place, Chiefsof State smile
and photographs are taken of them. But their agenciesare
busy. The intelligenceagenciesof the smallerStatesalsoare
busy doing thesethings to one another.
214. From a humanitarian point of view it is your
responsibility, my good friend-because you arestill young,
and I will not live very long-to tell your leaders,through US
here, to change that pattern that has backfired. You, Sir,
gave us a speechhere, my good friend, Mr. Scali. It was
nlarvellous in its diction, well-balanced, nothing wrong:
compromise, five points. Let us take the mathematicalsort
of equation or parallel: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Now if both parties
should compromise on certain points on the basisof those
five points, do you know how many combinationsyou can
make out of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5? And if one doesnot want to
accept this solution, then it will be a compromise.Umpteen
combinations of figures and umpteen combinations of
abstract ideasfor a solution!
215. Where there is will thcrc is a way. Why do not you
and the Soviet Union speakto that State that wascreated
by you in 1947’~ 1 think the Soviet Union may have
regretted it-1 do not know-or it may not haveregretted it.
You may have regretted it but it doesnot show, because
the Zionists are still very, very powerful. They have
permeated your Congress,your Scnatc, your banking.
You know who sells the gold. They made a good
profit, Mocatt and Goldman. in London,---Iknow who they

are. Yes, the Jewsknow how to control markets. There is
nothing wrong. Perhapswe alI shouldhave beenin the gold
business.And we, whether we are Jewsor Gentiles,suffer
becauseof those policies that are stiIl predicated on the
balanceof power and power politics.
217. This is not my swan song. You will hear from me
again. I have other matters which you know, becauseyou
are a highly intelligent gentleman,otherwiseyour illustrious
Presidentwould not have put his faith in you to represent
the American Government. And I would be embarrassing
my good friend, AmbassadorMalik. I haveknown him since
1948. He is one of the most adept and skilful diplomatsand
I am sure Mr. Brezhnev is not so haughty as not to heed
what he tells him.
218. It is time that we representativesshouldtalk loudly. I
do talk loudly, to my Chief of State. He hasnot hangedme.
And I talked loudly to many in the Arab world and they
did not hang me.
219. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): They might.
220. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): They will hangyou.
He says, “They might”. You might be hangeclby your own
people if you go too far, but I will feel sorry for you
becausewe have gotten to know you by sitting next to you
here. A joke? This is how you want to relievethe tension.
SometimesI crack a joke to relieve the tension,but what I
am saying is not puerile or childish. I am saying this
seriously.
221. It is high time that a new pagewasturned, and we
diplomats should not be automata, hardly ableto function
becauseof the straitjacketsof instruction provided to us by
our respectiveGovernmentsor hardly ableto walk because
of the tight pants of procedure that we provide ourselves
with in so many semantical terms. The time is ripe for
somethingdrastic to be done lest thingsget out of hand. I
have had my pulseon the situation. Time and again1have
toId you. I come from the region, from the area, and
believe me I am talking to you sincerely.Act before it is
too late, you two Powers.China? What can China do? It
has its problems. We have its sympathy. I told my good
friend AmbassadorHuang that I was not asking for his
support. But he said that it dependson the super-Powers,
and today he confirmed it-or the two majorPowers,if you
do not like to be called super-Powers.
222. You will meet againin July, you will repeat the same
thing here over and over again.And then I will bringmore
books and more documents to quote from, and the
prefabricated replies of Mr. Tekoah will be read-some
prepared by him or prepared for him by others.Wherewill
it get us? Perhapsthis is what Israelis almingat: the status
quo sothat it may consolidateits rule over the place.
223 And will the Israelisalways be living in a fortresssurrounded, as the Crusaderswere surroundedin different
military fortresses? Look at what happened to the
Crusaders.
224: If the Jews wan&ta live. amongus, they can do so.
But they cannot lord it over us. They cannot cast the

216.

21

j

!

:

Palestinian people by the wayside. The Palestinian people
have their personality. They are the indigenous people of
Palestine, The Sykes-Picot-Sazonov agreement, which was
signed in 1916 by the three allies of the First World War,
partitioned the Ottoman empire. And in order to disguise
their colonialism they called it mandates. I lived under a
mandate, in Lebanon and Syria. I know what I am talking
about. That was colonialism in disguise. There was a
mandate over Syria, a mandate over Lebanon, a mandate
over Iraq, and a mandate over Palestine. They were distinct
people. We knew a Palestinian from the inflection of his
voice. They happened to speak Arabic. They embraced
Arabism. But many of them, I must say, were the original
.... ,’,Jews. And the Khazars came and wanted to displace them.
,..:
225. Sovereignty Iies in a people. And there was a
people-the people of Palestine, whether we like it or not.
Even if they had not been Arabized, they would still have
been the people of Palestine. There was the people of
Lebanon; the people of Syria; the people of Iraq. They
were separate entities. The mere fact that for 400 years
they had been ruled by the Ottomans did not rob them of
their personality. The British wanted to establish the State
in order to preserve the roots of the empire.
226. And the Zionists railroaded your country, Mr. Scali,
into the war in 1917, when the Germans were beating the
British. You must remember that hotel-the Savoy Plaza,
facing the Plaza Hotel. That was where the Zionists met in
order to intensify the British propaganda to railroad the
United States into the First World War. And the price was
the Balfour Declaration. I was a contemporary of those
days. I knew people who attended that conference. And
one of your ambassadors to Turkey, Mr. Morgenthau, was
against Zionism because he considered himself ‘American.
Therefore, after the British lost their empire and became
insolvent and had to throw the question into the lap of the
United Nations, it became your responsibility.
You
emerged as a great Power after the Second World War. The
two World Wars were not brought to your homeland. You
fought, you sent boys. You had no business being involved
with those Europeans--that is hindsight-but you were.

we can do is come to you with our problem, hoping we
may move you towards influencing your Governments as a
departure from the antiquated duty of the diplomat to do
nothing but what his Government tells him.
231. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I will
limit myself to one observation. When, Mr. Baroody, you
address yourself to two great Powers in the Security
Council, it would be better if you addressed your remarks
to the five permanent members, and to all members of the
Council. However much they might wish it, two Powers in
the Security Council cannot adopt any resolution without
the support of the other Council members. Please bear that
in mind.
232. Mr. SEN (India): After the most eloquent speech by
Ambassador Baroody what I am going to say will come as
an anti-climax. It is on a point of fact. I should like as
briefly as I can to tell the Security Council of the Indian
position on resolution 242 (1967) in 1967. I could, of
course, read out the entire text of the speech by the then
permanent representative of India, Mr. Parthasarathi, but
that would take too long. Instead, I shall read three
paragraphs from a document circulated yesterday. Mr. Parthasarathi said:
“The principle of the inadmissibility
of territorial
acquisition by force is absolutely fundamental to our
approach and we cannot accept or acquiesce in any
decision that leaves out territories occupied by military
conquest from the provision of withdrawal.”
“It is our understanding that the draft resolution, if
approved by the Council, will commit it to the application of the principle of total withdrawal of Israel forces
from all the territories-I
repeat, all the territoriesoccupied by Israel as a result of the conflict which began
on 5 June 1967.”
“This being so, Israel cannot use the words ‘secure and
recognized boundaries’. . . to retain any territory
occupied in the recent conflict .” [See S/l 0948.1

227. ‘And look what is happening now to you and to your
dollar. And that touches us, because our patrimony is being
eroded also.

The Council has already heard what I had to say.
233. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):
on the representative of Saudi Arabia.

228, Therefore, prime responsibility is with the United
States Government-to
restrain Israel and not to delay and
to see how, in the words of Ambassador Goldberg, we can
even-handedly solve this problem. We hope you will talk to
your leaders-if not face to face, by communication; you
have the wherewithal to do so.

I call

234. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I feel
duty bound to answer you with a few words, because you
put a question to me. The bulk of my statement that had to
do with the two major Powers was directed to our good
friend Ambassador Scali. If the Soviet Union would also
like to establish peace, it could co-operate with the United
States, instead of having each Power look at its traditional
national interests in the area by resorting to a policy of
balance of power. That is all I meant. But you know, Sir,
that I gave you the benefit of the doubt. I said that after
Mr. Gromyko and Mr. Hershel Johnson voted for partition,
you seem to have had either qualms or regrets, or perhaps
followed a policy that I do not understand, and were
favourable to the Arabs because, as I said, the Zionists
probably turned their backs on you-1 do not know why;
you could ask them why-after
you helped them to Irave a

229. Baroody is warning you that it will be a question of
how many. But I know through
analysis, through my knowledge of the region, that if you
do not act to find a really just solution, then, by the law of
retribution, there may be a point from which there can be
no return. And we all stand to lose.

years. I do not know

230. I must thank you, Mr. President, for your indtllgence,
and I must thank my colleagues for having been so patient
with me. But, after all, we do not wield world power. All
22

intention, and that we were indeed informed to the
contrary. I do not like to say this in the absence of the then
representative of the United Kingdom and the then
representative of the United States. Lord Caradon told our
Foreign Minister, half jokingly, half seriously, that he knew
English better than the Egyptian Minister did, and therefore
he assured him that the words “territories occupied” meant
all territories occupied. Of course, I was not present, but I
heard that from Mr. Riad himself. I have repeated it to
Lord Caradon, and he did not deny it. As for the United
States, we have verbatim records of private conversations
and Mr. Goldberg also told Mr. Riad, “I assure you that not
an inch of Egyptian territory is going to be touched”. I do
not have the papers in front of me-1 did not think that I
would need to use them-and I state this now with a little
diffidence because I do not want to speak about people
who are not present.

homeIand in Palestine. That is why I addressed our American
friends and asked them to co-operate with you, and I asked
the same of you. But I think the United States counts more
in this matter than does the Soviet Union, because the
United States provides not only arms but also aid to Israel.
I think that I have made myself clear.
235. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): With
all due respect to you, Mr. Baroody, I again request you to
bear my comment in mind. You yourself recognized that
Western Europe has no less an interest in the Middle East
and its oil than the United States. I think that interest is
much greater than that of the Soviet Union, since the USSR
has its own oil.
236.

I call on the representative of Israel.

237. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like to refer very
briefly to the observation made by the representative of
India. In my earlier intervention I said:

243. But the distortions alluded to in the very beginning
have gone as far as Mr. Tekoah quoting, in the presence of
the Council and in my presence, something that I never said
when he spoke about the original sin. I do not know where
he got that, but I just want to say that I did not say it.

“Even the Minister of State of the United Arab
Emirates, who was present at the Security Council
deliberations in November 1967, confirmed that the Arab
delegations had in fact been informed at the time that the
purpose of the omission, in the resolution, of the words
‘alI’ and ‘the’ before the term ‘occupied territories’ was to
leave the possibility of frontier rectifications, This understanding”-that
resolution 242 (I 967) left open the possibility for territorial adjustments-“was
confirmed also , , .
by India’s representative . . . though his successor today,
for obvious reasons, chose not to mention it . . .“. /,$‘upra,
para. 1.59.)

244. Having heard all the members of the Council, having
heard the statements made on behalf of Africa and on
behalf of the non-aligned world, and having heard also the
statements in exercise of the right of reply and other
exercises of the Israeli representative, I feel we were fully
justified when we asked for this series of meetings of the
Council to examine at this historic time the situation in the
Middle East. The meetings have rightly been described by
the representative of the United States as a challenge and an
opportunity.
.’ j.,,:.
245. Our two main questions have now been answered.
They have been answered by the world, represented by the
overwhelming majority of the members of this Council, by
the representatives of Africa, Europe, Latin America and
the third world, on the one hand, and they have been
answered by the Israeh representative, on the other hand.

238. I could have added that for the same obvious reasons
Egypt’s Minister for Foreign Affairs chose also not to
include in the documents submitted by him to the Security
Council the statement to which I referred. The operative
central sentence in the Indian representative’s statement on
22 November 1967, as it appears in the verbatim record, is
as follows: “Of course, mutual territorial adjustments are
not ruIed out. . .“. /1382nd meeting, para. .53:]‘
239. What I have been trying to point out throughout this
debate is that resolution 242 (1967) leaves the possibility
for negotiation and agreement in order to define something
that has not been defined in that resolution. That is the
thesis which is contrary to that propounded here by the
Egyptian Foreign Minister, who spoke of the immutability
of the old line.

246. The first question centred around the continued
military occupation of the Egyptian, Syrian and Jordanian
lands, illegally exploited, and maliciously disfigured by the
Israeli military forces in order finally to usurp them or parts
of them. The answer of the world was that this occupation
was inadmissible and intolerable. You have indeed in the
Council said “NO’‘--(‘NO”
to occupation, “No” to coercion
and “No”
to usurpation. The answer that the Israeli
representative
had to give boils down to the naked
confession that what the Israelis have occupied by force
they intend to keep-or to keep whatever they want to
keep of it. “No evacuation without negotiation”, they say,
meaning no negotiations will ever be allowed to succeed
without resulting in further expansion and annexation.

240. Now once the principle that border changes are
possible has been established-and I think this debate makes
it very clear that that principle has been recognized by all
concerned, including the representative of India at the time
who was critical of resolution 242 (1967)-then the actual
extent of these border changes would, of course, have to be
agreed between the parties in negotiations resulting in an
agreement.

247. The representative of Israel not only refuses to
answer my explicit and repeated questions about what his
people think of the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territories by force but he has angrily
rejected and objected to your stating this principle from the
Chair.

241. The PRESIDENT [translation from Russian): I now
call on the representative of Egypt.
242. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT
(Egypt): I should like first to tell
the Council that we were not informed of any such
23

248. The second question concerns the right of the people
of Palestine-two
and a half.million people, whom, as I have
said, you cannot wish away-to live in peace, free and
independent, in the homeland of their fathers and grandfathers. The answer of the world, here again, was clear. It
was an affirmation that it was impossible without respect
for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people for any
meaningful, just or lasting peace to be attained. The sad
answer of Israel is that the Palestinians have no place in
Palestine. They are not a nation. They are indeed invited to
cross the river out of Palestine and conquer the Kingdom of
Jordan, if they really need a country of their own.

the parties shallnot advancebeyond or passthe Armistice
DemarcationLine and “shall not violate the international
frontier”, We also find a reference in article III, para.
graph2, to “the Egypt-Palestine frontier”, in article VIII,
paragraph2, to the “Egyptian-Palestine frontier”, and la
the first paragraph of annex I again to the “Egyptian.
Palestinefrontier”. There are many other provisionswhich
prove conclusively that the international frontiers of Egypt
were never at issueeven for the Israelis at the time of the
Armistice Agreements,or indeedanyone at any other time.
Similar provisionsare. also to be found in other Armistice
Agreements,betweenIsrael and other Arab countries.

249. Those are the answers clearly revealed to this
Council, regardless of what the mass media of this town,
the host of the United Nations, have found fit to print or
fit to omit. In regard to the Palestinians, this Council
should never be made to forget that hundreds of thousands
exist in Gaza, hundreds of thousands exist in Lebanon, and
thousands and thousands of others are without homes all
over the world. They are not only the people living on the
West Bank.

254. The United States delegation will, I hope, give these
remarkssomeattention. Surely the absenceof the reference
to the international borders in one resolution of the
Council doesnot wipe them away.

250. It is obvious that we shouId have by now passed to
the submission and adoption of a resolution. Such a
resolution could indeed sum up this debate, condemning
without ambiguity the military occupation of our lands,
condemning without ambiguity the usurpation of the rights
of the Palestinian nation, calling without ambiguity for the
respect of established international borders. We understand,
however, that, because of the seriousness of the situation,
more time is needed by the members of the Council to
deliberate on the future course the Council is to take.

!

25 1. The representative of Israel referred to what he called
the need for the establishment of frontiers between Israel
and its neighbours. He alleged that frontiers never existed in
our area and he seems to have some support here from the
United States delegation. I have a very short comment to
make.
252. In support of his allegations the Israeli representative
invoked certain provisions of the 1949 Armistice Agreements and in particular article V, paragraph 2, of the
Egyptian-Israeli Armistice Agreement,5 which stipulated
that the Armistice Demarcation Line was not to be
construed as a political or territorial boundary. He deliberately omitted any reference to the statement in the same
provision that the delineation of the Armistice Demarcation
Line was without prejudice to the position as regards the
“ultimate settlement of the Palestine question”, As I have
pointed out to the Council before, the purpose of this
savingclausewas to avoid any prejudice to the rights of the
Arab people of Palestine,pending, asI have just stated, the
ultimate settlement of the Palestine question, This provision hasno relevanceto and no bearingwhatsoeveron the
character of the international frontiers between Egypt and
Palestineunder the Mandate, and clearly recognizedin the
Mandate over Palestine as approved by the League of
Nations.
253. Article II, paragraph 2, of the sameEgyptian-Israeli
Armistice Agreement provides that the military forces of
5 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth
Special Supplement No. 3.

Year,

24

255. Before I end these brief remarksI wish to thank the
Secretary-Generaland his Special Representative for the
unambiguousanswersto the three queriesI put to them. It
should be obvious to everyone now that Egypt never
accepted and Egypt will certainly never accept a so-called
separate or partial solution which will in reality solve
nothing since it will leave dormant the seedsof more
aggression,
strife and future conflict.
256. We sincerely agreewith the United States representative when he judges this seriesof meetings to be an
opportunity to review our perceptions; to find, in fact,
where we are after the almost six years since the Council
last met to put an end to the war, then called the Six-Day
War, but now running into its sixth year.
257. We have heard once more the Israeli explanationsof
resolution 242 (1967), given under the cloak of what was
called “constructive ambiguity”. Is it not time to remove
this ambiguity? Is this the resolution that you have
passed? Are these the decisionsthat you would take:
partitioning Egypt, Syria, and Jordan? IS it not time for
the Council to assertthe principles you have pronounced
today, Mr. President? If one text is not clear, other texts
are, can and should be. Certainly, the Charter is; it is the
Charter only that we here cannot alter or change.
258. Mr. President, you and your colleagues around this
table have given the situation in the Middle East much of
your time and certainly much of your attention. Every
State member of this highest Council of the world has
participated in this debate, serious and consciousof the
grave situation our countries in the Middle East are facing
today. Wehave come to the community of nationsseeking
the shelterof the Charter. Only if we find that shelterwill
the road to justice and peacebe open.
259. May I end by again expressingmy specialappreciation to the Foreign Ministers of Africa who conveyed to the
Council what Africa had resolved. May I also request
Mr. Cissoko,who is present here, to convey Egypt’s thanks
to Africa. Other Foreign Ministers and colleaguesfrom the
Arab world certainly do not expect me to convey thanks to
them. But allow me,Mr. President,to register-and I do this
not merely becauseit is customary to do so-my esteem
and admiration for the way in which you have conducted

this debate and kept the light on the problem that is before
the Council, the problem that has brought me here.
260. If seems we are now concluding, and I shall soon be
going back home. I shall be leaving with a great debt of
gratitude and appreciation for each word, which we have
carefully listened to, and which we are going to study
further, and for the spirit of help that has sustained me
through this debate. I do hope that besides expressing
appreciation for the words said I shall be able to express
real appreciation for action undertaken.
261. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I now
call on the representative of Israel, who wishes to exercise
his right of reply. I believe I will be speaking for all
members of the Security Council if I express the hope that
his statement will be short.

claims and positions Of the Parties in the ultimate, peaceful
Setknent
of the Palestine problem, then, Obviously, they
do not recognize that Armistice Line as an international
boundary; then, obviously, both parties reserve the right to
come to the negotiations on a final peace settlement with
Whatever SUWStiOnS they may feel would be appropriate at
the time of such talks.
268. I also pointed out that that particular paragraph
appears in all four of the Armistice Agreements concluded
between Israel and its Arab neighbours: in the IsraeliEgyptian,
Israeli-Lebanese, Israeli-Syrian and IsraeliJordanian Agrecmcnts
269. But the Israeli-Egyptian agreement went even further
and included a clause quoted by me yesterday f1724th
meeting] which specifically said, if I remember the text
correctly, that the Armistice line should not be interpreted
as a political, territorial boundary, I think that this has been
basically confirmed and understood as a result of the
exchanges that we have heard in the course of the last week
around the Security Council table. I againrepeat,even an
Arab representativeand the representativeof India at the
time in the Security Council, who identified himself
entirely with the Arab position, made it very clear that
resolution 242 (1967), which was adopted unanimously,
left open the possibility for borderchanges.
Now obviously
these border changes can be arrived at only through
negotiation and agreementbetweenthe parties,If we were
to accept the thesis as put forward by the Minister of
Egypt, we would find ourselvesconfrontinga rather bizarre
theory in addition to being completelywrongas far asthe
basic documents involved in this problemare concerned;
the Armistice Agreements, resolution 242(1967), the
statementsof representativeson the Security Councilwhen
that resolution was adopted. We would be confronting a
strange theory of a line-and all of us know what a line
is-and that cannot be even one millimetrewide-which is
to be consideredan international boundary as far as one
side to the agreement is concernedbut not as an international boundary asfar asthe other sideof the agreement
is concerned. A line after all is only a theoreticalline. Now
doesMinister El-Zayyat proposethat what wasintendedin
1949 was that Israel recognizedthis theoretical line as
constituting the international boundary for Egypt, while
for Egypt it remaineda purely theoreticallint without any
wj&]> at all becauseEgypt itself reservedthe right for
what? Expansion? Aggression?This is a theory which
would be untenable in any court, in any committee that
wouId try to interpret from the legalpoint Of ViCW Or frm
the po]itjcaI or historical point of view what wasactually
agreedon both in 1949 and in 1967.

262. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt, in his last remarks, referred to two
substadive
points. First of all, he spoke again On the
question of Palestinian rights and tried to explain away his
suggestion as being made simply out of concern for the
rights of Arabs of Palestine.
263. My response will be in the words of a broadcast of
today, 14 June, over Radio Amman, the capital of Jordan:
“The Prime Minister of Jordan reported to the Jordanian Cabinet on 14 June ‘regarding the memorandum
that he sent to Arab Foreign Minsiters concerning the
meaning of the Egyptian Foreign Ministers’s call in the
Security Council to create a Palestinian State in the
occupied West Bank and the dangers inherent in this call
with regard to the Palestinian cause’.”
264. This is precisely the reason why 1, from the very first
meeting in this debate, pointed out that Minister ElZayyat’s references to the so-called inalienable rights of the
Palestinians to live within secure and recognized boundaries
are in fact a suggestion, a proposal, a call to dismember
Jordan.
265. The second point of substance which Minister ElZayyat
referred to was the question of resolution
242 (1967) and its interpretation.
I take note of the fact
that he too repeated today that there is much ambiguity-I
repeat: ambiguity-in
resolution 242 (1967).
266. Yes, we all realize that; I think this debate has made
it clearer than ever before. The ambiguity, the openness,
the possibility for interpretation,
the invitation to accommodate each other, the invitation to conduct negotiations
and conclude agreements applies also to a central prOViSiOn
of that resolution: the establishment of secure and recognized boundaries.

270. I shall end my brief commentby sayingthat despite
these differences of view and interpretation Westill hope
that Egypt will agree to enter into a process Of WPti*
tion-Of free, honourable negotiationswithout any Preconditions, without Israel askingof Egypt to accept in
advance any Israeli view and position---andthat these
negotiatiolls will at long last bringpeaceto the Middle East,
PeacebetweenIsraeland its Arab neighbours.

267. Minister El-Zayyat quoted from the tieneral Armistice Agreement concluded between Israel and Egypt in
1949. As far as I could follow the quotation it was correct.
He wili find the same quotation in at least one of my
statements in order to emphasize that if both Egypt and
Israel undertake not to consider the Armistice Demarcation
Line as determined in the said Agreement as prejudicing the

27l . The PRESIDENT (translationfronz Russian):For the
information of those speakersat the Security ~ou~lc~l
25

meeting who take part in the discussion of the item and
refer to resolution 242 (1967), I should like them also to
bear in mind the fact that the resolution provides for
United Nations machinery on the Middle East.
272.

The common ground today is that they all agree that Israel
should withdraw from all the Arab territories it occupied in
1967. That means Gaza, it means Sinai, it means the West
Bank of Jordan, it means Arab Jerusalem, it means the
Golan Heights. If there is an interpretation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) which was accepted officially by two Arab countries, Jordan and Egypt, it is this
interpretation.

I call on the representative of Egypt.

273. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT
(Egypt): I am taking the floor on
just a few points, because I have never seen such an
exercise. Fortunately I was reading from a piece of paper.
What I said about ambiguity is this. “We have just heard
once more the Israeli explanations of resolution 242 (1967)
given under the cloak of what was called constructive
ambiguity.” I did not say that the resolution had ambiguity. I was saying politely that the Israeli representative
was trying to deceive the Council into giving explanations
that were not the wish or the will of the Council.

280. This interpretation is not attributed by me or by the
Arab side to the resolution. It is one which was governed by
the preambular paragraph, as I said this morning of the
1725th meeting: no acquisition of territory by war. It is
also governed by the norms of international law and
international relations and the law of the United Nations,
This is an interpretation that the Arab Governments which
accepted Security Council resolution 242 (1967) all share,

274. Secondly, I have never said and I wish the record to
show that I have never said, what he again alleged I
said-quoting this dispatch or radio broadcast from Amman-asking for a Palestinian State in the West Bank. The
records show clearly that I never said that.

281. It is with great apprehension and sense of shock that
one feels and witnesses the evolution in the Israeli position
between 1967 and today. It is an evolution from a position
which then was that Israel wanted peace and wanted
guarantees for the future, and not territory, something that
is to be testified to by the fact that Israel in June 1967, led
by its Foreign Minister, did not vote against the Latin
American draft resolutions which said that Israel should
withdraw “all its forces from all the territories occupied as
a result of the recent conflict”, meaning the one in June
1967, to a position where it now speaks of agreed borders.

275. The third exercise was this question of the line which
would be a boundary for Egypt and not a boundary for
Israel. Is this really so difficult? The boundaries of Egypt
were the boundaries with Palestine, They were not the
boundaries between Egypt and Israel, and Israel is not the
State that inherited all of Palestine. The only legal basis
which you have recognized and which Members recognizing
Israel have recognized for Israel is a line inside Palestine, as
shown on the map accompanying the 1947 resolution
partitioning Palestine, What is left after that line-and this is
the armistice line-is the land of Arab Palestine, and it is
with this Arab Palestine that Egypt has its international
borders.

282. Now, while the principle of agreement is introduced
in the Security Council resolution with regard to the
malchinery of the United Nations-introduced
in that
resolution, as you yourself, Sir, so rightly said-it does not
apply to borders or to the concept of withdrawal. Withdrawal is governed by the lines, by the concept of no
acquisition of territory by force and by the fact that the
principle that the attacking forces should, in the context of
a peaceful settlement, withdraw to the lines from which it
crossed at the outbreak of the hostilities.

276. The next point was about accommodation. The
representative of Israel was asking that we both accommodate each other. We have no wish to be accommodated
inside Palestine, and Israel must rest assured that this year,
next year, this generation or the next generation, Israel will
never-but never-bc accommodated in Egypt,

283. The agreement is a matter that pertains to procedure.
It is a matter which is associated with the work and the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. It is a concept that applies to the manner in which
the resolution is to be implemented. It is a very serious and
very dangerous concept to speak of agreed borders and give
this interpretation to the clear and categorical call for
withdrawal by a party which at the moment not only
occupies and holds under occupation the national soil af
three Arab countries but also speaks through a number of
its leaders of retaining slices, perhaps all of the occupied
territories.

277. The last point is about negotiations. I am not going
to say anything. The Foreign Minister of Israel has
apparently failed to convince his Ambassador. Yesterday I
quoted here what Mr. Abba Eban said about negotiations
under duress. I stand on his declarations. I like it.
278. The PRESIDENT ftranslation
on the representative of Jordan.

from Russian):

I call

279. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): The Israeli representative has
tried again to drive a wedge between Jordan and Egypt. The
issue before this Council is not inter-Arab relations, nor is it
our view of the future of our relationships or of how our
countries and peoples should reconstitute or restructure
lheir relationships. These are matters for the Arabs to
decide among themselves. If there are common grounds,
there is a common position shared by the Arab countries
who
come to the United Nations in 1967 complaining of
the attack and the occupation by Israel of their territories,

284. I wanted to draw the attention of the Security
Council to this serious evolution in the Israeli position and
the fact that it clearly depicts an appetite for territory and
a rejection of the basic concept on which resolution
242 (1967) was based, which is a balance of obligations
between peace, a guaranteed peace, and a withdrawal by
the forces of occupation to the lines from which they had
started. Jordan’s concept and understanding of resolution
6 Seefoot-note I.
26

c

242 (1967)-a concept and understanding which, from the
statements I heard from the Foreign Minister of Egypt, I
tliink Egypt also shares-is that withdrawal should be total
and that it is only in that context, the context of a balance
of obligations between total withdrawal and a guaranteed
peace, that resolution 242 (1967) is to be applied. That is
our understanding of it and that is our concept of the
future just peace in that area.
285. The PRESIDENT (translation from RussiaiT): We
have now come to the end of the list of those wishing to
speak at today’s meeting, and also the list of representatives
who expressed a desire to speak in exercise of the right of
WlY*
286. Before closing the meeting, I should like to make the
following statement.
287. Some tentative suggestions have been made to me
concerning the desirability of suspending for a reasonably
short period the formal Security Council meetings dealing
with the examination of the situation in the Middle East.
Among delegations which have informed me that they
think such a suspension might be appropriate are those of
Austria, France and the United Kingdom.

289. There is a general understanding that the Security
Council would resume its examination of the situation in
the Middle East, for which purpose a meeting of the
Council will be convened in the middle of July on a date to
be determined following consultations among the members
of the Council.
290. I call on the representative of Egypt.
291. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. President, because of
the seriousness of the situation, because what we arc facing
in our area is the question of having to end a war imposed
on us and having to end the military occupation of our
land, and because of our respect and esteem for the three
States mentioned in your statement-Austria,
France and
the United Kingdom-Egypt
accepts suspension of the
present debate. But may I take it that you, Mr. President,
together with the President for next month-1 bclicve it will
be the representative of the United Kingdom-and the
Secretary-General will keep in touch with the situation in
order to determine when we shall next meet on the subject
and what we shall meet for.
292. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I cdl
on the representative of Jordan.
293. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): Mr. President, following the
example of my colleague the Foreign Minister of ligypt, 1
simply wish to extend to you the thanks of Jordan for
inviting my delegation to participate in the Council’s
deliberations on the acute and serious problem we arc all
facing. I wish to extend to members of the Council my
thanks and the thanks of my delegation and Jordan for
giving us this opportunity. I also wish to thank everyone
who has upheld the principle of the non-acquisition of
territory by force and expressed hope and determination
that in the Middle East there will be peace based on justice.

288. The exchange of views on this matter with the
members of the Security Council has revealed a common
view that such a suspension would be useful. It can be used
for further pondering on the results of the discussion of the
question in the Security Council by both the members of
the Council and the representatives of the States participating in the consideration of this question. In the light,of
the report of the Secretary-General on the efforts undertaken by his Special Representative and the statements
made by all States participating in the present debate, the
suspension could also be used for further unofficial
consultations among the members of the Security Council
as to the next steps of the Council,

The meeting rose ut 8.05 pm.

27

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent cn vente clans les librairies
et les agences
depositsires
du monde entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
A : Nations U&s.
Section des ventes, New York 011 Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccicjn de Ventas, Nueva York o Gincbra.

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria sn librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
