S/PRST/2006/45

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 November 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5566th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 November 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Great Lakes region”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes efforts aimed at bringing an end to the
long-running conflict in northern Uganda, and is following closely the Juba
talks process between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). The conflict with the LRA has caused the
displacement of up to two million people and the death of about 100,000
people in the region, as well as leading to the death of eight UN peacekeepers.
“The Security Council welcomes the cessation of hostilities which took
effect on 29 August 2006, and was renewed on 1 November 2006, and stresses
the importance, for peace and stability in the region, of both parties respecting
that cessation of hostilities. The Security Council commends the Government
of Southern Sudan for facilitating this agreement, and for its efforts to further
a long-term and peaceful solution to the conflict, and calls on all parties to
commit themselves fully to this end.
“The Security Council demands that the LRA immediately release all
women, children and other non-combatants, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict, and that the
peace process be concluded expeditiously.
“The Security Council will continue to monitor developments closely. It
invites UN Member States to support efforts to bring an end to this conflict so
that peace and security can be restored to the region and the rule of law
re-established, and to ensure that those responsible for serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law are brought to justice.
“The Security Council welcomes the briefing provided by the Secretariat
on 7 November 2006, which it will consider further, in particular in light of
progress in the Juba talks process. It recalls the briefing provided on 19 April
2006 by the Ugandan Foreign and Defence Ministers, the visit to Uganda of
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict in June 2006, and the briefings by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs on northern Uganda on 20 April and 15 September 2006.

06-61873 (E) 161106

*0661873*

S/PRST/2006/45

“The Security Council welcomes the announcement by the Government
of Uganda of the establishment of a Joint Monitoring Committee to oversee
the delivery of a prioritised Emergency Action Plan to tackle the humanitarian
issues in northern Uganda, looks forward to further progress on improving the
living conditions for civilians in northern Uganda, measurable against clear
bench-marks, and urges Member States to maintain their support to these
efforts. It also welcomes the Government of Uganda’s work so far on its
Peace, Recovery and Development Plan to address the long-term needs of the
region.”

2

06-61873
