UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/42
25 August 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3570th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 August 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the Protocol on the fundamental
principles for establishing peace and national accord in Tajikistan signed
by the President of the Republic of Tajikistan and the leader of the Tajik
opposition on 17 August 1995 (S/1995/720, annex). It commends the efforts
of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy and all countries acting as
observers at the inter-Tajik talks, which have significantly contributed to
reaching the above agreement between the Tajik parties.
"The Security Council calls upon the parties to implement fully the
commitments contained in the Protocol. It supports the agreement of the
parties to conduct the continual round of talks due to begin on
18 September 1995, with the aim of concluding a general agreement on the
establishment of peace and national accord in Tajikistan and urges the
parties to agree as soon as possible on the venue of the negotiations. It
reiterates that the primary responsibility rests with the Tajik parties
themselves in resolving their differences.
"The Security Council welcomes the agreement reached by the parties to
extend the Agreement on a Temporary Cease-Fire and the Cessation of Other
Hostile Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country signed in
Teheran on 17 September 1994 (S/1994/1102, annex I) for a period of six
months until 26 February 1996, and calls upon the parties to comply
strictly with the obligations assumed under this agreement, including
cessation of all hostile acts on the Tajik-Afghan border and within
Tajikistan. The Council calls upon all States and others concerned to
discourage any activities that could complicate or hinder the peace process
respecting fully the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of
Tajikistan and the inviolability of the Tajik-Afghan border.

95-26156 (E)

250895

/...

S/PRST/1995/42
English
Page 2

"The Security Council urges the parties to implement as quickly as
possible the confidence-building measures agreed upon during the fourth
round of inter-Tajik talks held in Almaty.
"The Security Council stresses the need to continue the existing close
contacts of the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT)
with the parties to the conflict as well as its close liaison with the CIS
Collective Peace-keeping forces, with the Russian border forces and with
the OSCE Mission in Tajikistan.
"The Security Council welcomes the contributions by some Member States
to the voluntary fund for contributions established by the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with its resolution 968 (1994), and reiterates its
encouragement to other Member States to contribute thereto.
"The Security Council expresses its readiness to consider in due
course the recommendations of the Secretary-General regarding the possible
role of the United Nations in the context of the present and future
agreements between the Tajik parties."

-----
