S/2018/40

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 January 2018
Original: English

Seventeenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2103), covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 19 October 2017
(S/2017/880).
2.
Relations between Iraq and Kuwait continued to improve during the reporting
period. The President of Iraq, Fuad Masum, made an official visit to Kuwait on
20 November 2017 in response to an official invitation from the Emir of the State of
Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah. This was the first visit to Kuwait
by an Iraqi President in nine years. Discussions were focused on boosting bilateral
relations in all fields and on the preparations for the international conference on the
reconstruction of Iraq that Kuwait will host from 12 to 14 February 2018. Both sides
agreed to pursue increased investment and economic opportunities, thereby further
strengthening their ties. The decision, reached on 21 November by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission, concerning the
resumption of deposits to the United Nations Compensation Fund and payments by
the Government of Iraq towards the outstanding compensation awards also represents
a positive step towards closer ties between Iraq and Kuwait.

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
3.
During the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued to
investigate a number of potential burial locations, including the Jahra’, Sabahiah and
naval base sites in Kuwait and the Radwaniyah, Suleimaniyah and Salman Pak sites
in Iraq. As part of those efforts, the Ministry also followed up with witnesses, as well
as with relevant government bodies, to verify all acquired information in an effort to
identify exact burial locations. Furthermore, two new witnesses separately came
forward with information on potential burial locations.
4.
The Ministry of Defence of Iraq also continued to seek information from
relevant government institutions in an effort to precisely determine the burial location
at the Khamisiyah site. From 6 to 14 September and from 8 to 16 October 2017, the
technical team of the Ministry undertook exploration and excavation wo rk at the

18-00580 (E)

170118

*1800580*

S/2018/40

potential burial site in Khamisiyah, during which 183 and 210 trenches were dug,
respectively. No human remains were found. The coordinates of areas covered by
trenches were communicated to the members of the tripartite mechanism for their
information.
5.
From 15 to 18 September and from 18 to 21 October 2017, the technical team
of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq also carried out exploration and excavation work
at the potential burial location in Samawah District. A total of 183 trenches were dug ,
and six sites were identified. However, neither human remains nor grave -like features
were found. The coordinates of areas covered by trenches were communicated to the
members of the tripartite mechanism for their information.
6.
From 23 to 28 September and from 22 to 28 October 2017, the technical team
of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq carried out exploration and excavation work at the
potential burial site in Karbala’ Province, digging 125 and 160 trenches, respectively.
The coordinates of the areas covered with 285 trenches were recorded and
communicated to the members of the tripartite mechanism for their information. A
total of 16 sites were identified during the work, but no human remains or grave -like
features were found.
7.
On 16 October 2017, the technical team of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq
undertook exploration and excavation work at the potential burial site in Maysan
Governorate, during which six trenches were dug. No human remains were located.
The coordinates of areas covered by trenches were communicated to the members of
the tripartite mechanism for their information.
8.
On 24 October 2017, human remains were retrieved by the technical team of the
Ministry of Defence of Iraq from a potential burial site in Basrah. The remains were
handed over to the Medico-Legal Directorate. Corresponding forensic work of genetic
profiling is ongoing.
9.
Also during the reporting period, human remains were retrieved by the technical
team of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq from a potential burial site in Najaf. The
remains were handed over to the Medico-Legal Directorate. Corresponding forensic
work of genetic profiling is ongoing.
10. On 30 October 2017, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq issued a broadcast on all
available satellite TV channels, inviting those with information on missing Kuwaiti
persons and missing Kuwaiti property to come forward.
11. On 12 November 2017 in Baghdad, my Deputy Special Representative for Iraq
met with the Head of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) delegation
in Iraq, Katharina Ritz, to discuss how the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) could best contribute to the missing Kuwaiti and third -country nationals
file.
12. In line with the recommendations made at the forty-fourth session of the
Tripartite Commission, which are aimed at reaching out to other organizations and
countries facing similar issues, on 13 November 2017 UNAMI, together with
members of the tripartite mechanism, took part in a visit to Cyprus, organized by
ICRC, to the Mia Milia excavation site, the premises of the Committee on Missing
Persons in Cyprus and the Committee’s anthropological laboratory. The Committee
was established to recover, identify and return to their families the remains of Turkish
and Greek Cypriots who went missing during the intercommunal fighting of 1963 to
1964 and the events of 1974. The Committee’s team provided an extensive overview
of this bicommunal project, including its archaeological phase, related to the
exhumation of the remains of missing persons; its anthropological phase, related to
the analysis of the recovered remains at the Committee laboratory; its genetic phase,
related to the DNA identification process; and its phase involving the identification
2/5

18-00580

S/2018/40

and return of remains, which includes the reconciliation of the information obtained
in all previous phases and the formal identification and return of the identified
remains to their families. A productive exchange of information and experiences took
place between members of the tripartite mechanism and the Committee. The Iraqi
delegation expressed keen interest in applying to its own work a number of the
procedures, techniques and technologies used by the Committee.
13. On 14 November 2017 in Cyprus, UNAMI attended, in its observer capacity,
the 101st session of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite mechanism. The
Iraqi delegation expressed its commitment to continue its efforts until the file was
fully resolved, despite the lack of tangible results over the past 13 years. The Kuwaiti
delegation thanked the Ministry of Defence of Iraq for its activities and persistent
efforts. The Iraqi delegation requested support for its field work to acquire expertise,
as well as for the training of the Ministry of Defence technical team. Delegations of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and ICRC were also requested to study the maps of Khamisiyah that had
been obtained in an effort to identify burial locations in that area, with the Kuwaiti
delegation emphasizing the importance of also acquiring aerial photographs. In
addition, the Kuwaiti delegation proposed that ICRC regularly update the
Khamisiyah, Karbala’ and Samawah sites through Google Earth to showcase all field
activities. The proposal is currently under consideration.
14. During the session, a draft report on the ICRC review project was shared with
all delegations, providing a historical overview of the tripartite mechanism, technical
assessment and background with respect to each of the potential burial sites, and a
series of findings and recommendations addressing the way forward. The members of
the mechanism were invited to study the report and to provide their comments by the
next session of the Technical Subcommittee, scheduled to be held i n January 2018.
The Iraqi and Kuwaiti delegations expressed their appreciation to the ICRC team for
its work on the review project.
15. On 15 November 2017 in Cyprus, my Deputy Special Representative met with
the Head of the technical committee in charge of the file on missing Kuwaiti persons
at the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, Brigadier General Hazem Qassem Majid, who
informed her that a special committee would be convened to examine in detail the
draft report on the ICRC review project and provide feedbac k. He also expressed the
hope that the project would provide specific indications of which potential burial
locations should be prioritized and which should be closed, in order to guide the work
of the Iraqi technical teams. In addition, the head of the co mmittee identified the
needs of the various institutions of the Government of Iraq contributing to the file,
including the need for modern technology, field equipment, forensic training and
capacity-building, particularly in the areas of DNA and anthropolo gy, as well as for
an increase in the storage capacity of the Medico-Legal Directorate. My Deputy
Special Representative underlined the continued support of UNAMI for the
Government of Iraq and a commitment to look carefully at where the United Nations
could add value, drawing on existing expertise and resources within the Mission and
more widely across the United Nations community.
16. On 15 November 2017 in Cyprus, my Deputy Special Representative also met
with the Chair of the Kuwaiti National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners
of War Affairs, Ibrahim Al-Shaheen, and the other members of the Committee.
Mr. Al-Shaheen requested the support of UNAMI in obtaining both aerial
photographs and satellite imagery of the Khamisiyah site and in reviewing t he
viability of using modern technology, such as ground -penetrating radar and metal
detectors, on potential burial sites in Iraq. My Deputy Special Representative
reaffirmed the determination of UNAMI to support the tripartite mechanism, guided
by the recommendations set out in the draft report on the ICRC review project.
18-00580

3/5

S/2018/40

17. A UNAMI delegation, headed by my Deputy Special Representative, attended,
in an observer capacity, the forty-fifth session of the Tripartite Commission, held in
Cyprus on 16 November 2017. A constructive atmosphere prevailed during the
session, with all delegations reaffirming their commitment to the humanitarian
objective and underlining the importance of the ICRC review project in supporting
the work of the tripartite mechanism. The observer status of UNAMI was extended
during the session. My Deputy Special Representative reaffirmed the dedication of
UNAMI to supporting the tripartite mechanism and, in particular, to facilitating the
efforts of the Government of Iraq on this important humanitarian endeavour.
18. On 23 November 2017 in Baghdad, my Deputy Special Representative followed
up in a meeting with the Minister of Defence of Iraq, Irfan Al -Hayali. Mr. Al-Hayali
expressed his commitment to achieving progress in the search for the missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals, emphasizing that all the capabilities of the Ministry had
been placed at the disposal of its technical committee in an effort to attain tangible
results.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
19. During the reporting period, no progress was made with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property.
20. On 15 November 2017 in Cyprus, my Deputy Special Representative met with
the Head of the Arab Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Saad
M. Redha, who reaffirmed the commitment of the Government of Iraq to resolving
the file and underlined the readiness of the Ministry to hand over a number of Kuwaiti
books located in university libraries across Iraq. My Deputy Speci al Representative
expressed the readiness of UNAMI to facilitate and observe the official handover of
the Kuwaiti books.

IV. Observations
21. I welcome the efforts of both Iraq and Kuwait in overcoming a history of conflict
and tragedy, while working to forge close ties. They serve as a model of goodneighbourly relations in the region. I am confident that the strong support and
solidarity demonstrated by Kuwait, and the commitment shown by Iraq to its
international and humanitarian obligations, will provide the impetus required to reach
the full normalization of relations. With this in mind, I call on the Government of Iraq
to continue its efforts to attain tangible progress on the file of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives.
22. I remain disappointed that, despite all efforts, the human cost of the first Gulf
war still lingers, with families of the missing waiting for more than 26 years to
discover the fate of their loved ones. Providing the answers to grieving families
depends on steadfast commitment, action and the adoption of new and innovative
ways to take the file forward. The Ministry of Defence of Iraq has undertaken
exceptional proactive efforts in field missions and in the collection of information,
for which it should be commended. While I urge the Ministry to continue in the same
vein until it is able to obtain concrete results, I also encourage other Member States
to look into ways to support these efforts, including thro ugh the procurement of field
equipment, as well as the provision of forensic, DNA and anthropological training
and capacity-building for the Iraqi technical teams. I also call on those Member States
in possession of satellite imagery from 1990 and 1991 to provide analysis and

4/5

18-00580

S/2018/40

information to the Government of Iraq that could assist in the identification of burial
locations.
23. I applaud the outstanding dedication, support and expertise of the members of
the tripartite mechanism, under the able leadership o f ICRC, who have guided efforts
to locate and recover missing persons for more than two decades and have maintained
positive momentum on this important work. I am particularly encouraged by the
efforts of the United Kingdom and the United States in reviewi ng their military
archives to obtain information that could assist in this quest, and remain hopeful that
their search will yield results. I welcome the submission, during the most recent
meeting of the Technical Subcommittee in Cyprus, of the draft report on the ICRC
review project. I commend ICRC for undertaking a project of such magnitude and
scale, which covered the compilation of extensive data. UNAMI will carefully study
the document to determine how best to support the mechanism, drawing on its
expertise and available resources. I am certain that, by working together and
translating the recommendations of the project into a concrete plan of action, the
tripartite mechanism will achieve concrete results, while providing valuable lessons
for other contexts in which efforts to locate and identify missing persons are being
planned.
24. I regret that no new developments took place with regard to the missing Kuwaiti
property. I reiterate my calls for the Government of Iraq to put in place the logistical
arrangements for the swift repatriation of the located Kuwaiti books. I also urge the
Government of Iraq to explore new strategies to revive the search for the Kuwaiti
national archives.
25. I reaffirm the unwavering commitment of my Special Representative and my
Deputy Special Representative, as well as of the UNAMI staff, to continue to play an
active role in this important humanitarian endeavour.

18-00580

5/5
