S/2014/427

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 June 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
This fourth report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014), in which the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolution by all
parties in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The report covers the period 20 May to 17 June 2014. The information
contained in the report is based on the data available to the United Nations actors on
the ground and reports from open sources and sources of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Severe levels of violence were ongoing during the reporting period, with
intensified use of barrel bombs by Government forces against civilian populations
reported in certain areas, such as the Bustan al-Qasr neighbourhood in eastern
Aleppo City, and the continuation of mortar attacks against residential
neighbourhoods by armed opposition forces. Extremist groups continued to carry
out suicide attacks, executions and other acts of terrorism. Fighting betwe en armed
opposition groups and extremist forces continued in northern and north -eastern
Syrian Arab Republic. Collectively these attacks caused thousands of deaths,
injuries and the displacement of civilians throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, in
particular Aleppo, Dar‘a, Idlib, Rif Dimashq and Deir ez-Zor governorates.
4.
In Aleppo, hundreds of civilians, including women and children, have
allegedly been killed since the beginning of May 2014. Heavy fighting continued at
front lines in north-west Aleppo city and around key supply routes in rural Aleppo.
Analysis of satellite imagery by Human Rights Watch shows continued heavy air
and ground bombardment by Government forces on opposition -held districts in the
city of Aleppo between 23 May and 6 June 2014. The majority of the 130 major
damage sites identified by Human Rights Watch are strongly consistent with air
strikes and specifically the impact of barrel bombs dropped from helicopters,
striking predominantly residential neighbourhoods. The impact on civilians and

14-55694 (E)

230614

*1455694*

S/2014/427

infrastructure has been severe. On 28 May, for example, more than 40 people,
including women and children, were killed as a result of air raids using barrel
bombs over areas under opposition control in eastern Aleppo city.
5.
In Dar‘a, intensification of aerial bombardment during the reporting period by
Government forces displaced at least 2,000 people and reportedly killed
approximately 160 civilians, including some 65 women and children. Hundreds of
barrel bombs were dropped on Dar‘a during May. On 22 May, three mortars landed
on a tent hosting a pro-government election rally in the Al Matar neighbourhood of
Dar‘a city, resulting in 43 people killed and many injured.
6.
In Rif Dimashq, ongoing aerial bombardment and shelling around the
opposition-held eastern Ghouta town of Al Mleiha led to a large displacement of the
civilian population; of the estimated 20,000 people who were living in Al Mleiha,
only 5,000 remain at most. The intensified use of barrel bombs was reported in
Khan al-Shih area, causing civilian casualties and massive infrastructure damage.
7.
An escalation of fighting between Government and opposition forces in
eastern and western rural Deir ez-Zor led to the closure of road access into and out
of Deir ez-Zor city, resulting in shortages of food and fuel supplies. This included
an intensification of shelling, particularly on Deir ez-Zor city neighbourhoods under
control of the Free Syrian Army. Infighting between opposition groups also
intensified, as the Islamic State in Iraq and Al Sham (ISIS) gained ground in the east
of the governorate, causing approximately 125,000 residents to flee to Al Mayadeen
and surrounding villages.
8.
Heavy fighting also continued in Idlib around key front lines, and several
opposition-held villages in the western rural part of the governorate sustained
shelling and air strikes. On 7 June, the Bab al-Hawa area hospital in the Harim
district was reportedly targeted by two rockets.
9.
The United Nations remains unable to provide a verified assessment o f the
presence and activity of non-Syrian fighters on a nationwide scale. On 25 May, a
citizen of the United States of America was involved in a suicide bombing in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Following the incident, the United States underscored its
concern about the flow of foreign fighters into and out of the Syrian Arab Republic
and emphasized that they were working with key partner Governments in a focused
outreach effort to address this issue. During the reporting period, ISIS expanded its
operations across Syrian and Iraqi borders, reportedly bolstered by a number of
foreign fighters. The recent advancement of ISIS in Iraq is expected to have a direct
impact on the eastern governorates of the Syrian Arab Republic, including Deir
ez-Zor and Ar Raqqah, and may strengthen the presence of extremist groups in ISIS controlled areas of the Syrian Arab Republic.
10. There was no progress made towards the implementation of the Geneva
Communiqué during the reporting period. On 3 June, the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic held presidential elections, in which no opposition candidate ran. The
elections were held outside the framework of the Geneva process.

B.

Human rights
11. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) continued to receive reports of arbitrary

2/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

arrest and detention, torture and ill treatment, allegedly perpetrated by members of
the Syrian security apparatus, including military intelligence, political security, State
security and air force intelligence. OHCHR received information indicating that,
between 22 May and 2 June, 11 detainees died as a result of torture in several
Government-run detention facilities in Hama, including at the Air Force Intelligence
Branch and Deir Shmayel Detention Centre. The Government has yet to put in place
a mechanism to investigate serious and credible allegations of torture. This is of
particular concern when large numbers of men, women and children are thought to
be held in detention facilities across the country amid consistent and ongoing
reports of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
12. On 22 May, Syrian armed forces entered Aleppo Central Prison, breaking
through the siege imposed by several armed opposition groups, includi ng Ahrar
al-Sham and Jabhat al-Nusra, since mid-2013. The Government regained control
over the whole prison complex. During the last week of May, the entire prison
population, amounting to an estimated 2,500 inmates, was reportedly transferred to
alternate makeshift places of detention in the city, primarily al-Wahda School and
Ibn Khaldoun Hospital. Information obtained by OHCHR indicates that conditions
in these places of detention continue to be inhumane.
13. On 24 May, 53 political detainees who had been held by the Syrian authorities
prior to 2011 were transferred from the prison. As at 9 June, families of the
detainees had not received any information on the location or conditions of
detention of these 53 men, raising concerns for their safety. Those transfer red from
the prison included approximately 150 detainees who were arrested by security
forces in connection with anti-government protests since 2011. Many of the
detainees were reportedly not brought before a judge or afforded de fence counsel at
any stage during their detention. On 4 June, the Government released approximately
300 prisoners from Central Aleppo Prison, who had been arbitrarily detained after
having already served their sentences.
14. On 9 June, President Bashar al-Assad issued Legislative Decree 22 of 2014,
granting a general amnesty for crimes committed before 9 June. According to the
Syrian news agency, the decree stipulates that some sentences will be reduced, such
as death penalties to life imprisonment. It further provides that some sen tences will
be commuted, including the entire duration of the sentence for prisoners with
terminal illnesses and for those aged over 70 years. The amnesty also applies to
foreigners who entered the Syrian Arab Republic “with the purpose of joining a
terrorist group or committing a terrorist act” if they present themselves to the
Government within a month, as well as to army deserters. Unverified reports at the
governorate level suggest that by 15 June at least 860 prisoners were released under
this amnesty.
15. On 29 May, at least 15 civilians, including 7 women and 3 children, were
allegedly killed by armed opposition groups in the town of Teliliye in Al Hasakeh
governorate. The killing occurred during fighting between ISIS and People ’s
Protection Units (Yekîneyên Parastina Gel, YPG) to gain control of the area. Dozens
of combatants on both sides were also reportedly killed. Internet -based footage
depicted images of bodies of women and children lined up on the ground after
apparently having been shot, suggesting that they were massacred. According to
activists interviewed by OHCHR, all 15 of the deceased were internally displaced

14-55694

3/21

S/2014/427

persons, who had fled violence in Aleppo. Both ISIS and YPG have accused one
another of perpetrating the massacre.
16. On 21 May, Jabhat al-Nusra reportedly executed three ISIS combatants
captured that day in clashes around Al Tewamiya in Deir ez-Zor governorate.
17. Internet-based footage and photographs appear to depict Mohammad
Mohammad, a 26-year-old man, being beheaded on 23 May by ISIS combatants in
the town of Al Shuyouk in Hasakeh governorate. Activists who knew the victim
report that he was not a combatant. According to information received by OHCHR,
he was among a number of people, including women, captured on 23 May at an ISIS
checkpoint outside the village of Jubb al-Faraj, Al Hasakeh. No information has
been received by OHCHR on the fate of the others captured.
18. On 30 May, while on the road to Ein al-Arab, Aleppo, over 200 civilians, the
majority of them high school students, were allegedly abducted by ISIS combatants.
The students were reportedly on their way home from the city of Al Bab, Aleppo,
where they had sat school examinations. The same day, ISIS released ap proximately
125 female students. As at 9 June, more than 100 male students reportedly continued
to be held by ISIS.
19. Four videos posted on the Internet on 30 May, purportedly by armed
opposition groups, depict 54 hostages, all women and children, allegedly being held
in Idlib since their capture by armed opposition groups on 4 August 2013, during an
attack on a village in northern Ladhiqiyah. Some 40 other hostages, also captured
during the same attack, were released by armed groups on 7 and 8 May. According
to activists in northern Ladhiqiyah, at least 100 more civilians remain unaccounted
for since the attack.
20. During the reporting period, the independent international commission of
inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, OHCHR and United Nations human rights
mechanisms, including special procedures mandate holders, continued to be denied
access to the Syrian Arab Republic.

C.

Humanitarian access
21. The humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic has further
deteriorated. Latest estimates indicate that the number of people in need has now
reached 10.8 million, an increase of 17 per cent (or 1.5 million), approximately
6.4 million of whom are internally displaced. The current estimate of 3.5 million
people residing in areas that are difficult or impossible for humanitarian actors to
reach has also risen, likely to be up to 4.7 million people. For the purpose of this
report, all monitoring figures are based on 3.5 million. This includes at least
241,000 people who live in areas that are besieged by either Government or
opposition forces.
22. There has been no improvement in achieving sustained humanitarian access to
all people in need within the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular those in hard-toreach areas. New Government truck-sealing procedures introduced in April failed to
improve the reach of humanitarian aid, and in fact resulted in fewer people being
reached in May. The Government subsequently imposed additional clearance
requirements, further undermining access to people in desperate need of assistance.
By 9 June, only 12 per cent of the planned 4.25 million people in the World Food

4/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

Programme (WFP) food dispatch plan were reached in comparison to 26 per cent at
the same time in April.
23. While deliveries of chlorine in all 14 governorates benefited 16.5 million
people with clean water, other critical types of humanitarian assistance, including
food, have not been allowed consistent entry to hard -to-reach areas. WFP delivered
food assistance to nearly 3.3 million people across all 14 governorates in May, but
overall during the reporting period assistance reached only 33 (or 12.6 per cent) of
the 262 locations identified as being hard to reach or besieged. This included food
and nutrition assistance provided by WFP, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to 348,819 people (10 per cent of 3.5 million); and
non-food items for 268,960 people (7.7 per cent of 3.5 million).
24. Eight opposition groups a have signed a declaration of commitments in which
they declared to respect and uphold fundamental humanitarian principles, abide by
international humanitarian law and commit to facilitating the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Six of the groups signed within the reporting period.
Besieged areas
25. Approximately 241,000 people remain besieged; 196,000 in areas that are
besieged by Government forces in Madamiyet Elsham, eastern Ghouta, Darayya and
Yarmouk, and 45,000 in areas besieged by opposition forces in Nubul and Zahra.
26. During the reporting period, United Nations assistance only reached two
besieged communities: Yarmouk and Douma. Food was delivered to 2,467 people,
or 1 per cent, and non-food items to 17,204 people, or 7 per cent of people in these
besieged areas. UNICEF also distributed nutritional assistance to 3,600 beneficiaries
in Douma in the form of fortified spread and cartons of High Energy Biscuits.
27. Eastern Ghouta: 150,000 people remain besieged in eastern Ghouta. On
24 May, a convoy to Douma was approved with reduced amounts of relief supplies.
Food and non-food items were delivered to 2,000 people and medicines for 22,600
people. In addition UNICEF provided nutrition assistance to 3,600 beneficiaries and
water, sanitation and hygiene assistance to 2,000 beneficiaries; 27,346 beneficiaries
did not receive surgical items that had been prepared for delivery, while critical
medicines for another 27,435 people were reported absent from the final convoy.
While on the ground, the team observed a noticeable deterioration i n the
humanitarian situation since their last mission on 29 March, in particular with
regard to health, nutrition and water. Hundreds of civilians gather daily at
Government checkpoints but continue to be barred from exiting the area.
28. Madamiyet Elsham: 20,000 people remain besieged in Madamiyet Elsham.
Since 1 January 2014, the United Nations has submitted 12 requests for Government
authorization to access Madamiyet Elsham through inter-agency convoys. Out of
those, four requests were approved, one was denied in writing and all the others
remain unanswered. Despite the approval of four inter-agency convoys, thus far
none of the attempts have resulted in the successful delivery of any humanitarian
assistance inside Madamiyet Elsham because of Government refusals to allow
__________________
a Mujahadeen Army (7 June); Idlib Military Council (5 June); 101 Infantry Division (5 June);

Fursan al-Haqq, Idlib (5 June); Hizm Movement (27 May); Jabhat al-Asali wa al-Tanmiya
(21 May); Syria Revolutionaries Front (14 April); and PYD (23 April).

14-55694

5/21

S/2014/427

convoys to proceed. Madamiyet Elsham has not been reached with assistance since
October 2012, except for polio vaccinations.
29. Yarmouk: 18,000 people remain besieged in Yarmouk. UNRWA was permitted
to conduct distributions on nine days, delivering 350 food parcels — enough for
467 people for one month — and 3,801 hygiene kits for 15,204 people, during the
reporting period. The Syrian authorities continue to refuse to authorize UNRWA to
dispatch and distribute medical supplies in Yarmouk, with the exception of small
quantities of rehydration salts, mineral supplements, vitamins and polio vaccines.
30. Darayya: An estimated 8,000 people in Darayya have been besieged by
pro-Government forces since November 2012. Preliminary negotiations f or a
cessation of hostilities agreement in Darayya are ongoing, but significant
differences remain between the parties. Increased hostilities and heavy shelling,
including the reported use of barrel bombs, have taken place in Darayya over the
past month. Darayya was last assisted in January 2013.
31. Nubul and Zahra: 45,000 people remain besieged by opposition forces in
Nubul and Zahra. Following the successful convoy to the two towns on 8 May, a
two-month convoy plan has been approved by the Governor of Aleppo. Written
approval by the Governor was received only for the first month.
Cross-border assistance
32. There has been no development since the United Nations sought the consent of
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in March 2014 to use additional border
crossings in order to facilitate greater access to those in need in hard -to-reach areas.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
33. The delivery of urgently required medicines and medical supplies continued to
be obstructed during the reporting period, the most significant obstacle being the
decision by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to prohibit the delivery of
specific life-saving supplies as a matter of policy. This, combined with insecurity
and other bureaucratic obstacles, has meant that the overall delivery of supplies is
only a fraction of what is required and there is a very uneven distribution between
Government and opposition-controlled areas, the latter receiving only 25 per cent of
the quantities distributed in the first three months of 2014.
34. Medicines and medical equipment continued to be removed from World Health
Organization (WHO) convoys entering opposition-controlled areas. In some cases,
even prior to the submission of distribution lists for opposition-controlled areas,
WHO had been warned by local or national authorities that if plans include d
injectable or surgical items, the required approvals would not be granted. Once
plans are approved, convoys are then subjected to additional checks prior to
departure by national security officials, at which stage medicines approved by
central authorities are further removed. During a recent inter-agency convoy to
Homs, for example, medicines (mainly antibiotics) were removed from the convoy
traveling to the hard-to-reach area of Ar Rastan. That meant that 2,116 beneficiaries
were denied urgently needed medicines. Many of the same medicines were allowed
into Government-controlled areas on the same day.
35. Physicians for Human Rights reported that 29 medical personnel were killed
during May, the highest number in a month since the start of the conflict, bringing

6/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

their total number of recorded deaths of medical personnel to 502. Of the
29 medical personnel, 27 were killed by actions of Government forces and 2 by
opposition armed groups: 16 were killed by shelling and bombing, 8 by torture and
4 from shooting; and 1 was executed by ISIS. Physicians for Human Rights has also
corroborated 153 attacks on 127 different medical facilities since the start of t he
war, including 3 hospitals in April 2014. All three hospitals attacked in April were
hit by barrel bombs — two in Aleppo city and one in Dar‘a.
36. Final results for the May polio immunization round indicate that over
2.8 million children under five years were reached during the campaign in all of the
country’s 14 governorates. The lowest reported coverage, in Rif Dimashq (86.4 per
cent) and Deir ez-Zor (75.4 per cent), was due to the deteriorating security
situations in those governorates. The overall coverage was 97.4 per cent of the
target population.
Administrative procedures
37. The Government’s new truck-sealing procedures improved the security of the
cargo by helping to prevent petty pilferage at checkpoints. However, considerable
delays were experienced during the first two weeks of May, when the new
mechanism was rolled out. On 29 May, a streamlined facilitation letter for regular
programming was agreed and circulated by the Government. The new procedures do
not apply to deliveries of medical supplies or to humanitarian deliveries of
assistance to opposition and contested areas, all of which must be negotiated on
ad hoc basis. In mid-June, challenges were still being encountered at checkpoints
and security personnel in charge of monitoring the sealing process failed to be
present at warehouses in a number of instances (for example, Kiswah), despite the
fact that the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator had submitted an updated list
of all United Nations and international non-government organizations’ warehouses.
38. These new procedures resulted in reduced access overall, but particularly in
the health sector, leading to significant delays in the distribution of supplies
required to respond to disease outbreaks for which advance planning cannot be
carried out. Previous approval procedures, applied through the Ministry of Health,
are no longer accepted at Government checkpoints, and new requirements for
additional approval letters, truck sealing and Government oversight are not
consistently applied. In early June, WHO requested the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to exempt health items from the new procedures applied to aid
delivery.
39. The Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has since indicated its intent to
introduce additional clearance procedures for regular programme deliveries,
including a requirement that approvals for all United Nations deliveries be made
under a unified monthly plan submitted by the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator. On 29 May, the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated that
a new facilitation letter would be required for customs procedures. The United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator submitted a note verbale on 13 June clarifying
that a unified plan was not feasible, that the Syrian Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan is the framework for the humanitarian response, and that additional
facilitation letters for supplies imported into the Syrian Arab Republic would cause
delays and additional financial burdens for agencies.

14-55694

7/21

S/2014/427

40. The Ministry of Social Affairs also informed governors that as of immediate
effect, all convoys or missions to opposition and contested areas will now require
the approval of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the High Relief Committee and the
National Security Office. Prior to this, in line with the Syrian Humanitarian
Assistance Response Plan strategy, in areas where hubs are approved, the governors
were delegated to coordinate and authorize delivery of assistance within their
respective governorates, including across lines of conflict. The High Relief
Committee and the National Security Office have not previously been involved in
providing facilitation letters at any level. These new restrictions, if enforced, will
result in lengthier, rather than reduced, approval processe s.
41. As at 11 June, a total of 82 United Nations visas or renewal requests remained
pending, 40 within the 15 working day limit and 42 exceeding the 15 working days.
There has been no progress in obtaining visas for international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), with 13 visa requests still pending.
42. During the reporting period, two additional national non-governmental
organizations were approved to work with United Nations agencies by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, and one was removed from the list. The number of national
non-governmental organizations currently authorized to partner directly with the
United Nations is now 85, working through 142 national branches.
Safety and security of staff and premises
43. Deteriorating security and direct attacks on aid workers continued during the
reporting period, most notably on 24 May, when a warehouse run by the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent (SARC) in Douma was attacked while the United Nations team was
present. One SARC driver was injured and several civilians were killed. During the
reporting period a SARC special needs project office was also shelled, killing
1 SARC volunteer.
44. Twenty-nine United Nations staff (27 UNRWA and 2 UNDP) are currently
detained, of which four are missing.
Observations
45. Every month I report to the Council the thousands of people killed, displaced
and traumatized by aerial bombardments, mortar attacks, kidnappings and
executions, many in densely populated areas. Even children traveling for school
exams, perhaps the most poignant display of hope in the midst of this relentless war,
are not exempt from the violent and indiscriminate actions of the parties. Arbitrary
arrests, torture in detention and attacks on hospitals and health -care workers
continue and are part of the everyday fabric of life of many Syrians. But they should
not be. As I have said to this Council before, there are rules that govern the conduct
of war, and these rules are being flagrantly violated every day.
46. I am particularly concerned that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
a signatory to the Charter of the United Nations, continues to indiscriminately drop
hundreds of barrel bombs on defenceless men, women and children in populated
neighbourhoods. I am equally concerned at the relentless and indiscriminate use of
mortar and shelling of residential neighbourhoods by armed opposition groups.
These actions are flagrant violations of international law. The deliberate targeting of
civilians is a war crime.

8/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

47. Efforts to expand humanitarian assistance to those most in need have been met
with continued delays and obstruction. Continued insecurity and the absence of
agreements between parties that could facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance have played their part in this delay, as has the refusal by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic to ease the bureaucratic obstacles imposed on
humanitarian work. Far from improving access, new procedures rolled out two
months ago have resulted in more delays and have reduced the reach of
humanitarian partners further. Revised clearance measures now being proposed by
the Government will only solidify that trend. I remind the parties to this conflict that
their obligation to allow and facilitate access for humanitarian assistance is not
negotiable. It is demanded by the Security Council, by international humanitarian
law and by the most basic commitment to human decency shared by millions of
people across the world. United Nations agencies and their partners must be allowed
rapid and unhindered access to all Syrians in need.
48. It is inhumane and unlawful that medicines and medical supplies continue to
be routinely prevented entry into opposition held areas, in clear violation of
international humanitarian law. There is no possible justification for the official
restrictions being imposed by the Government on surgical equipment and injectable.
Tens of thousands of civilians are being arbitrarily denied urgent and life -saving
medical care. The denial of basic and widely accepted humanitarian co mmodities is
a deliberate tactic of war aimed at denying help and support to those most in need.
49. As stipulated by the Council in resolution 2139 (2014), humanitarian actors
must be allowed to reach those in need by all routes available, both line and border
crossings. As stated in my most recent report (S/2014/365), the United Nations is
ready to put in place speedy, pragmatic and practical arrangements at critical border
crossings to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid in accordance with assessed
and established needs and the obligations under resolution 2139 (2014). Such
arrangements would allow United Nations convoys to cross the border into the
Syrian Arab Republic, in their own vehicles, without the need for specific permits or
visas, to deliver urgently needed relief to people in need.
50. While the parties to this conflict are responsible for upholding their obligations
under international law, the members of the Security Council and other Member
States with influence can and must do more to demand that the violence end, that
sieges are lifted and that vital humanitarian assistance reaches all areas of the
country.
51. In my report of 22 May (S/2014/365), I informed the Council that the demands
of resolution 2139 (2014) were not being heeded, and that the resolution had yet to
make a meaningful difference in the lives of millions of people.
52. I therefore call upon the Council, in the strongest terms, to honour the
humanitarian imperative of saving lives and meeting urgent humanitarian needs,
wherever they occur.

14-55694

9/21

S/2014/427

Annex
1.

Protection of civilians a
Examples of attacks on civilian facilities (schools, hospitals, camps,
places of worship)
Attacks on schools during the reporting period
• On 4 June, one mortar landed on the Faculty of Mechanical and Electrical
Engineering in Damascus. No casualties were reported.
• On 3 June, 3 civilians were killed and 25 allegedly injured as a result of three
mortars landing in Dar‛a city; one mortar landed on the Faculty of Education.
• On 29 May, local media reported that a grenade exploded in Zat al-Nitaqain
School in the Al Nasera neighbourhood in Al Hasakeh city, causing material
damage. No casualties were reported.
• On 29 May, ISIS kidnapped approximately 225 Kurdish students who were
returning to opposition-held Ein al-Arab after completing their academic
preparatory certificate examinations in Government-held areas of Aleppo city.
Reports indicate that 125 female students were released on the same day, while
more than 100 male students are still being held. The students were forced to
undertake risky cross-line travel to sit the examinations, as the Government
did not allow the students to take the examinations in Ein al -Arab.
Large-scale impact of conflict on public services
• The current education enrolment rate in the Syrian Arab Republic ranks as the
second-worst in the world, with more than half of all school-age children
(51.8 per cent) no longer attending school. The out-of-school rate reached
above 90 per cent in Ar Raqqah and Aleppo and 68 per cent in Rif Dimashq.
• The conflict continued to disrupt health-care services, including dire shortages
of essential medicines, supplies and health-care workers, especially those
trained in emergency care. Hospitals and health-care facilities have been
damaged in 12 of the country’s 14 governorates, and they face an array of
obstacles that severely affect their ability to function, including lack of fuel
and electricity. Out of 97 Ministry of Health hospitals:
– 47 per cent are reported as fully functioning; 30 per cent are reported as
partially functioning; and 28 per cent are reported as not functioning at all
– 71 per cent are accessible to people in need; 21 per cent are not accessible;
and the status of accessibility for 7 per cent of hospitals is unknown
– 62 per cent of ambulances have been damaged or destroyed.
• On 8 June, ISIS cut water and electricity to Deir ez -Zor.
• Following an explosion on 2 June, which damaged two main water pipelines,
1 million people were left without regular water supply in Baghdad Station,

__________________
a The United Nations has a distinct and regular mechanism of reporting on the six grave violations

against children in armed conflict that has set verification standards and periodicity of reporting
to identify trends.

10/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

Al Ashrafia, New and Old Al Seriyan and Old Aleppo in Aleppo governorate.
SARC is negotiating with armed opposition groups in the area for its
maintenance teams to gain access. It will take three weeks to repair the
pipelines.
Economic impact of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic b
• Seventy-five per cent of Syrians live in poverty, with more than half of the
population living in extreme poverty. Approximately 20 per cent of people live
in “abject poverty”, unable to meet basic food needs for their daily survival.
Estimates indicate that one third of the population of Idlib and Deir ez -Zor
lives below the “abject poverty” line, as does a quarter of the population of
Aleppo and Dar‛a.
• The economic loss from the conflict is estimated to be $143.6 billion,
equivalent to 276 per cent of the national gross domestic product (GDP) in
2010. The current national GDP is estimated to be only one third of what it
would have been in the absence of the conflict.

2.

Safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need
Hard-to-reach areas
• Latest estimates indicate that the number of people located in “hard -to-reach”
areas has risen from 3.5 million to 4.7 million. c
• Food assistance was provided to 348,799 people during the reporting period
(318,105 by WFP and 20,447 by UNRWA). UNICEF provided nutritional
supplies to 10,247 people.
• UNRWA distributed food assistance to 20,467 people in hard -to-reach areas
during the reporting period (20,000 in Neirab and 467 in Yarmouk).
• Non-food items were provided to 268,960 people (7.7 per cent of 3.5 million)
during the reporting period. From 20 May to 11 June, UNHCR provided
243,180 people with non-food assistance in hard-to-reach areas. The
International Organization for Migration (IOM) provided 5,000 hygiene kits to
12,150 people in hard-to-reach areas, while UNICEF provided non-food items
to 13,630 people in need.
• WHO distributed medicines and supplies for over 398,217 people in need in
hard-to-reach or besieged areas.
• UNICEF reached 37,180 people with water, sanitation and hygiene items and
20,065 children with educational support in hard -to-reach areas.

__________________
b Syria Centre for Policy Research, Syria Squandering Humanity: Socioeconomic Monitoring

Report on Syria, combined third and fourth quarter (July-December 2013), (United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and United Nations
Development Programme, May 2014).
c While latest estimates indicate that the number of people in “hard-to-reach” areas has increased,
monitoring and reporting for the reporting period was completed on the basis of the 3.5 million
figure. United Nations agencies will monitor and report against the 4.7 million figure from the
next reporting period onwards.

14-55694

11/21

S/2014/427

• UNFPA distributed 11,844 female and 6,500 male dignity kits; and IOM
provided 5,000 hygiene kits to 12,150 people in hard-to-reach areas.
Inter-agency convoys
• Three inter-agency convoys took place during the reporting period:
– On 29 May 15 trucks delivered food assistance for nearly 30,000 people,
non-food items for 10,000 people and medicines for 15,000 patients to the
SARC warehouses in Orem al-Kubra in rural Aleppo. Syrian Arab Red
Crescent sub-branches subsequently distributed the supplies in Orem al Kubra, Afrin, Azaz and Tel Rifat.
– On 28 May 20 trucks reached Ar Rastan (opposition-controlled) and
8 reached Akradisneh and Ein el-Nisr (Government areas), providing food
and non-food items to 60,500 people and medical items for 48,270. Some
medical items destined for Ar Rastan, which would have assisted an
additional 2,116 people, were removed.
– On 24 May a joint United Nations/SARC accompanied convoy to Douma
delivered food and non-food items to 2,000 people and medicines to 22,600.
Owing to security and crowd control concerns at the original agreed
distribution point, supplies were offloaded and repackaged at a warehouse
run by SARC inside the city to ensure orderly distribution. During the
offloading of the first truck, two mortars fell in close proximity of the
warehouse. Soon after, the warehouse was hit again, resulting in the death of
several people and the injury of eight people, including one SARC driver
who sustained injuries due to the blast.
• Two inter-agency convoys were requested but did not take place during the
reporting period:
– On 25 May, an inter-agency convoy to Adraa Balad and Adraa Omalieh, Rif
Dimashq, carrying emergency supplies including food, non-food items,
hygiene materials and medicines for 600 families (300 in Adraa Balad and
300 in Adraa Omalieh) did not take place owing to security concerns,
including the attack on the convoy in Douma on 24 May. Although
originally scheduled for 5 April, the mission was postponed until 25 May
owing to the delay in obtaining authorization of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs;
– Rural west Hama: no feedback was received from the Governor of Hama on
the request submitted by the United Nations hub in Homs on 22 April and
the reminder letter sent on 15 May to conduct a mission to rural west Hama.
The United Nations hub in Homs conducted a mission to Hama on 28 May
to follow up with the governor.
Besieged areas
• 241,000 people remain besieged in total.
• During the reporting period, food assistance was delivered to 2,467 people, or
1 per cent of people in besieged areas, and non-food items to 17,204, or 7 per
cent of people in besieged areas.

12/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

• UNICEF provided nutritional assistance to 3,600 beneficiaries in Douma, and
WHO delivered medicines for 22,600 people in Douma.
• UNRWA delivered 350 food parcels and hygiene kits for 15,204 people to
Yarmouk. Authorities continued to refuse to authorize UNRWA to dispatch and
distribute medical supplies, with the exception of small amounts of rehydration
salts, mineral supplements, vitamins and polio vaccines.
Cross-border assistance
From Turkey
• According to the Turkish Red Crescent Society, humanitarian actors have
channelled about $23 million worth of humanitarian assistance on average
monthly from Turkey to the Syrian Arab Republic through the zero -point
delivery system administered by the Turkish Red Crescent Society. This
monthly average does not include assistance delivered through commercial or
other channels.
From Jordan
• The Al Naseeb border crossing between Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic
remained open for the transportation of relief items during the reporting
period, although insecurity continued to prevent direct cross -line deliveries of
relief items from As Sweida to Dar‛a governorate.
• During the reporting period, UNHCR submitted 38 official requests for
importation of core relief items, with 37 approved and 1 pending. In 2014,
approved requests have resulted in 461 UNHCR trucks entering the Syrian
Arab Republic from Jordan.
• UNICEF imported sodium hydrochloride and kits for newborn babies through
29 trucks entering from Jordan.
From Lebanon
• The Masna and Al Arida border crossings between Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic remained open for the transportation of relief items during the
reporting period.
• UNHCR submitted 17 requests to transport core relief items, medicine and
telecommunications and security equipment across the Lebanese border, with
13 approved. Four requests, related to telecommunications and security
equipment, remain outstanding.
• UNICEF imported various shipments through Lebanon, including polio
vaccines, cold chains and medical supplies.
• It is estimated that other humanitarian actors transport relatively small
amounts of assistance from Lebanon to the Syrian Arab Republic through other
channels. Items coming from Lebanon tend to be less voluminou s (medicines,
information technology equipment and security equipment) and often do not
require individual trucks, and enter the country by courier service.

14-55694

13/21

S/2014/427

From Iraq
• The United Nations has requested the use of the Al Yaroubiyeh crossing
between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic for the importation of relief items.
Initial approval to transport items through the crossing was received in
November 2013; however, the approval remains conditional on the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic regaining control of the crossing
from PYD.
Safety of humanitarian workers
• On 12 June, five mortars impacted near the UNRWA Aleppo area office. There
were no reports of staff injured or property damaged.
• On 6 June, SARC reported the death of a SARC volunteer after the shelling of
a project office in Ar Rastan.
• On 4 June, one national staff member reported minor property damage
following mortar incidents in Abou Roumaneh in Damascus city.
• On 3 June, several mortar incidents around Damascus city led to minor
property damage to two national staff houses in Al Maliky and in Pakistan
Street.
• On 27 May, a fact-finding mission-Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons/United Nations Department of Safety and Security convoy
was hit by an improvised explosive device on the road to Kfar Zita near Taybet
el-Imam town in Hama governorate. The driver of the vehicle received minor
injuries. A second vehicle was impacted by small arms fire with minor
damage.
• On 25 May, a few stray bullets landed in the vicinity of the UNHCR office in
Kfar Souseh, with some bullets hitting the inside of the building. No injuries
were reported.
• On 24 May, a warehouse run by SARC in Douma was targeted while the
United Nations team was present in Douma town, killing seve ral, and injuring
a SARC driver.
• On 22 May, one UNRWA staff member received minor injuries following
shelling on Khan Dannoun.
• 28 United Nations national staff members continue to be detained or missing
(27 from UNRWA are detained or missing and one from UNDP is detained).
• Syrian humanitarian workers continued to face a number of risks, including
summary executions, kidnappings, arrests, violence and harassment. In
addition to the one SARC volunteer having been killed during the reporting
period, SARC also confirmed the death of two volunteers from incidents that
occurred in April. The total number of humanitarian workers killed since
March 2011 is 59. This includes 14 United Nations staff members, 37 SARC
staff members and volunteers, 7 Palestine Red Crescent Society volunteers and
staff members and 1 international NGO staff member.

14/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

Declaration of Commitment on Compliance with International Humanitarian
Law and the Facilitation of Humanitarian Assistance
• A total of eight armed opposition groups have signed the Declaration of
Commitment, affirming their core responsibilities under international
humanitarian law and of their commitment to facilitate action to meet the
needs of civilians on the basis of need alone. Of the eight signatories, six
groups signed during the reporting period:
– Mujahadeen Army: signed 7 June
– Idlib Military Council: signed 5 June
– 101st Infantry Division: signed 5 June
– Fursan al-Haqq (Idlib): signed 5 June
– Hizm Movement: signed 27 May
– Jabhat al-Asali wa al-Tanmiya: signed 21 May
– Syria Revolutionaries Front: signed 14 April
– PYD: signed 23 April

3.

Safe passage of medical personnel and supplies
Attacks on medical facilities during the reporting period
• On 7 June, Bab al-Hawa hospital in Harim, Idlib, was targeted by two rockets.
No casualties or damage were reported.
• On 4 June, one mortar landed near Badie Amouda Hospital in the Abu
Roumaneh neighbourhood in Damascus. No casualties or damage were
reported.
Removal of medicines and medical supplies from convoys
• During the reporting period, medicines and medical equipment for
approximately 57,000 people in hard-to-reach areas was removed from WHO
convoys owing to lack of approval, removal, or diversion of supplies. This
included:
– Surgical items for 27,346 beneficiaries and critical medicines for another
27,435 to Douma on 24 May.
– Medicines for 2,116 people in Ar Rastan, Homs. Many of the same
medicines were permitted to the Government-controlled areas Akradisneh
and Ein el-Nisr on the same day.
Polio vaccination campaign
• As at 9 June 2014, there were 36 confirmed cases of polio.
• Final results for the sixth country-wide polio vaccination campaign (4-8 May)
indicated that over 2.8 million children under five were re ached in all
14 governorates. The lowest reported coverage, in Rif Dimashq (86.4 per cent)
and Deir ez-Zor (75.4 per cent), was due to the deteriorating security situations

14-55694

15/21

S/2014/427

in those governorates. The overall coverage was 97.4 per cent. The next polio
round, which commenced on 15 June and will last until 19 June, targets
2.9 million children, with the results expected during the next reporting period.
Measles vaccination campaign
• During the reporting period, the Ministry of Health confirmed a measle s
outbreak in the Syrian Arab Republic, with 160 cases in eight governorates:
Deir ez-Zor, Ar Raqqah, Ladhiqiyah, Homs, Idlib, Aleppo, Hama and
Al Hasakeh. In total, over 2,000 suspected cases of measles have been reported
in the first half of 2014, double the number of reported cases for the whole of
2013.
• A measles vaccination campaign led by the Ministry of Health will run from
15 to 26 June, which is aimed at reaching between 700,000 and 1 million
children aged between 6 months and 10 years. The me asles campaign aims to
reach high-risk districts in Aleppo, Idlib, Ar Raqqah, Deir ez-Zor, Al-Hasakeh,
Rif Dimashq, Homs, and Ladhiqiyah. UNICEF imported over 1.3 million
doses of the measles vaccine on 29 May and delivered 6.5 million doses of
vitamin A to the Ministry of Health to be used during the campaign.

4.

Administrative hurdles
Clearance procedures for convoys
• On 27 April, the Government communicated a new procedure for
unaccompanied truck clearance, whereby trucks are “sealed” at wareho uses
and not searched at checkpoints. The new measure improved the security of
the cargo, but a lack of clarity by security forces resulted in significant delays
throughout May and June.
• On 22 May, Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued new instructions th at each
organization needs to submit a further facilitation letter for each truck to the
governor in the governorate where the warehouses are located.
• On 29 May, a new procedure for the importation of goods was issued. The new
procedure includes the introduction of a facilitation letter, as for the sealing
procedure for trucks, as well as approval from the local governor and weekly
importation/loading plans.
• On 9 June, the Ministry of Social Affairs communicated to governors that all
convoys or missions to “hot spot areas” (that is, cross-line locations) now
require the approval of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the High Relief
Committee and the National Security Office. Previously, the governors were
delegated to authorize and coordinate delivery of assistance within their
governorates, including across conflict lines, in areas where hubs are
approved. In addition, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has indicated its intent
to require the United Nations to provide comprehensive monthly
implementation plans for discussion.

16/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

Clearance procedures for telecommunications equipment
• Although Government approvals to import and operate information and
communications technology equipment remain a lengthy process, UNHCR has
obtained approval of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for all requested items,
including VHF radios, VSAT for Qamishli and some information technology
equipment. The only exception is for Thuraya handheld satellite phones.
UNHCR has submitted the required supporting documentation to obtai n
licenses for the Thuraya phones, including the list of staff that will be using
them; however, final approval has yet to be received.
Empowered interlocutors
• Government of the Syrian Arab Republic: The joint United Nations and
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic working group established following
the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) includes a security focal point. Regular
meetings are taking place between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the
Humanitarian Coordinator on an almost daily basis.
• The opposition is still unable to designate empowered interlocutors. The
fragmented nature of the opposition makes it difficult to have a clear identified
interlocutor for armed opposition groups. Ad hoc local engagement is ongoing
to negotiate access. Interlocutors vary depending on the localities where access
is being negotiated.
Visas
• The revised visa policy established by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic on 4 March continued to be implemented. As at 11 June, a total of 82
United Nations visas or renewal requests remained pending, 40 within the 15
working day limit and 42 exceeding the 15 working days. There has been no
progress in obtaining visas for international NGO staff, with 13 visa requests
still pending.
Humanitarian hubs and presence
• UNHCR opened an office at the Qamishli hub.
• The Aleppo hub is still operating and is currently staffed with international and
national staff.
• The Government has approved As Sweida as a hub; however, approval is still
pending for the request to establish a hub in Dar‘a.
• UNICEF established a warehouse in Ladhiqiyah governorate during the last
week of May. The strategic location of the warehouse will ease the dispatch of
supplies to governorates covered under the Tartous, Homs and Aleppo hubs.
International NGO partners
• No new international NGOs requested approval to work in the Syrian Arab
Republic during the reporting period.
• The number of international NGOs approved to work in the Syrian Arab
Republic stands at 16.

14-55694

17/21

S/2014/427

• International NGOs are still not authorized to work directly with national
NGOs and are not allowed to accompany United Nations convoys to the field.
• There was no progress during the reporting period on the revision of the
standard memorandum of understanding for international NGOs with SARC
and line ministries.
National NGO partners
• The overall number of national NGOs authorized to partner directly with
United Nations agencies increased to 85, operating through 142 national
branches.
• During the reporting period, two new national NGOs were approved by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs to partner with United Nations organizations: one
in Damascus governorate and one in Homs governorate.
• One national NGO in Tartous was excluded from relief work with United
Nations agencies and international organizations during the reporting period.

5.

Funding
• $381.1 million of funding for the Syrian crisis was registered during the
reporting period. Of that amount, $208.6 million was for activities inside the
Syrian Arab Republic and $172.5 million was for support to Syrian refugees in
neighbouring countries.
• Of the total amount reported for the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting
period, 20 per cent ($42.4 million) was for activities included in the Syria
Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan. For neighbouring countries, 94 per
cent ($162.2 million) of the amount reported was for activities included in the
Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan.
• As at 17 June, the total funding for the Syria Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan and the Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan stood at 29 per
cent ($6.5 billion requested, $1.9 billion received) with the Syria Humanitarian
Assistance Response Plan 26 per cent funded and the Syria Regional Refugee
Response Plan 31 per cent funded.

6.

Overview of United Nations humanitarian response
Food assistance
• In the May 2014 dispatch cycle, WFP dispatched food in support of nearly
3.3 million people across all 14 governorates of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Inter-agency convoys to rural parts of Homs (Ar Rastan and Akradisneh),
Douma in Rif Dimashq and Aleppo facilitated the delivery of food rations in
support of 88,750 people. However, the total food dispatch for May
represented a 14 per cent decrease compared to the April cycle when food was
dispatched in support of over 3.8 million beneficiaries. Food dispatches
experienced significant delays in May owing to continued insecurity and the
new Government convoy procedures. For example, in Ar Raqqah and Deir ez Zor, only 30 and 8 per cent of the dispatch plan was achieved, respectively, in

18/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

May, owing to continued insecurity. However, for Ar Raqqah, this was an
improvement in access compared to April, when none of the planned
assistance reached the governorate.
• In June, with implementation of the new transport facilitation system still
under development, food dispatches continued at a slower pace. By 15 June,
only 25 per cent of the WFP food dispatch plan was achieved, representing a
10 per cent decline from the same period in April.
Core relief items and shelter
• UNHCR has distributed over 8.1 million core relief items to over 2.2 million
beneficiaries in 13 out of the 14 governorates since the beginning of 2014.
• UNHCR upgraded private shelters for 20,983 beneficiaries in Homs, Rif
Dimashq and Aleppo governorates. In addition, UNHCR completed the shelter
rehabilitation of collective shelters in six governorates, benefitting 7,780
people.
Health
• WHO delivered antibiotics and medical equipment, including six water
purification units, for over 286,817 people in the hard -to-reach area of Deir ezZor.
• WHO, in support of Syrian Arab Red Crescent and local health authorities,
delivered medical supplies for 138,145 people in Aleppo and medical supplies
and medicines to over 22,600 people in the besieged areas of Douma.
• WHO distributed intravenous fluids for 76,401 beneficiaries in health facilities
in Aleppo, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, As Sweida and Tartous governorates;
and medicines and supplies for 48,270 people in Ar Rastan, Akradisneh and
Ein el-Nisr in Homs.
• UNFPA supported 28 mobile clinics, 27 static clinics and 13 medical points
operated by partners in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor,
Ar Raqqah and Hama governorates to provide life-saving reproductive health
services to 71,032 women and men.
Nutrition
• UNICEF provided High Energy Biscuits and plumpy doze for treatment of
moderate malnutrition for 3,000 children in Ar Rastan, Homs, and 3,600
children in Douma.
• A rapid nutrition survey of conflict-affected children was completed in all
14 governorates except Ar Raqqah and Al Hasakeh. The Ministry of Health has
received the survey data from most locations, including hard-to-reach areas,
such as Kiswah and Qusaya in Rif Dimashq and Sulaymaniyah in Aleppo.
Preliminary results are expected in the next reporting period.
Water, sanitation and hygiene

14-55694

19/21

S/2014/427

• UNICEF interventions enabled access to clean water to some 16.5 million
people in all 14 governorates through the provision of chlorine, with 43 per
cent (6.6 million people) of them in non-government-controlled areas.
• UNICEF reached 20,680 people with water, sanitation and hygiene support in
Al Hasakeh and 16,500 in Idlib governorates, including hard-to-reach areas.
• The United Nations Population Fund distributed 11,884 female and 6,500 male
dignity kits to affected people.
Education
• UNICEF, along with the Directorate of Education, distributed 11,905 school
bags to Al Hasakeh city and 8,071 to Qamishli, both hard -to-reach areas,
assisting 19,976 children.
• In Al Waer, three prefabricated classrooms were delivered to one school in the
area. To date, 15 prefabricated classrooms have been installe d in Al Waer
schools, providing a protected learning environment to 1,200 children.
• During the reporting period, UNICEF, through its partner Action Against
Hunger, completed light rehabilitation and hygiene awareness activities for
14 schools in Al Hasakeh city, benefitting 11,833 children.
Palestine refugees
• UNRWA provided food to 19,500 people, cash assistance to 58,551 people,
77,357 health consultations and 422 microfinance loans.
• UNRWA participated in the WHO-led campaign to vaccinate or revaccinate all
children against polio in the Syrian Arab Republic, which covered 65 per cent
of at-risk Palestine refugees. Vaccination rates among Palestine refugees for
polio were already high (99 per cent coverage).
Agriculture
• The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) provided
agricultural support to 18,081 beneficiaries (2,583 households); 14,399
beneficiaries (2,057 households) in Rif Dimashq, Idlib and Hama governorates
received animal feed and 3,682 beneficiaries (56 2 households) in Rif Dimashq
governorate received poultry packages.
• FAO and SARC finalized arrangements for the transportation and distribution
of seeds to Ar Raqqah governorate for storage and planting during the
upcoming planting season.

20/21

14-55694

S/2014/427

Protection and community services
• UNHCR continued to extend community and protection services support
through field staff in 7 key locations, 11 community centres, partnerships with
international and local NGOs and more than 200 community outreach
volunteers. On 21 May, the Governor of Homs granted UNHCR access to Al
Andalus Processing Facility for the first time since April. The facility currently
accommodates 350 individuals, the majority of whom were evacuated from the
Old City of Homs.
• UNHCR recently launched a legal aid programme for internally displaced
persons in Tartous in cooperation with the Syrian Society for Social
Development and the Danish Refugee Council.
• UNICEF reached 12,385 children with essential psychosocial support services
provided through partners in Hama, Quneitra, Aleppo, Tartous, Homs,
Ladhiqiyah and Damascus governorates. This included support to 1,437
children in Al Waer, a hard-to-reach area in Homs governorate, through a new
local partner NGO.
• UNHCR provides assistance to the approximately 35,000 registered refugees
in the Syrian Arab Republic, the majority from Iraq.

14-55694

21/21
