S/PV.7208

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7208th meeting

Wednesday, 25 June 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Pankin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Antueno
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Kazragienė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2014/420)

14-44089 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1444089*

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

events since then, which have prevented me from being
pysically present in New York at the Security Council
today.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2014/420)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Canada, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Pakistan, Spain and Turkey to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kubiš,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Kabul.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/420, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: The report of the Secretary-General of
18 June (S/2014/420) provides a comprehensive account
of the events and trends of the recent quarter. It was
finalized prior to the second round of polling on 14 June.
I shall therefore provide an update on election-related

2/38

25/06/2014

The Council is meeting amid challenges that
are testing Afghanistan’s electoral, institutional
and legal frameworks, together with the maturity
of its political leaders. How the two presidential
candidates, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf
Ghani Ahmadzai, and the country’s leadership manage
those events and the current impasse will be vital to
Afghanistan’s unity and stability.
What keeps us hopeful in such challenging times
is the very strong and encouraging statements of the
Afghan people on the polling days of 5 April and
14 June. With pride and determination they turned out
in support of a democratic political transition and an
end to cycles of ruinous violence. The presidential and
provincial council elections of 2014 are Afghan-held,
Afghan-managed, Afghan-led and Afghan-secured.
The electoral institutions are still maturing but the
preparations for and conduct of the electoral cycle
have been recognized by domestic and international
observers as an improvement compared with the past.
That is certainly not to suggest that there were not
instances of fraud and irregularity.
At this time of the election impasse, the determination
and sacrifice of the candidates, campaign workers,
electoral personnel, security officials and voters must
be at the forefront of the minds of Afghanistan’s
leaders. Millions of people came out to support each
of the two candidates. Their votes and those wishes
must be respected and protected. That the outcome of
such an extraordinary effort is currently at an impasse
makes it all the more disappointing and dangerous.
It is the responsibility of the Afghan independent
electoral management bodies and Afghan stakeholders,
including, first and foremost, the candidates, to ensure
the timely and orderly completion of the election
process from which a legitimate leader emerges.
Soon after the second round of polling, citing
institutional bias and substantial fraud, Mr. Abdullah
chose to disengage from the electoral process.
Accusations have centred around the high levels of
turnout in some areas of the country, which Mr. Ghani’s
camp, in turn, put down to his team’s mobilization
efforts. The recent resignation of the Independent
Election Commission’s chief electoral officer was hoped
to provide an opportunity for the resumption of the

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

process and, in particular, lead to discussions between
the campaign teams and institutions on strengthening
technical checks and balances where voting patterns are
claimed to be unusual in increasing confidence in the
credibility of the electoral process and the acceptability
of its outcome.
The presidential candidates need to immediately
engage with one another and the mandated electoral
institutions in actively defining solutions to help the
process move forward with improved quality and
credibility. There is no political transition besides the
elections to decide the country’s legitimate leadership,
accepted by the majority, and to protect its Constitution
and the gains since the fall of the Taliban. Under the
Council’s mandate, the United Nations and I, myself,
as Special Representative can and do provide good
offices at the request of the Afghan authorities. We
have received such requests recently.
I remain very clear, however, about the parameters
of United Nations engagement. They are Afghan
elections. We can facilitate Afghan parties reaching
solutions. We can provide technical expertise to advise
on the possibilies and modalities of strengthened
checks and balances where there are questions about the
process. What we cannot do is to prepare solutions and
decide on behalf of the Afghans. That is the exclusive
responsibility of Afghans. The United Nations efforts
assist Afghan institutions and stakeholders. We cannot
substitute for them or replace them.
Given the rising tensions following the second
round, including increasing ethnic overtones, the utmost
maturity and statesmanship are required, in particular
by the two presidential candidates. Otherwise, the
risk is a confrontation of the two condidates and their
supporters, in which the losing side will reject the
results and contest their legitimacy. That could lead to a
protracted confrontation with the danger of a slide into
violence. Afghanistan can ill afford the unpredictable
impact on security, stability, the economy and the wider
region. The candidates urgently need to cooperate
with one another to prevent such scenarios, which,
unfortunately, cannot be excluded for now.
In such times of tension, missteps, miscommunication,
misunderstandings and the actions of a few radical
people can have broader consequences. I appeal
for calm among the supporters of both candidates
amid sharpening, hateful rhetoric of an increasingly
inflammatory tone that risks creating ethnic divisions.

S/PV.7208

Most disturbingly, this includes rhetoric invoking
memories of the fratricidal factional conflicts of the
1990s. All necessary steps need to be taken by the
two leaders to avoid creating a slippery slope to civil
disorder and instability.
The country’s political class, and notably the
two candidates Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Ghani, have a
paramount responsibility to manage this situation.
The wishes of the people for a timely conclusion of the
leadership transition, in accordance with the country’s
laws, need to be respected. They must decisively and
actively engage in finding solutions to end the current
impasse and contribute to Afghanistan’s forward
momentum at this critical time. As with elections
anywhere in the world, there can ultimately be only
one winner. The need now is for statesmanship, not
brinksmanship.
In challenging times, the predictability of
international support is all the more critical. The
upcoming sequence of high-level meetings is
specifically seen as an opportunity to highlight and
renew commitments with a new administration,
including regional cooperation at the Heart of Asia/
Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference hosted by
the People’s Republic of China, ongoing international
security assistance at the NATO Summit in Wales,
and development priorities at the London Conference
on Afghanistan. This will all depend on Afghanistan’s
political leaders and institutions breaking the electoral
impasse and the completion of political transition in an
orderly and timely manner.
Altogether, this reporting quarter has been both
promising and challenging for Afghanistan. On the
bright side is the people’s participation and engagement
in the election process. That was, however, dominated
by economic downturn linked to a lack of confidence
due to the current uncertainties; the activities of
the insurgency and spoilers, including those linked
to international terrorism and narcotics networks;
the protracted electoral impasse; and deaths and
displacement due to natural hazards and conflict. Just
last week, an attempt was made on the life of the head of
the High Peace Council secretariat, Masoom Stanekzai,
an individual who has worked tirelessly for peace. Still
the people of Afghanistan look towards a better future,
and expect their leaders to work for it.
Finally, I would note that Afghanistan, together
with the whole Umma, is preparing to observe the holy

14-440893/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

month of Ramadan. I sincerely hope that the occasion
of the holy month of Ramadan, observed in a spirit of
compassion, can in its own way through contemplation
and prayers, help pave the way for a peaceful and
prosperous future for a stable and united Afghanistan.
To my respected colleague Ambassador Tanin, members
of the Security Council and all peace-loving people,
I address the traditional congratulations, Ramadan
Mubarak.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I welcome today’s initiative of the
Security Council to discuss Afghanistan, and I am
pleased to be here to provide a briefing together with
my dear colleague Ján Kubiš to the assessment of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
of the current situation.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kubiš was very clear about the risks and challenges
facing the current election process in Afghanistan. The
2014 political and military transition is likely to create
considerable political and security uncertainty, which
must be addressed. At this crucial moment, Afghanistan
needs continued international support. If its economic
development declines and international aid is reduced,
along with business confidence, the reliance on the
illicit economy will further increase.
Over the past decade, drug cultivation and
production have been the most profitable illicit
and criminal business activities in Afghanistan. At
UNODC, we estimate that the global opium market is
worth some $68 billion, and 80 per cent of the world’s
opium and heroin is produced in Afghanistan. The
narcotics trade may be worth between 10 to 15 per cent
of the country’s gross domestic product. In 2013, the
area under poppy cultivation reached an historical high
of 209,000 hectares. Opium production increased by
50 per cent, compared to 2012, rising to 5,500 tons.
Afghanistan remains at the centre of a multi-billion
dollar illicit business that impacts on security, the
rule of law, health and sustainable development. This
is being driven not only by global consumption, but
also by domestic speculation and corruption. The link
between the lack of security and opium cultivation
is also evident. 90 per cent of total opium poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan takes place in the southern
and western provinces — the most insecure areas,
4/38

25/06/2014

where anti-Government elements and drug traders
are extremely active. Money-laundering is hindering
proper tax collection and creating an underresourced
Government bereft of the financial means to confront
illicit drugs. This is true on both the supply side and the
demand side; the country has the highest rate of opium
addiction in the world.
Unfortunately, these problems have not been
concretely reflected in the Kabul and Tokyo processes.
As a result, counter-narcotics efforts have not been
given a high priority by national and international
stakeholders. However, it would be unfair to say that
nothing has been done to confront this challenge. Here
are just a few facts and figures on the most recent
developments.
Notwithstanding the election period and security
concerns, the Counter-Narcotics Police of Afghanistan
have continued with the eradication of opium crop in
12 provinces although the figure of 1,600 hectares
eradicated from the beginning of the season to 2 June is
down form previous years. In the period from January
to December 2013, the Afghan Counter-Narcotics
Police undertook 440 operations resulting in 383
arrests, dismantled two heroin laboratories, and seized
2.8 tons of opiates and 13.8 tons of precursor chemicals.
UNODC’s role is to provide support and assistance
to the relevant Afghan counter-narcotic authorities and
to help them to do more. We are also building effective
international cooperation and partnerships through such
networks as the Regional Programme for Afghanistan
and Neighbouring Countries; the Triangular Initiative,
which brings together Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan;
and the Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan (AKT)
Initiative, while working closely with many regional
organizations.
Ministerial review meetings have been held
recently between the members of the AKT group
and the Triangular Initiative, as well as the Steering
Committee of the Regional Programme, to further
strengthen cooperation in countering illicit drugs and
in border management among countries of West and
Central Asia. The Triangular Initiative, in particular,
has already produced concrete results in terms of
several tons of drugs seized; even more importantly, it
has made it possible for those three countries to engage
in constructive cooperation at the operational level.
UNODC is continuing to support law enforcement
operations in the region through new initiatives, such

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

as the Criminal Assets Southern Hub, the Southern
Trafficking Operational Plan and the Maritime
Regional Security Initiative. Furthermore, UNODC is
promoting drug control cooperation at the interregional
level to assist countries in countering transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking rings involved in
the Afghan opiates trade.
In that context, we are supporting the linkages
between counter-narcotics intelligence-sharing centres
such as the Joint Planning Cell, under the Triangular
Initiative, and other regional centres, including the
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination
Centre, the Gulf Criminal Information Center to Combat
Drugs, the Southeast European Law Enforcement
Centre and many others. To cement that process, last
year UNODC launched its “networking the networks”
initiative, which brings together regional centres to
enhance criminal intelligence and to collaborate in
operations along the main trafficking routes used for
shipping drugs and precursors to and from Afghanistan.
Despite the work of the international community,
much more needs to be done. Afghanistan needs
a meaningful action plan that takes a long term
development, peace and security approach — one that
is coupled with an effective drug control effort that is
able to balance its different components of supply and
demand reduction and alternative development and that
mainstreams action against drug lords and criminality
into work promoting sustainable economic and social
development. A more comprehensive approach is
needed in three key areas.
First, there is a need to reduce the vulnerability of
citizens to the illicit economy through improvements to
the quality of their lives, including in the areas of health
care, education and job creation. Of course, alternative
development is an essential tool in those efforts that
can help farmers to permanently move away from illicit
crop farming. But that will succeed only if we also
provide licit markets for substitution crops and improve
upon existing infrastructure.
Secondly, we must remove the opportunities for
criminals by focusing on good governance, the rule
of law and anti-money laundering and anti-corruption
activities. Those issues are a fundamental element
of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
Nevertheless, there is still a great need to turn the
text of the framework into concrete action so that we
can eliminate corruption in Afghan society and its

S/PV.7208

institutions and sever the flow of money from this
crime.
Thirdly, we have to generate the political will
that can introduce a long-term engagement that binds
together the United Nations family as well as the
relevant international and national stakeholders. The
2016 special session of the General Assembly could
also help at the international level by reviewing the
achievements and challenges in countering the world
drug problem, including in Afghanistan.
Allow me assure the Security Council that UNODC
will continue to support Afghanistan in fighting
drugs and crime and will further promote regional
and interregional cooperation in an integrated and
comprehensive response to illicit drugs.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for briefing the council via
video teleconference and for his leadership of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
especially at this very important juncture in my
country’s history. I thank him in particular for his
continued commitment to Afghanistan throughout its
transition. I also welcome the presence here today of
Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office of Drugs and Crime. I am grateful to Australia,
in particular to Ambassador Quinlan, for its continued
leadership on Afghanistan in the Council. I would also
like to take this opportunity to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report (S/2014/420) on the situation in
Afghanistan.
This is a pivotal moment for Afghanistan. We are
at the last stage of our country’s historic presidential
elections. The democratic transition is the cornerstone
of the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned progression to
peace, stability and prosperity.
The Presidential elections on 5 April and on 14 June
generated an unprecedented surge of democratic spirit
in Afghanistan. After decades of conflict, it is
remarkable to witness my country emerging as a
vibrant young democracy characterized by widespread
engagement in the political process. That has been
demonstrated by rallies attended by thousands, debates

14-440895/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

that were broadcast and viewed throughout the country,
media coverage and information exchange via phones,
computers and television screens, and candidates’
public outreach, not only in the capital but, significantly,
country-wide.
In an exceptional show of faith in democracy,
Afghans cast their ballots despite intimidation by the
Taliban and other extremist and terrorist groups so that
they could have a say in the country’s political destiny.
They dipped their fingers in ink, boldly asserting their
right to choose a leader in defiance of threats to their
lives and safety. In doing so they voted not only for a
candidate but also for peace, for the advancement of the
gains made in the past 12 years and for a better future.
They did so by the millions, in numbers that
exceeded expectations in both the first and second
rounds. All segments of the population participated,
including women and all ethnic groups, in all provinces
of the country, in the cities and in the rural areas and in
the south, north, east and west.
Dozens of national institutions and thousands of
citizens played a role in ensuring the administration,
integrity and legitimacy of the first entirely Afghanmanaged electoral process. Thousands of independent
domestic and international observers and candidate
monitors covered the polling stations and continue to
oversee the entire electoral cycle.
We are grateful to the international community
for standing with the Afghan people and for providing
technical, financial and logistical resources to enable
Afghan institutions to successfully hold elections. We
appreciate the support of the United Nations, including
the United Nations Development Programme, to
national electoral institutions in their management of a
peaceful democratic transition.
We note with pride the professionalism and
competence exhibited by Afghan security institutions
during the elections period. Their dedication allowed
elections to take place despite serious security threats.
Moreover, careful planning including through the
training of hundreds of female police and more than
2,000 civilians and the recruitment of more than 13,000
female searchers, allowed for the active participation of
diverse segments of the population on polling day.
We were deeply saddened by the tragic loss and
injury of civilians, election personnel, observers and
Afghan security forces who put their lives at risk to
protect the future of the country. We deplore the attacks
6/38

25/06/2014

against the infrastructure of election institutions,
including the central office of the Independent Election
Commission in Kabul and even attacks on candidates
and their supporters. However, the Afghan people’s
near-blanket defiance of extremist threats sends a strong
message that the Taliban no longer have the ability
to destabilize the country. Despite the tragic losses
suffered during the elections, peace and democracy
have clearly triumphed in Afghanistan.
We note the steps that have been taken by the
Independent Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission to detect fraudulent
votes and manage complaints in the first round,
including through the blacklisting of electoral workers
liable for infractions. Attempting to avoid potential
crisis and protect the legitimacy of our historic
elections, the election bodies are again managing
issues raised with regard to the electoral process in the
second round. Their efforts aim to ensure the integrity
and transparency of the electoral process and uphold
constitutional and electoral law.
We appreciate the readiness of the United Nations
to stand up for the interests of the Afghan people by
supporting the integrity of the Afghan-led, Afghanmanaged electoral process, which will lead to the
establishment of a new Government that legitimately
reflects the will of the Afghan people. We see United
Nations support of the Afghan process as a positive step
towards addressing the political concerns of the second
round.
As Afghanistan makes the transition for the first
time from one democratically elected president to the
next, we continue to focus on the steps necessary for
the country to move decisively towards full ownership
and leadership in the transformation decade. Afghan
security institutions are assuming full responsibility
throughout the country as combat operations by the
international forces near their conclusion. The future
elected President of Afghanistan will continue to make
a constructive relationship with our international
partners a priority, starting by signing a bilateral
security agreement with the United States and followed
by the finalization of the agreement on NATO’s training,
advising and assistance role in post-2014 Afghanistan.
In that regard, we look forward to the upcoming NATO
summit in Cardiff on 4 September.
The country’s progress towards sustainability
and self-sufficiency depends upon the ability of
Afghan institutions to perform key governance and
14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

service-delivery functions and promote economic
development. That will require the continued support
and assistance of the international community, as set
out in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework
adopted in Tokyo in 2012. We welcome the next
ministerial meeting under the Framework, to be held
in London in November 2014, as a forum for renewing
and reinvigorating the mutual commitments necessary
for Afghanistan’s long-term prosperity.
As Afghanistan moves towards a new beginning,
the interlinked challenges of achieving security, peace,
good governance and development will continue to
loom large. We were reminded of long-term challenges
to development last month by the devastating floods
in Badakhshan province. In addition, we recognize
that illegal drugs and narcotics continue to undercut
our legitimate development path. For that reason, we
will continue to implement our National Drug Control
Strategy and call on our regional and international
partners to focus on solutions that reduce demand and
combat regional and global illicit networks.
Understanding that terrorism and extremism
continue to be the greatest impediment to development
in Afghanistan and the region, we will continue to focus
on peace and reconciliation efforts with the Taliban
and on other measures, including the Anti-Money
Laundering law recently passed by the upper house of
the Afghan National Parliament. The active role of all
citizens — women, men and children — will be vital
for overcoming our shared challenges in that regard.
Regional engagement will continue to be critical to
the peace, stability and success of the transformation
decade. We believe that it is important to build upon the
achievements of the last decade to solidify and expand
a workable framework of bilateral and multilateral
mechanisms with our neighbours and the wider region
and to strengthen relations with the Islamic world.
To that end, we look forward to the upcoming Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference to be held in Tianjin,
China, on 29 August.
As Afghanistan expands its multifaceted
cooperation with our regional partners, we expect
our neighbours to continue to work towards regional
stability. The recent operation of Pakistani forces in
North Waziristan, which led to the displacement of
thousands of families to Afghanistan’s Khost province
and the associated loss of life, is a serious source of
concern for the Government of Afghanistan. We urge
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan to give high priority

S/PV.7208

to the greater security of Afghanistan and the region at
this crucial time.
The Afghan Government is committed to a
swift and successful conclusion of the electoral
process. Preparations are well under way for the
first ever democratic and peaceful transfer of
power in Afghanistan. All Government institutions
have commenced their transition planning, and an
interministerial committee has been assigned to prepare
for the official inauguration of our incoming president.
We look forward to welcoming the dignitaries of all our
international and regional partners to that occasion.
When we do so, we will remember that Afghanistan
and our international partners have made tremendous
sacrifices to ensure that war remains a relic of the past.
It is essential that the country not return to the days
when bullets rather than ballots decided the country’s
political fate. In post-Taliban Afghanistan, no tenet has
been more cherished than the idea that stability and
legitimacy are a profound necessity. That principle has
motivated considerable investment in terms of dollars
spent and lives lost, and its curtailment would carry
damaging consequences for the country and its people.
It is our fundamental responsibility to ensure that
peace and democracy are secure in Afghanistan today,
tomorrow and throughout the transformation decade.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now give
the floor to members of the Security Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing and commend
him and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for critical support for
Afghanistan’s presidential election. I also thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his
briefing, and Ambassador Tanin, as always, for his able
engagement in the Council’s work on Afghanistan.
The conclusion of voting in the Afghan presidential
elections was a vital stage in Afghanistan’s transition.
The Afghan people themselves defied attempts by
armed insurgent groups to disrupt the process and have
spoken decisively in favour of democracy. We applaud
their courage and their commitment to a peaceful
Afghanistan. The strong participation of women
reflects the progress Afghanistan has made over the last
10 years. Afghanistan’s future will depend on the full
and decisive role women have in its political, economic
and civic evolution.

14-440897/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

Today, the Security Council will adopt a presidential
statement on Afghanistan’s elections. That will send
a strong message of the international community’s
support for Afghanistan’s electoral process and will
recognize the importance of those historic elections for
Afghanistan’s transition and democratic development.
We recognize the outstanding work of UNAMA in
assisting Afghan institutions in their management of the
process. The partnership between the United Nations
and the Government of Afghanistan has been crucial
in successfully managing the many administrative and
logistical challenges of conducting the poll.
We are now at a critical point in the electoral
process. We recognize the importance of the Afghan
electoral institutions, including the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission, in ensuring a transparent,
open and credible result, and we call on all parties to
engage with the electoral institutions and processes
patiently and to channel their complaints through the
institutional mechanisms established by Afghanistan’s
electoral laws and Constitution. The performance of
Afghanistan’s election institutions and processes is
integral to the credibility of the elections themselves.
The months ahead will be crucial. Beyond the
elections, we look forward to the historic milestone
of a peaceful, democratic transfer of leadership in
Afghanistan. Australia is ready, with our partners,
to work with the new Government to finalize the
parameters for the international community’s support
for Afghanistan beyond 2014.
The Afghan National Security Forces have
demonstrated their increasing capability in fighting the
insurgency and providing security for the Afghan people,
including, vitally, throughout the election process itself.
The Afghan National Security Forces must continue to
build their capabilities across Afghanistan. Australia
will continue to support the Afghan National Security
Forces, including through our sustainment commitment
of $100 million a year, as agreed in Chicago in 2012.
We look forward to concluding the legal frameworks
necessary to enable a post-2014 international mission
to train, advise and assist.
It will be essential for the new Government to
implement the commitments made at the 2012 Tokyo
conference towards achieving sustainable economic
and social development. The people of Afghanistan
will expect to see improvements to governance and
the rule of law, including in the areas of transitional
8/38

25/06/2014

justice, budget management, combating corruption and
improving accountability.
We encourage Afghan authorities to provide full
support to the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission so that it can fulfil its necessary role as an
effective and independent institution. Australia urges
the full implementation of the law on the elimination
of violence against women and encourages the
Government of Afghanistan to finalize and implement
a national action plan on women and peace and security
that would promote the active participation of women
in the peace and reconciliation process. We welcome
Afghanistan’s report on the implementation of its
children and armed conflict plan and emphasize the
need for its full implementation.
We are concerned with the reported increase in
civilian casualties in Afghanistan, the vast majority
of which are attributed to the Taliban. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2014/420) notes that improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) remain the main cause of
civilian casualties. We are concerned by the growing
use and sophistication of IEDs and the terrible toll
they take, particularly on civilians. The Council has
already taken steps to address that trend in resolution
2160 (2014), adopted last week, on the new mandate
of the Taliban sanctions regime, which imposes a new
obligation on States to promote vigilance in industries
involved in the production, trade and storage of
explosives or the raw materials and components that
can be used to manufacture IEDs, such as chemical
components and detonating cord.
It is essential that Member States engage in
establishing good practices, including with industry, and
share information, establish partnerships and develop
national strategies and capabilities to counter the use of
improvised explosive devices. Crucially, we must not
lose sight of Afghanistan’s significant humanitarian
challenges, including significant displacement as a
result of conflict and recent natural disasters.
Today, the Council will also adopt a presidential
statement on narcotics, which is an issue of great
concern to many countries, including my own. We thank
UNODC for its continued efforts to build the capacity of
Afghan authorities to counter the very serious narcotics
threat. That role will remain important.
To conclude, Afghanistan stands at the threshold
of transformation. Its people have voted peacefully for
change, respecting and trusting the democratic process

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

to bring them greater peace and security. We can
ensure them that the United Nations, the international
community and certainly my own country, Australia,
will continue to support them and the Government
of Afghanistan as they work to achieve the stability
and legitimacy that Ambassador Tanin has just so
sharply identified as the motivating principles behind
the commitment of Afghanistan’s people to their own
future.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the briefings by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Ján
Kubiš, and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury
Fedotov. We also welcome the detailed statement by
Ambassador Zahir Tanin.
We welcome the holding of the presidential and
provincial council elections on 5 April and the second
round of polling in the run-off between Abdullah
Abdullah and Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai on 14 June. We
note the Government’s efforts to promote and strengthen
female participation, either as candidates, voters or
observers and applaud the 36 per cent participation rate
by women in the 5 April elections.
A legitimate political transition based on a result
that is accepted by candidates and voters is essential
for the stability of Afghanistan. We once again stress
the need for the process to be credible, transparent,
inclusive and in full compliance with the legal and
constitutional framework set out by the country’s own
National Assembly. We also highlight the important
work of the Independent Election Commission and
UNAMA to verify that that is the case.
Progress on human rights, especially the rights of
women and girls, is a decisive factor in the country’s
stability. It is important that resolution 1325 (2000)
continue to be implemented at all levels to ensure
women’s participation in decision-making and that their
needs are adequately met. In that vein, including women
in the police and security forces is important and should
continue to be a priority task for the new authorities.
It is equally crucial that the new Government ensure
the full implementation of the law on the elimination
of violence against women in order to end impunity for
those who commit violence against Afghan women.
The increasing number of civilian deaths and
injuries in Afghanistan caused by the use of improvised

S/PV.7208

explosive devices shows there are still serious security
problems in the country. The number of events and
victims is at the worst levels since 2011. Given that,
we firmly support the new provisions on such explosive
devices contained in resolution 2160 (2014), adopted by
the Council on 17 June, which are aimed at reducing
their production, propagation and use.
In addition, together with Mr. Yury Fedotov, we
are alarmed by the increase in drug production and
trafficking in Afghanistan, where last year a new record
was set in the production of opium. We reiterate the
need for a comprehensive and international approach in
the fight against drug trafficking that includes actors
involved in security, development and humanitarian
issues.
We deplore the further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the north as a result of
the heavy seasonal rains and extend our solidarity
to Ambassador Tanin with respect to the resulting
significant loss of life. In the context of a conflict that
has spanned decades, ongoing vulnerability to natural
disasters, the situation of internally displaced persons
and food insecurity are major humanitarian challenges
that need to be addressed in a coordinated manner
by the newly elected authorities and the international
community. That will not be possible without ensuring
the full, prompt and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel.
We are concerned that terrorism in its various forms
and manifestations has increased with the elections,
and we condemn the attack on presidential candidate
Abdullah Abdullah on 7 June. With the withdrawal of
the International Security Assistance Force at the end
of 2014, my country believes it will be necessary to
continue building the capacities of the Afghan National
Security Forces in order to address the emerging
threats and challenges. That will require greater resolve
with regard to the current uncertainties that prevail in
Afghanistan.
A specific example in that regard is the bilateral
security agreement between Afghanistan and the United
States of America. Both presidential candidates have
committed to subscribing to that agreement, if elected.
It is also important that the new Government establish
stronger regional cooperation networks through
multilateral processes, such as the Istanbul process
and the Toyko Conference. Regional cooperation is
also essential for peace and reconciliation, as are the
contacts with the Taliban and other groups that continue

14-440899/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

to fight the Government. It is essential that the next
Government has the necessary stability to carry out an
orderly transition.
In conclusion, I should like to express Chile’s
support for the efforts of the Afghan people in building
a democratic State with the rule of law and full
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
That is vital both for the stability and development of
Afghanistan as for the stability of the entire region.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): At the outset, let me thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crimes, for their respective briefings. I
also thank Afghan Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his
statement.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the leadership
and the entire team of UNAMA for the important and
vital role they played in the recently concluded elections
in Afghanistan. UNAMA has made a remarkable
contribution in accompanying Afghanistan on its road
to State-building and socioeconomic stability. With
the elections in Afghanistan marking the first Afghan
transition from one democratically elected President to
another, we congratulate the Afghans and their partners
on achieving this milestone. The enthusiastic voter
participation in two rounds of votes held on 5 April and
14 June demonstrated the strong need of the Afghan
people for a democratic process. We are fully aware
that many Afghans are eagerly awaiting the election
results at the end of the election process so that normal
life can resume in their country, given how long it has
taken.
As we await the announcement of the official
results, scheduled on 22 July, it is important that voters
and candidates exercise maximum patience and respect
for the electoral process and mandate of the authorities.
We appeal to the candidates and their supporters to
refrain from inciting violence, as the country is still
in a state of fragility. We also stress that whoever wins
must be aware that an inclusive governance of the
country’s diversity is vital to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan in promoting reconciliation and national
unity.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
volatile. With an increase of 22 per cent in securityrelated incidents, compared to the same period last

10/38

25/06/2014

year, Rwanda commends the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) for the consistent progress they
have made in ensuring national security. They have
proved their growing capability to respond to security
challenges, and we specifically commend their efforts
during the election period. We know that by the end of
the year, the ANSF will have full responsibility for the
security of Afghanistan as the International Security
Assistance Force draws down. It is therefore important
that the international community continue to support
and enhance the capability of the Afghan National
Security Force.
National reconciliation is also at an unavoidable
crossroads on the path towards the lasting stabilization
of the country. Rwanda supports an inclusive and
peaceful initiative, and recognizes the importance of
the process being Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.
In that regard, the contribution of regional actors to
achieving sustainable peace and stability, including by
supporting the inter-Afghan dialogue, is of paramount
importance. The strong support of UNAMA for the
High Peace Council in confidence- and trust-building
has also been indispensable.
We underscore the importance of the general
mutual commitment made at the Tokyo Conference
on Afghanistan of July 2012 as an indispensable tool
for guiding cooperation between Afghanistan and its
development partners. The implementation of the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework is fundamental
to the long-term stability and future success of
Afghanistan. We encourage the Afghan authorities to
honour their commitments in the areas of promoting
good governance, implementing the necessary reforms,
fighting corruption and protecting human rights. On
that note, we recognize the significant progress that has
been made in the process.
Narcotics remain a key problem in Afghanistan and
beyond. They are a threat to international peace and
security. Continued efforts to suppress drug trafficking
would enable the Council to effectively fight against
drug-financed terrorism and criminality. No concrete
results have been attained to date, due to lack of serious
joint efforts on the part of all the stakeholders in the
region to curtail its production.
We welcome the draft presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/12) on drug trafficking that the Security
Council shall adopt shortly, which fully expresses
the position of the Council on the issue and supports
the existing regional, interregional and international
14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

mechanisms in the fight against illicit drugs. We hope
that it will contribute to the fight against the scourge of
illicit drugs.
In conclusion, let me say that Afghanistan
institutions have a great role to play in ensuring that
their transition is successful, that the progress made
is self-guided and forms the basis for Afghanistan’s
future peace, security, growth and development. We
will continue to advocate that UNAMA, the United
Nations system as a whole and the international
community continue to accompany Afghans towards
their aspirations.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš
and Executive Director Fedotov of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime for their briefings.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The 2014 presidential election was an historic
moment for Afghanistan, its transition and democratic
development. We pay tribute to the people of Afghanistan
for their courage in casting their ballots despite threats
and attacks by the Taliban and other extremist and
terrorist groups. The people of Afghanistan have
proven that votes, not violence, count. In particular, we
commend Afghan women for their determination, in
the face persistent stigmatization, to have their rightful
say in the election and to engage more actively in the
country’s political life. Among the teams of candidates in
the first round, three included female vice-presidential
candidates. It is encouraging that there were almost 300
women among Provincial Council aspirants and that,
according to the preliminary results, 97 of them are
winners.
It is critical that the will of the people be reflected.
The work of the Independent Election Commission and
the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission will
be important in the days ahead. We urge the remaining
candidates to engage constructively with the electoral
institutions and refrain from any acts that could incite
violence or civil disorder or that could lead to instability.
Once complaints have been considered in accordance
with the law, we urge them to accept the outcome.
We welcome the support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its
engagement with the Afghan authorities and people
during the run-up to the elections and while they were

S/PV.7208

being held. The EU and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe deployed their election
observation teams. We urge the Afghan leadership to
make full use of their observations for future elections.
We commend the efforts of the Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) in ensuring security during
the elections, which demonstrated its growing ability
to carry out large-scale security operations and provide
effective country-wide security. I want particularly
to underline the ANSF’s role in protecting women
and providing a favourable environment for their
participation in the elections.
However, the security situation remains a source
of concern and a challenge for the new leadership of
Afghanistan. Civilians continue to be caught in fighting
between the Government and the armed opposition. We
are especially worried about the increase in civilian
causalities, which include women and children. Once
again, explosive weapons have been the leading cause
of civilian casualties, with improvised explosive
devices standing out as weapons of particular concern.
During the past three months, more than 100 children
have been killed or wounded as they stumbled upon
ordnance, which is often poorly marked. We also note
with concern the growing number of incidents in the
east of the country carried out by a range of Al-Qaida
affiliates working parallel to the Taliban.
International assistance in support of the Afghan
army and police will remain essential during and beyond
the transition period. We reiterate our support for the
transition and look forward to the swift conclusion of
the status-of-forces agreement by the country’s new
leadership. Lithuania has pledged to contribute in
support of the ANSF after 2014.
We also note that only scant progress has been
achieved in the dialogue between the Government
and the armed opposition. Those efforts need to
continue, including on the local level, where they are
most effective. We welcome UNAMA’s engagement
in facilitating local dialogue and peace initiatives,
including through community efforts in Nuristan and
by launching the latest report of the Afghan People’s
Dialogue on Peace.
A stable, secure, economically sustainable
Afghanistan can be built only based on the rule of
law, strengthened democratic institutions and the
implementation of citizens’ rights. Progress in the
Afghan human rights situation, however, remains

14-4408911/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

limited. We are especially concerned that children’s
rights continue to be gravely violated, as reported by
the Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting
on Children and Armed Conflict. We express our grave
concern that schools continue to be attacked by parties
to the conflict, teachers continue to be threatened and
more than 100,000 children continue to be deprived
of their right to education. We call upon the Afghan
authorities to endorse a road map to enhance the
implementation of the children in armed conflict action
plan.
We welcome the reinstatement of provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code that enable women to testify
against relatives. We also welcome the measures taken
for tracking enforcement of the law on the elimination
of violence against women, and for tracking civilian
casualties disaggregated by gender. However, further
efforts are required to promote and advance human
rights. UNAMA has an important further role to play
in that regard. The independence and effectiveness of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
should be ensured.
Regional cooperation is essential for developing
a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, since today’s
challenges know no borders. We are heartened by the
support and determination of the States in the region,
including through the Istanbul Heart of Asia Process.
Afghanistan’s grave economic situation, illicit economy
and the issue of combating drug trafficking will all
continue to require urgent attention.
Finally, given the multitude of challenges, UNAMA
will remain an essential partner of the Government
of Afghanistan in ensuring the success of the
transformation process, maintaining the progress that
has been made and supporting much needed reforms.
Afghanistan has Lithuania’s full support in its further
efforts.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank Special
Representatieve of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš
and Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for their briefings.
And I acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin, and thank him for his statement.
My comments will focus on three aspects of the
situation in Afghanistan: political developments,
humanitarian issues and counter-narcotics efforts.

12/38

25/06/2014

On political developments, we note with satisfaction
that, despite the Taliban’s threats to launch a campaign
of violence to disrupt the recent elections, millions of
voters turned out to cast their ballots. According to the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/420), a series of
televised debates between the presidential candidates
and local mobilization around the provisional council
elections contributed to civic awareness and a high
voter turnout. That is a clear indication that the
people of Afghanistan have embraced democracy. We
congratulate them on the success of the elections and
look forward to the announcement of the final results
next month. In the meantime, we urge the candidates to
refrain from inflammatory rhetoric and other acts that
could endanger the national security of Afghanistan.
In terms of gender and women’s empowerment,
we are pleased to note that all the campaign platforms
addressed women’s issues. Three teams had women
as vice-presidential candidates and 296 of the 2,591
candidates to provincial council elections were women.
In order to encourage the participation of women in
voting, the Government trained 581 female police and
2,245 women in addition to recruiting 13,690 female
searchers for the elections. Women also have a legally
mandated 20 per cent of the seats in the provisional
councils across the country. Of the 362,780 party and
candidate agents registered for the first round of the
elections, 23 per cent were women. Viewed against
the recent history of women’s limited participation in
Afghan politics, that level of involvement in politics by
Afghan women is highly significant. It shows the extent
to which women have been empowered in Afghanistan.
We would like to acknowledge the support of the United
Nations to the electoral process in Afghanistan through
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the United Nations electoral support project.
On humanitarian issues, we take positive note of
the approval by the Internally Displaced Persons Task
Force of a road map for the implementation of a national
policy on internally displaced persons (IDPs). We hope
that this will enhance the management of the IDP
problem in Afghanistan. We are concerned, however,
by the constraints that are hampering humanitarian
access. Those include attacks against personnel, assets
and facilities. Some of those attacks have resulted in
the deaths of humanitarian personnel. We pay tribute to
the members of the humanitarian community working
across Afghanistan under challenging circumstances.

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

On counter-narcotics, we commend the Afghan
authorities for their efforts in fighting drugs production
and trafficking. The eradication of 1,473 hectares
of opium poppy is a significant achievement in the
Government’s war on drugs. Since criminal gangs
and terrorist groups are known to fund their activities
through drug production and trafficking, the efforts of
the Afghan Government in fighting those crimes would
deny them a source of funds and, it is hoped, reduce
their capacity to organize.
Still on counter-narcotics, we understand that
there is almost always a regional dimension to drug
trafficking. That makes international cooperation
an essential part of an overall strategy of drug-law
enforcement. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
progress made within the framework of the regional
programme for Afghanistan and countries in the region
in the areas of law enforcement, criminal justice,
demand reduction and research advocacy.
We also take positive note of the progress achieved
under the regional cooperation frameworks, including
the Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan Initiative and
the Triangular Initiative, involving Afghanistan, Iran
and Pakistan. The positive outcomes of those initiatives
include enhanced cooperation in drug control, border
management and law enforcement. We encourage the
Afghan authorities to strengthen counter-narcotics
cooperation with their neighbours to consolidate the
gains made in the war on drugs.
I wish to conclude by commending Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš for his
leadership and commitment to attaining his mandate.
Our commendation also goes to the staff of UNAMA
for their hard work in challenging circumstances.
Our wish is to see a peaceful, prosperous, stable and
democratic Afghanistan.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš
for his informative briefing. I also thank him and his
entire team at the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their steadfast and
professional work supporting the Afghan people and
their Government at this critically important juncture.
I welcome Executive Director Fedotov of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to the Council
today, and thank him very much for his briefing.
Once again, I thank Ambassador Tanin for his
presence and for his remarks.

S/PV.7208

We are meeting at an historic time for Afghanistan.
Millions of Afghans have gone out to vote not once,
but twice, in recent months, in an election that will
eventually determine the first democratic transfer of
power the country has ever seen. It has been an act of
immense courage on the part of Afghan voters, who
braved real threats to assert their most basic democratic
right. And, I would argue, there are reasons to be
optimistic beyond the ink on millions of people’s fingers.
Many of the Afghan institutions that have developed
over the past decade played a key role in the electoral
process. Presidential candidates engaged in vigorous
televised debates that raised public awareness of their
positions. Their campaigns were covered by a maturing
and independent national press. Nearly 70 Afghan
organizations fielded more than 18,000 observers to
increase transparency, and Afghan security forces
provided security throughout the process.
Perhaps no one has seen a bigger change than
Afghanistan’s women. Under Taliban rule, Afghan
women were completely excluded from public life. This
year, more than 2.5 million women cast ballots in the
first round of voting. But that is not all. Female election
observers monitored polling stations and women ran
for and won seats on provincial councils. The Afghan
people can be proud of that progress.
Even as we recognize steps forward, we are
mindful of the challenges that remain. One of those
challenges is evaluating allegations of electoral
fraud. To that end, we urge both candidates to remain
engaged with Afghanistan’s electoral institutions — the
Independent Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission — and to present
them with any evidence of fraud. We call on those
institutions to ensure that all allegations they receive
are given prompt, thorough and impartial review and
adjudication, and we call on all stakeholders to refrain
from violence and to condemn violent acts if and when
they occur. Further, we believe that UNAMA can play a
critically important role in facilitating that process and
in maintaining the dialogue between the candidates and
the Afghan electoral bodies.
Without regard to which candidate emerges
victorious, the United States is committed to working
with the next President of Afghanistan in order to help
the Afghan people build a more stable, peaceful and
prosperous country. That is why President Obama
announced last month that we are ready to keep
approximately 9,800 United States service members

14-4408913/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

in Afghanistan at the start of 2015. Those troops will
help to train, advise and assist the Afghan National
Security Forces as part of the NATO Resolute Support
mission and pursue the remnants of Al-Qaida. That
support depends on the conclusion of the bilateral
security agreement that both Afghan candidates have
committed to signing.
International assistance will remain vital to
ensuring Afghanistan’s future stability. The Afghan
people can be confident that the United States will do
its part to provide long-term, multifaceted support.
That will include financial assistance for sustaining
and professionalizing the Afghan National Security
Forces, humanitarian aid to tackle endemic problems
such as the country’s massive displaced population, and
key investments in Afghan institutional and economic
development. That support will be critical to shoring up
the gains made over the past decade.
Afghanistan will also need the help of its neighbours.
Just as a more stable Afghanistan is essential to security
in the region, so is the region’s enduring engagement
in building peace and stability in Afghanistan. It is
important that regional partners continue to promote
Afghanistan’s development through initiatives such
as the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. In
that regard, we recognize China’s leadership in hosting
the forthcoming Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference
in August.
Afghanistan’s progress will also depend on
continuing international support for a robust UNAMA
mission so that the United Nations can continue to
work on crucial issues ranging from coordinating
humanitarian aid to fostering regional diplomacy, and
from monitoring human rights practices to supporting
the development of key institutions such as the justice
system. We look forward to discussing the future of
that mission with the new Afghan Government and
with Security Council colleagues.
Let me be clear — outside support alone cannot
guarantee that Afghanistan will realize its full
potential. Ultimately, the hardest choices about the
country’s future will fall on the shoulders of its leaders,
who will need to build upon the important gains made
over the past decade. As the bravery and determination
of the Afghan people in the recent election have shown,
Afghans are willing to take great risks in order to build
a more stable, peaceful and prosperous country. We
must continue to support them.
14/38

25/06/2014

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing and
for his work as Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, and the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, for their statements.
I associate myself with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union.
When men and women act with courage, there
will always be other men and women who will walk
in their footsteps. On 5 April and 14 June, braving
considerable risks, Afghan men and women chose the
path to the polls, and millions followed them. Despite
intimidation, threats and even violence, the Afghan
people showed their determination to take control of
their future and their destiny, by choosing the path of
peace and democracy. Their courage and determination
compel admiration and deserve praise, as do the actions
of the Afghan security forces, who were able to ensure
the security of the ballot despite attempts to disrupt the
conduct of the voting through violence.
Today it is crucial that the Afghan voters see their
courage rewarded and their hopes for these elections
not disappointed. We therefore appeal to the sense of
responsibility of everyone involved — the candidates,
who should cooperate with the institutions in charge
of the electoral process and respect their authority, and
the institutions themselves, which should fulfil their
tasks transparently and efficiently. If disputes arise,
they should be dealt with within the legal framework
provided for the purpose, not through the media or by
intimidation or violence.
On 22 July, when the electoral process is complete
and the final results are declared, there will be a winner
and a loser. But the whole of Afghanistan will emerge
a winner if the defeated candidate chooses to concede
defeat with dignity, adding to the legitimacy of the
elected President. And the entire Afghan people will
be victorious if the elected candidate chooses to form
an inclusive Government that represents Afghanistan’s
diversity. It is only then that these elections will have
contributed to creating the conditions required for
Afghanistan to progress along the road to stability,
democracy and peace.

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

It is essential that the electoral process be brought
to a successful conclusion. But there must be advances
in other areas too in order to consolidate the progress
Afghanistan has made in the past decade, starting with
human and women’s rights. We hope the future Head of
State will allocate significant spots in his Government
to women and seriously promote their active
participation in the peace and reconciliatioп process.
We also hope the new executive branch will ensure
the full implementation of the law on violence against
women. The level of women’s participation in the 2015
parliamentary elections will be a good measure of the
evolution of their place in public life.
On the issue of children in armed conflict, we are
pleased that the Afghan Government has presented its
third report to the United Nations on its implementation
of the action plan on the recruitment and use of
children in its national security forces. We have no
doubt that the Government will very soon adopt the
road map developed jointly with the United Nations
aimed at speeding up the action plan’s implementation.
We are grateful that the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/420) includes information on all the violations
and abuses committed against children in Afghanistan
as well as on the implementation of the action plan.
We thank the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its well-produced brochure
on the protection of Afghan children in armed conflict.
We urge that it be distributed as widely as possible.
The continued increase in the number of civilian
casualties in the conflict is a matter for serious
concern. We firmly condemn the indiscriminate
attacks on civilian populations, which show that one
of the chief challenges to be tackled is that of security
in general and the protection of civilians in particular.
Regarding security, many members of the international
community, including Luxembourg, have expressed
their willingness to remain engaged with the Afghan
people and security forces after 2014. For that, it is
essential to clear up any legal uncertainty surrounding
future international missions in support of the Afghan
security forces. In so doing, Afghanistan will send
a strong signal to its partners about the firmness
of its commitment. We commend the Permanent
Representative’s remarks this morning in that regard.
The resurgence of drug trafficking and the
cultivation of opiates in Afghanistan is another cause
for deep concern. This serious and complex problem
should be tackled head on, not just for the obvious

S/PV.7208

public health reasons but also because there are often
links between the forces of insurgency and drugrelated activities. Meeting this challenge will require
the commitment of everyone, primarily in Afghanistan
but also at the regional level and in the international
community. For its part, Luxembourg welcomes every
initiative aimed at promoting synergies between
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
UNAMA.
This is also the moment to recall that the drug
issue cannot be separated from the development of
the Afghan economy in general. If opium cultivation
is gaining ground, that is due partly to the lack of
economic alternatives. One of the new Government’s
priorities should unquestionably be to take measures to
promote growth and create jobs. This is also where the
mutual accountability commitments made at the Tokyo
Conference should come into the picture. Maintaining
international financial support should go hand in
hand with a commitment on the part of the Afghan
Government to economic reforms, the rule of law,
development-oriented governance and the fight against
corruption.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation to the staff of UNAMA for the outstanding
work they do in a dangerous and difficult environment.
At this crucial time, it is important that it has the means
to maintain a presence in the provinces as close to the
Afghan people as possible.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Afghanistan, for his
briefing, as well as the personnel of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their dedication
under dangerous conditions. I would also like to thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
his briefing, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement earlier.
Through their courageous participation in historic
elections, the Afghan people have expressed their
commitment to the political process, their rejection of
violence and their resolve to work steadily to advance
the process of democracy. In that regard, Jordan would
like to commend the people’s broad participation in
the first round of voting despite terrorist threats. We
also applaud participants’ political commitment to
the elections and the respect shown for the electoral
institutions, whose work must continue in transparency,

14-4408915/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

integrity and effectiveness in order to build voters’ and
candidates’ confidence in the electoral process. And we
salute the work of the Afghan authorities and security
forces in protecting voters, particularly women, as
they fulfilled their legitimate aspirations to elect their
representatives and President in justice, safety and
freedom. We call on the two presidential candidates to
put the interests of Afghanistan and its people first and
to do their best to end the stalemate so that the new
President will be able to take on his responsibilities as
soon as possible.
Although the process taking place in Afghanistan is
cause for optimism, we must also be realistic in assessing
the challenges facing the future Afghan President in the
electoral process and beyond. The security situation
remains difficult. The Afghan National Security Forces
and civilians still suffer terrorist attacks, which we
strongly condemn.
The international community must acknowledge
that without robust, sustained and significant support
for Afghanistan throughout the transition process and
beyond the authorities will face problems in overcoming
the many interlinked economic, political and security
challenges. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the Afghan people should not feel that they have been
abandoned. We also join his appeal for States to meet
their obligations to provide development assistance and
security despite the military drawdown in Afghanistan.
It is necessary to adapt the role of the United Nations
in line with the changes on the ground in the upcoming
period in order for the Organization to be able to
provide international assistance to the Afghan people.
The Afghan Government itself must continue to
ensure economic and political reform, the rule of law
and good governance, including combating corruption,
so that radical forces do not invoke popular justification
for their action. All political forces in Afghanistan must
work together in accordance with the constitutional
framework to achieve national unity.
Afghanistan’s security affects and is influenced by
its regional neighbourhood. That makes it necessary
to foster bilateral relations between Afghanistan and
regional States and to achieve regional cooperation
and direct security and political outreach, as well as
a proper follow-up of the outcomes of the relevant
processes and conferences. Regional cooperation on the
ground is crucial to dealing with the illicit cultivation
and trafficking of narcotic drugs, which threaten the

16/38

25/06/2014

socioeconomic future of Afghanistan and are a threat
to international peace and security.
In that regard, Jordan welcomes the regional
initiatives on drugs control, border management
and enhanced cooperation between judicial and law
enforcement bodies. We commend the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to combat drug trafficking
and call on it not to let up its resolve to address that
scourge. Jordan underscores the important role of the
United Nations and of UNODC and the need for the
Security Council to remain seized of the developments
in that regard.
In conclusion, we would like to extend our thanks
to the President of the Security Council for this month,
the Russian Federation, for the draft presidential
statement, which demonstrates the need for the unity of
the international community in combating the scourge
of narcotic drugs.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative Ján Kubiš
and Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his
remarks.
Having held its run-off presidential elections,
Afghanistan is at a critical juncture in its political
transition. We recognize the high turnout in
Afghanistan’s presidential elections despite threats by
the Taliban and other terrorist groups. The Afghanled efforts for the electoral process, including those
of the Afghan electoral institutions and Afghan
National Security Forces, are also commendable.
As a contributor to the project of the United Nations
Development Programme to ensure women security
officers in polling centres, we particularly praise the
courage of the Afghan women who cast their ballots in
the elections.
Despite those laudable efforts, it is imperative that
the transparency and integrity of the entire electoral
process be ensured. In the final stage of the run-off
presidential elections, all stakeholders, including the
candidates and their supporters, should refrain from
any acts of incitement, violence or disorder. The
electoral institutions and processes established in line
with Afghanistan’s laws and Constitution must be
respected. Any complaints about the electoral process
should be addressed through institutional mechanisms
and procedures.

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

With regard to Afghanistan’s security situation,
we are deeply concerned about the increase in civilian
casualties as compared with the same period in the year
2013. We strongly condemn the indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, including through improvised explosive
devices, and those aimed at disrupting the electoral
process. Furthermore, the ongoing grave violations of
children’s rights, such as the killing of children, as well
as attacks against schools and educational personnel,
are a matter of grave concern to us.
On the narcotics issue in Afghanistan, we note
the devastating effects that opium production and
consumption have on the stability and development
of Afghanistan. A comprehensive and coordinated
response is essential in order to address that chronic
issue, as it is linked to terrorism, transnational
organized crime and money-laundering. We recognize
the narcotic drugs control strategy of Afghanistan and
the regional cooperation in the area of drugs control.
We also appreciate the important role of UNODC in
tackling that issue, including the publication of the
annual World Drug Report. We call on the international
community to further support Afghan-led efforts to
that end as well.
Finally, in the light of the drawdown of the
International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan, it is important for the international
community to keep its commitments to supporting
the country. The NATO Summit in south Wales in
September and the first ministerial review of progress
on the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, to
be held in London later this year, will be important
opportunities to reaffirm those commitments. The
Afghan Government should also redouble its efforts for
good governance, including its fight against corruption
in the illicit economy.

S/PV.7208

At present, the situation in Afghanistan is at a
critical turning point. China welcomes the holding
of the presidential election in Afghanistan in April
and commends the Afghan people for their active
participation in it. The high voter turnout fully
demonstrated the Afghan people’s confidence in a
stable political transition. We hope that the presidential
election will be a new starting point for Afghanistan
towards unity and stability. China acknowledges the
efforts of the Afghan Government and the relevant
institutions in the election.
We have noted the recent turn of events with
respect to the counting of ballots for the second
round of presidential elections. We hope that the
parties concerned will resolve the pertinent issues
appropriately through dialogue. China will respect the
choice of the Afghan people. We are confident that a
stable and smooth conclusion of the election process
will help Afghanistan to embark on the track of peace,
stability and development at an early date.
The realization of the rebuilding of peace and
durable security in Afghanistan is primarily contingent
on the efforts of the Government and the people
of Afghanistan, with the vigorous support of the
international community. On the basis of full respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Afghanistan, the international community should
support the Afghan-led and Afghan-managed process
and assist Afghans in their efforts to overcome various
challenges encountered in transition and transformation
so that they can realize national security and stability
sooner.

The Afghan people demonstrated their aspiration
for a democratic political transition during the electoral
process. We support the peaceful and smooth transition
in Afghanistan and look forward to the key role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the sustained contribution of the international
community in that regard.

China is deeply concerned about the unabated
civilian casualties as a result of terrorist and violent
attacks in Afghanistan. The relevant parties should
effectively support the Afghan National Security
Forces in assuming their security responsibilities and
assist Afghanistan in strengthening its troop and police
capacity. We urge the international community to
play a positive and constructive role in Afghanistan’s
realization of a broadbased national reconciliation and
support Afghanistan’s High Peace Council in its efforts
to press for national reconciliation.

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative Kubiš and
Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings. China
also listened carefully to the statement of Permanent
Representative Tanin of Afghanistan.

The continued enhancement of Afghanistan’s
capacities in economic development is an important
basis for its durable security and stability. We hope
that the Afghan Government will continue to push for
economic and social development, continuously improve

14-4408917/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

people’s livelihoods and enable the entire population
to enjoy the dividends of development in all areas and
gradually eradicate the security threats of terrorism,
drug cultivation and trafficking, and transnational
organized crimes. The international community
should effectively honour its relevant commitments
and strengthen its support for Afghanistan towards
the realization of economic development and social
progress.
The United Nations, regional organizations and
relevant initiatives have played an important role in
helping Afghanistan and its region achieve security,
stability and development. We support the United
Nations in its continued central and coordinating role
to help Afghanistan smoothly complete its transition
and transformation. We hope that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will strengthen
its communication and cooperation with the Afghan
Government and play its positive role in supporting
the Afghan efforts for peace, stability and national
rebuilding.
Afghanistan is a good and friendly neighbour of
China. China hopes to see a unified, stable, developed
and friendly Afghanistan. China resolutely supports
Afghanistan in its efforts to maintain national
sovereignty and territorial integrity. As an active
supporter, participant and facilitator of Afghan peace
and rebuilding, China has, over a long period of time,
been providing Afghanistan with large amounts of
economic and social development assistance, helping
build hospitals, schools, roads and other infrastructure.
In addition, China actively participates in the
regional cooperation on Afghanistan and has made its
contribution in facilitating Afghanistan’s peace and
rebuilding process.
The fourth ministerial meeting of the Istanbul
Process will be convened in Tianjin, China, in August.
China would like to closely cooperate with Afghanistan
and the international community and facilitate the
meeting so as to send a clear and positive signal of
support for Afghanistan’s political, economic and
security transition. China would like to work with the
international community in our joint effort to push for
Afghanistan’s early realization of durable peace and
sustainable development.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
18/38

25/06/2014

(UNAMA); Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC);
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
their briefings.
Chad welcomes the role played by UNAMA in
supporting the transition process in Afghanistan, in
accordance with its mandate. That has contributed to
the preparation of free and fair presidential elections
with broad voter participation. We also welcome the
efforts of the International Security Assistance Force
in Afghanistan. Despite threats by terrorists and other
armed groups, the elections had a large number of female
candidates. We therefore commend the courage of the
Afghan people and encourage it to continue to fight for
change. We call on the candidates to show restraint,
maintain the calm atmosphere that prevailed during
the electoral campaign, apply the remedies provided
for by the laws in force for those filing objections and
complaints and accept the verdict of the polls following
the proclamation of the results.
Chad welcomes UNAMA’s approach to resolving
the post-election crisis by encouraging dialogue
between candidate Abdullah Abdullah’s camp, the
members of the Independent Election Commission
and the other candidates. We note with satisfaction the
involvement of all components of Afghan society, in
particular the political parties, traditional and religious
authorities and civil society for their willingness to
resolve the crisis by direct, inclusive dialogue, which is
the sole guarantee for preserving peace in Afghanistan.
We deplore the fact that the security and human
rights situation deteriorated during and after the vote as
a result of acts of violence and intimidation perpetrated
by the Taliban in association with Al-Qaida and other
armed groups against voters, including the cutting off
of fingers of persons who had voted. Those cruel and
criminal acts constitute serious violations of human
rights; the perpetrators should be prosecuted and held
to account.
We wish to express our sympathy with the
Afghan people, the families and staff of the accredited
diplomatic missions in Afghanistan for the victims of
the deadly attacks. We wish a speedy recovery to the
injured. Chad believes that terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations is criminal and unjust, whatever the
purpose, the time, the place and the perpetrators.
We welcome the political and diplomatic efforts
deployed at the regional level for the strengthening

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

peace and security in Afghanistan. We encourage
those promoting peace and security to continue in that
direction. We are worried, however, by the increase in
drug and narcotics trafficking, which adversely affects
the population of the region and far beyond. In that regard,
we welcome the Government’s work to eradicate the
cultivation of opium and its related enforcement efforts.
We invite and encourage Afghanistan’s neighbouring
States to continue to work towards coordination and
the cross-border fight against trafficking in drugs and
weapons and we call on international community to
support those efforts.
We deplore the fact that the humanitarian situation
has deteriorated as a result of natural disasters bringing
suffering to vulnerable populations in the northern
part of Afghanistan, in particular women, children and
the elderly. We support the Secretary-General’s call
to increase humanitarian assistance in Afghanistan.
We condemn all armed groups that are attacking
humanitarian personnel in order to prevent them from
bringing assistance to those in need. We also condemn
the recruitment of child soldiers and violence against
women and girls.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community and the future Afghan Government to
take all relevant measures to strengthen the country’s
security after the withdrawal of the International
Security Assistance Force. We offer our heartfelt
support to all United Nations personnel working in
difficult and dangerous conditions in order to maintain
peace and security in Afghanistan.
Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for presenting
the report of the Security Council on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2014/420). I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan, for their briefings.
While Afghanistan awaits the results of the
presidential elections, Argentina would like to express
to the people and the Government of Afghanistan its
desire that the elections allow them to consolidate their
political transition and that they become the basis for
strengthening their stability, reinforcing their national
unity and promoting their sustainable development with
equality. The high turnout by the people of Afghanistan,
including the unprecedented number of women who
participated in the electoral process, demonstrates the
commitment of the people of Afghanistan to building

S/PV.7208

their own future and their determination to fight for
their rights in the face of threats and attacks from the
Taliban. For the political transition to be legitimate, it
is important that the presidential election effectively
reflect the popular will demonstrated at the ballot box.
It is vital that the allegations of fraud be investigated,
the disputes be resolved through the proper legal
framework and all candidates accept the outcome of the
elections.
The challenges that await the new authorities are
as well-known as they are overwhelming. The new
authorities will also have to address the Afghan people’s
desire for peace. In that context, a peace process that
includes direct consultations between the Government
and the main opposition forces is essential to put an
end to the cycle of violence that continues to afflict
Afghanistan.
A democratic and prosperous Afghanistan will
depend on the success of the reconciliation process
in the framework of a comprehensive strategy for
protecting and promoting human rights and access
to education, health services and work for all Afghan
people. The Government of Afghanistan has a
responsibility that it cannot put off or ignore to ensure
the full implementation of the law on the elimination
of violence against women so that perpetrators are
held accountable. In that context, we note the change
in the criminal code allowing women to testify against
family members and thus facilitating trials for domestic
violence cases. In addition, it is encouraging to see
the progress that the Government of Afghanistan has
achieved in implementing its plan of action on children
in armed conflict.
It is worrying that Afghanistan is one of the least
developed countries and that the security sector absorbs
almost half of its national budget. Implementing the
Kabul process and coordinating development assistance
continues to be vital, but no less important than the fact
that humanitarian assistance and development should
respect the priorities and programmes established by
the Government of Afghanistan itself.
Argentina supports efforts to prevent the production
and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan. Regional
cooperation is crucial, both in terms of applying the
law and criminal justice processes and in terms of
seeking to reduce the demand for drugs. It is of concern
that, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, Afghanistan is facing one of the highest
levels of drug addiction in the entire world. In that

14-4408919/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

context, we believe that it is appropriate that special
attention be given to young people in the programmes
being implemented in Afghanistan. We highlight the
important role being played by the United Nations
in support of national efforts and the importance of
coordinating between the various agencies in the
system to implement a comprehensive approach in that
regard.
This year, as Afghanistan is preparing to assume
new and growing responsibilities, the role of the
United Nations continues to be crucial in assisting
the Government to meet its security and development
obligations and supporting the coordination of
international aid, among other things. The Afghan
people should not be abandoned.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš for his
update to the Council and Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his remarks. I
will focus today on four areas: elections, security,
engagement with the Government of Afghanistan and
counter-narcotics.
Since the Council last met to discuss Afghanistan in
March (see S/PV.7139) we have seen some extraordinary
moments of courage from the Afghan people. In April
and again earlier this month, they showed the world
their desire to have a say in their country’s future by
turning out to vote in the presidential elections. They
voted for peace, as Ambassador Tanin said. That is a
huge achievement.
As the electoral process enters the final stages,
it is essential that all stakeholders act in the interest
of stability and national unity. Special Representative
Kubiš has underlined the need to find a way forward.
We urge both presidential candidates and their teams
to demonstrate the same patience and respect with the
electoral authorities that they did during the first round.
At this critical time in the process, both candidates
need to work with the Independent Election Commission
and Independent Electoral Complaints Commission and
their established legal mechanisms for investigating
and adjudicating complaints, as the representative
of Australia and others have said. We also urge the
electoral institutions to conduct their investigations
thoroughly and transparently.
The fighting season in Afghanistan is under way,
and security is a challenge for all concerned. Over the
past three months, as the Secretary-General’s report
20/38

25/06/2014

(S/2014/420) highlights, a high number of incidents have
been reported. Innocent civilians have been targeted
and killed. Those attacks must be strongly condemned.
We pay tribute to the courage and sacrifice of
the security forces operating in Afghanistan at this
challenging time. Their dedication has allowed the
Government of Afghanistan to build the foundations
for a stable and democratic country. In particular, we
recognize the contributions of the Afghan National
Security Forces. Their security plans, implemented as a
backdrop to insurgent attempts to disrupt the elections,
were a testament to both their confidence and their
capability. The support of NATO and the international
community will be vital to ensuring that security in
Afghanistan lasts. The NATO Summit to be hosted by
the United Kingdom later in 2014 will be an opportunity
to underline the establishment of NATO’s military,
financial and political support to Afghanistan beyond
2014 and to mark the achievements of the International
Security Assistance Force. Regional initiatives such
as the Istanbul Process, for which China will host the
next meeting in Tianjin at the end of August 2014, will
continue to play a vital role.
Once a new President and his team are in place in
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom will work in close
cooperation with partners on the Council and the wider
international community to pursue shared aspirations.
Together we must set out a constructive approach that
allows the new Afghan President and his team the
space to formulate their own vision for the future while
pressing ahead on the key reforms and priorities we
know must happen quickly.
For the United Kingdom, the signing of the United
States-Afghan bilateral security agreement and the
NATO status-of-forces agreement is key. Subject to
those agreements, the Resolute Support mission will
be a vital part of NATO’s engagement in Afghanistan
beyond 2014. President Obama’s announcement of the
United States contribution, which the representative of
the United States just referred to a moment ago, is a
significant step forward.
We also want to signal the importance of a peace
process and engagement with key regional partners on
how best to sustain the progress made in the region. On
the economy, steps to shore up longer-term confidence in
Afghanistan’s economic future will be vital, including
by adopting and implementing important economic
legislation. The support of the Council and the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

will be essential in that effort, both in signalling our
expectations and delivering key assistance on the
ground.
Finally, as Mr. Fedotov has outlined to the Council,
the challenge posed by drugs to Afghanistan and the
wider region is serious. The United Kingdom recognizes
the importance of tackling the drug trade and the
significant challenges that remain. That is a complex
problem, which requires a comprehensive approach
combining tougher law enforcement, economic
development initiatives and the promotion of alternative
livelihoods. The United Kingdom will continue to work
with the United Nations and international partners to
support the Afghan Government in that effort.
For all the challenges that lie ahead, we see many
reasons to be hopeful in Afghanistan. The United
Kingdom will continue to play a strong and committed
role in supporting the Government of Afghanistan in
building a more peaceful and prosperous future for all
Afghans.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš, and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), Mr. Fedotov, for their briefings.
Mr. Kubiš’s absence from New York today is a telling
testament to the importance of following the situation
in the country hour by hour and of the ever-pressing
need of an attentive presence alongside Afghanistan.
I take this opportunity to thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its
exemplary work and to commend all its personnel for
their commitment.
Afghanistan has just experienced a major turning
point in its political life. The holding of two elections,
presidential and provincial, has revealed the high degree
of professionalism of the Afghan authorities responsible
for their organization. Moreover, the mass participation
of Afghans, especially women, in both rounds of the
presidential election bore witness to their courage and
to their desire to embrace democratic rules. We extend
our congratulations in particular to the Afghan National
Security Forces for their outstanding performance in
securing that democratic convergence. They thereby
frustrated the aims of those who refuse the resolute
choice made by the Afghans in favour of a future where
violence and coercion are not policy options.

S/PV.7208

The post-election phase will be as critical as the
preparations for the elections. It is essential that any
challenges to the results, if the latter have not been
arrived at according to the rules and procedures, do not
tarnish the success of Afghan democracy. There can
be no other manner of appointing the future Afghan
President than through full respect for the electoral
process. That holds true for future votes as well.
Both candidates must comply with current
operations and avoid all provocative rhetoric.
Confidence in the balloting and counting of votes
and in the announcement of the results is the key to
the legitimacy of the future President and hence of his
ability to take the reins of the country. In that regard,
we welcome the decision by Mr. Abdullah Abdullah to
resume cooperation with the competent institutions.
A draft presidential statement has been prepared to
that end at the initiative of Australia, welcoming the
commitment of all stakeholders to the success of this
phase.
Afghanistan’s launch into a new phase must not
allow us to forget the many challenges the country is
still facing and for which the support of the international
community is necessary. We are concerned by the
upsurge in drug trafficking. I shall not expatiate on the
extent of the problem. We are aware of the efforts being
made by the Afghans on that front, as rightly recalled
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2014/420).
We know above all that the challenge requires the
commitment of all, especially Afghanistan’s regional
partners. All must be done to avoid the worst — that is,
leaving Afghanistan on its own to address an uprising
that, while surely weakened, has not been fully
suppressed. Nor can we abandon the Afghan National
Security Forces, which have proved their robustness
and efficiency, but are worried about the withdrawal
of the international community, with a rebuilt but still
very fragile socioeconomic and institutional fabric.
The draft presidential statement that we shall
adopt today, at the initiative of Russia, makes that
very assessment. It is not a criticism of the Afghans
as new authorities prepare to take power. It is not an
a priori directive framing the future of international
commitment. As one phase of intense international
involvement draws to a close, it is an invitation to
reflect on the shape of our future presence. The draft
presidential statement, which incorporates the broad
principles already laid down by the Council, stresses

14-4408921/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

that the subject of the fight against drugs will also be
part of our thinking.
The action of the international community in
Afghanistan must indeed adapt. The models applied
hitherto, characterized by a counter-insurgency
strategy, will necessarily evolve. However, we will
not renounce the values for
​​ which we fought alongside
Afghans for 10 years. I am thinking in particular of the
role and rights of women in Afghan society.
We have a few months before us to evaluate and
determine how the international community can
support Afghanistan in the long term. In that respect,
the place assigned to the fight against drugs in the
UNAMA mandate will have to be strengthened. All
possible synergies among the actors in Afghanistan
should be supported; while it must need evolve into a
counter-narcotics entity, UNAMA will have to assume
that role.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.
We are grateful to Mr. Kubiš and Mr. Fedotov
for their detailed briefings, and to Mr. Tanin for his
interesting statement.
The Russian delegation aligns itself with the
statement to be made by the Permanent Representative
of the Kyrgyz Republic on behalf of the member States
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).
For our part, we also wish to emphasize the historic
importance of the presidential and provincial elections.
The fact that they were successfully conducted, despite
attempts by terrorists and extremist forces to disrupt
them, confirms the Afghan people’s commitment to a
strong, independent and democratic State. However,
we find it unsettling that the process has been fraught
with uncertainty, which arose after the second round
of presidential elections. We hope that all grievances
and disputes related to the electoral process and vote
counting will be settled legally, in the higher interests
of the Afghan people.
At this critical juncture, we reiterate the need for a
fair and comprehensive analysis of the risks and threats
facing Afghanistan. The aggressive activities of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorist and extremist
groups is causing a significant increase in civilian
casualties and losses among the Afghan security forces
personnel. Despite their dedication, armed opposition,

22/38

25/06/2014

fuelled by internal and external sources, including
through drug production and drug trafficking, are
entrenching themselves in large areas of the country,
including regions that had been completely controlled
by the Government. There is a deteriorating situation
in the south, south-east and east, where more than
60 per cent of all security incidents have occurred.
It is troubling that Al-Qaida affiliated groups have
felt increasingly free to conduct brazen attacks on
Government forces in coordination with the Taliban
and other extremist groups.
We are particularly concerned about the
growth of terrorist activity and the strengthening of
anti-Government forces in the north and north-east,
directly bordering our friends and allies in the CSTO
and the Commonwealth of Independent States. The
armed opposition groups now total more than 10,000,
while three to four years ago, north Afghanistan was
relatively peaceful. There is a clearly visible trend of
terrorist activity overflowing Afghanistan’s borders,
as evidenced by the increasingly frequent cross-border
incidents. This creates new challenges to the security
of Central Asia.
We hope that, by the end of this year, the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) will fully report to the
Security Council on the implementation of its mandate.
The question remains of a possible foreign military
presence in Afghanistan after 2014. In any case, when
deciding what stabilization actions are necessary, a
foreign military contingent should no longer be needed
in Afghanistan.
Russia fully supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government to promote national reconciliation. We
agree with our Afghan friends that a leading role should
be played by the Afghans themselves. Dialogue with
the armed opposition should be organized based on a
triad of principles: fighters must renounce violence,
recognize the Constitution and cut ties with Al-Qaida.
There can be no attempts to dilute those principles or
weaken the Security Council sanctions regime with the
allegedly noble goal of speeding up dialogue, because
the results will indeed be the opposite of those desired.
Today’s debate on the situation in Afghanistan is
held on the eve of the International Day against Drug
Use and Illicit Trafficking on 26 June. Unfortunately,
we regret that despite the concerted efforts of the
international community and the Government of
Afghanistan, the situation of the illegal production
and trafficking of drugs and narcotics in the country
14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

is not improving, but actually tending to worsen.
Afghanistan is turning into one of the global hubs of
drug production, as evidenced by data from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The volume of
illegally cultivated Afghan opiate poppy continues to
rise. In the past year, areas under cultivation increased
by 36 per cent as compared with those of 2012. At the
same time, there has been a 50 per cent increase in the
production of opium.
In that regard, the presence of many thousands of
ISAF troops withdrew, under various pretexts, from
active combat related to narcotics production, despite
the obvious risks that the trafficking presents for
stabilization in Afghanistan. We encourage the new
Afghan leadership to make counter-narcotics efforts a
priority. Without solving that issue there can be neither
healthy development nor stability in the country or
the region. It would seem that this moment could be a
turning point in terms of scaling up international efforts
to combat the scourge of drug trafficking, in close
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan.
Of particular importance in that regard is the need
for consistent steps towards furthering cooperation in
bilateral, regional, subregional and multilateral formats,
primarily with the countries of the region, based on the
principle of common and shared responsibility.
Among the most urgent measures to combat the threat
of drugs we would place the consolidation of counternarcotics institutions, along with the development
of international, inter-State and non-governmental
mechanisms for drug rehabilitation, enhanced targeted
pressure on the Afghan drug industry, strategic
anti-drug operations, increased police cooperation
and the pursuit of a common agricultural policy,
including through the implementation of alternative
development programmes in Afghanistan that speed up
the industrialization of the country.
We believe that the promotion of alternative
development programmes could be the key to freeing
Afghan society from the domination of the drug
economy. Such programmes should be extended to the
whole of Afghanistan, and should be made the major
thrust of the country’s economic development. In
that context, I would like to note that the Ministerial
Conference on Counter-Narcotics held in Moscow on
15 May adopted an outcome document providing for
a set of measures that would strengthen international
efforts to eradicate the drug problem, in particular
by drawing up a comprehensive plan for alternative

S/PV.7208

development in Afghanistan from 2015 to 2020, and by
creating a global alliance for alternative development.
The participants at the meeting also agreed on the need to
create an international drug rehabilitation fund to assist
individual countries in establishing national systems for
comprehensive rehabilitation and re-socialization for
drug users. And there was support for Russia’s proposal
to establish an international headquarters to combat
the Afghan drug threat with the aim of consolidating
the disparate anti-drug programmes in Afghanistan
and establishing effective, internationally controlled
mechanisms for eradicating drug production.
Given the massive negative geopolitical impact of
the industrial production of Afghan narcotics, it would
seem pertinent to consider including that issue on
the agenda of the 2016 special session of the General
Assembly on the global narcotics problem. At the same
time, preparations for that meeting should be based on
a comprehensive approach to the drug issue, relying on
the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs as a
key United Nations body in that area.
In conclusion, we fully believe that there is a
need to bolster regional cooperation in order to assist
Afghanistan in building a peaceful, independent and
economically prosperous State. We believe that the
ideal platform for synchronizing regional efforts
to assist Afghanistan is the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, in which practically all countries in the
region, including Afghanistan, are represented.
Achieving tangible results in the stabilization of
Afghanistan and its development as an independent
and peaceful State, free of terrorism and drugrelated crime, requires collective, coordinated effort.
Invaluable assistance to that end will be provided by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
whose role as the international military presence draws
down will only increase. For its part, Russia is open to
mutually beneficial partnerships with all stakeholders
in the implementation of significant projects that will
help Afghanistan guarantee sustainable development,
well-being and prosperity for all its citizens.
The President (spoke in Russian): I will now
resume my role as President of the Security Council.
Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council welcomes the holding
of the second round of the Afghan presidential

14-4408923/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

election on 14 June and reiterates the importance of
these historic elections to Afghanistan’s transition
and democratic development. It commends the
participation and courage of the Afghan people to
cast their ballot despite the threat and intimidation
by the Taliban and other violent extremist
and terrorist groups. It further commends the
participation of Afghan women in the electoral
process, and underlines the key role that they play
in Afghan-led peace, democracy and stability.
“The Security Council notes positively the
efforts of the Afghan people to prepare for and hold
these elections, including security arrangements,
and reiterates the important role of the Afghan
electoral institutions, including the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission. It calls upon
Afghan electoral institutions to uphold the highest
standards of integrity throughout this important
and historic process, and emphasizes that all efforts
must be made to ensure the integrity, neutrality and
transparency of the electoral process, including the
detection and prevention of fraud.
“The Security Council calls on all stakeholders
to engage with the electoral institutions and
processes with patience and respect, refrain from
any acts that incite imminent violence and civil
disorder or lead to instability, and to channel
complaints through the established institutional
mechanisms in line with Afghanistan’s electoral
laws and Constitution.
“The Security Council looks forward to the
conclusion of the electoral process in accordance
with the relevant laws and mandates of the electoral
institutions and the orderly transition to a new
administration and welcomes the ongoing support
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.
“The Security Council calls on all political
entities to work together in accordance with the
Afghan Constitution, with the aim of strengthening
Afghanistan’s
sovereignty,
independence,
territorial integrity and national unity in order to
achieve a peaceful and prosperous future for all the
people of Afghanistan.
“The Security Council condemns the actions
of those who attempted to disrupt the elections,
such as terrorist attacks against civilians, including

24/38

25/06/2014

election personnel and candidates, as well as attacks
against election infrastructure. It condemns violent
and terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida
and other violent and extremist groups and illegal
armed groups aimed at destabilizing the situation
in the country.
“The Security Council recognizes the sacrifices
of the Afghan people and Afghan National Security
Forces during the election period, and reiterates
that no terrorist act can reverse the path towards
Afghan-led peace, democracy and stability.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/11.
Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan.
“The Security Council recognizes the threat
posed by the production, trade, trafficking of
illicit drugs to international peace and stability in
different regions of the world and the important
role played by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) in this regard.
“The Security Council expresses concern at
the increase in poppy production as noted in the
UNODC Afghanistan Opium Survey 2013, noting the
serious harm that opium cultivation, production,
trafficking and consumption continues to cause
to the stability, security, social and economic
development and governance of Afghanistan as well
as to the region and internationally, and stresses the
important role of the United Nations to continue
to monitor the drug situation in Afghanistan.
The Council encourages International Security
Assistance Force to further effectively support,
within its designated responsibilities, Afghanled sustained efforts, including efforts by the
Afghan National Security Forces, to address drug
production and trafficking, in cooperation with
relevant international and regional actors.
“The Security Council notes that according to
the World Drug Report 2013, Afghanistan remains
one of the foremost source countries for opiates and
cannabis resin.

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

“The Security Council reaffirms that
Afghanistan’s peaceful future lies in the building
of a stable, secure, economically sustainable state,
free of terrorism and narcotics and based on the
rule of law, strengthened democratic institutions,
respect for the separation of powers, reinforced
constitutional checks and balances and the
guarantee and enforcement of citizens’ rights and
obligations. The Council renews its commitment
to assisting Afghanistan on its path towards peace,
democracy and reconstruction.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of
the Government of Afghanistan in fighting drug
production in Afghanistan.
“The Security Council stresses the importance
of a comprehensive approach to address the
security, economic, governance and development
challenges in Afghanistan, which are of an
interconnected nature, and recognizes that there is
no purely military solution to ensure the stability
of Afghanistan.
“The Security Council calls on the United
Nations, with the support of the international
community, to support the Government of
Afghanistan’s national priority programmes
covering the issues of security, governance, justice
and economic and social development and to support
the full implementation of mutual commitments
made on those issues at international conferences,
as well as on continuing implementation of the
National Drug Control Strategy, and requests
that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), in an increasingly enabling
function, assist the Government of Afghanistan on
its way towards ensuring full Afghan leadership
and ownership, as defined by the Kabul process.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for
the transition (inteqal) process, which will entail the
assumption of full responsibility by Afghanistan’s
institutions in the security sector, consistent with
the London, Kabul, Bonn and Tokyo Conferences
and the NATO Lisbon and Chicago Summits.
“The Security Council stresses the central
and impartial role that the United Nations will
continue to play in promoting peace and stability
in Afghanistan by leading the efforts of the
international community.

S/PV.7208

“The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the security situation in Afghanistan, in
particular the ongoing violent and terrorist activities
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and
extremist groups, illegal armed groups, criminals
and those involved in the production, trafficking or
trade of illicit drugs, and the strong links between
terrorism activities and illicit drugs, resulting in
threats to the local population, including women,
children, national security forces and international
military and civilian personnel, including
humanitarian and development workers.
“The Security Council notes with concern
the existing links between international security,
terrorism and transnational organized crime,
money-laundering, trafficking in illicit drugs and
illegal arms, and in this regard emphasizes the need
to enhance coordination of efforts on the national,
subregional, regional and international levels in
order to strengthen a global response to that serious
challenge and in particular to the close connections
between international terrorism and illicit drugs.
The Council welcomes the recent efforts carried
out under the Russian presidency of the Financial
Action Task Force on Money Laundering on the
identification of illicit financial flows linked to
Afghan drug production and trafficking.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need to
enhance existing interregional and international
cooperation and coordination mechanisms in
order to develop an integrated, comprehensive and
balanced response to the drug problem, including
as part of a long-term security, development and
institution-building agenda.
“The Security Council encourages an enhanced
collaboration between all relevant entities, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, including the United Nations Police
Division, and the United Nations Development
Programme in order to have an effective and
detailed coordination mechanism to prioritize
activities, support the National Drug Control
Strategy and ensure coordinated implementation
of a comprehensive United Nations comprehensive
approach. It encourages the inclusion of combating
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
in the work of all relevant United Nations entities

14-4408925/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

involved in Afghanistan, in accordance with their
respective mandates and actively maximizing their
synergies.
“The Security Council reaffirms specifically
in that context its support for the implementation,
under the leadership and ownership of the Afghan
people, of the commitments set out in the London
(S/2010/65) and Kabul Conference communiqués,
and of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy and of the National Drug Control Strategy
as part of the comprehensive implementation
strategy to be taken forward by the Government
of Afghanistan with the support of the region and
the international community and with a central and
impartial coordinating role for the United Nations,
consistent with the Kabul process and in line with
the national priority programmes.
“The Security Council, stressing the crucial
importance of advancing regional and interregional
cooperation, welcomes in that regard the continued
commitment of the international community to
support stability and development in Afghanistan,
and calls on the Afghan Government, with the
assistance of the international community, to
accelerate the implementation of the National Drug
Control Strategy, including through alternative
livelihood programmes, encourages additional
international support for the four priorities identified
in that Strategy, and commends the support
provided by the UNODC to the Triangular Initiative
and the Central Asian Regional Information and
Coordination Centre within the framework of the
Paris Pact initiative and the Rainbow Strategy,
the UNODC regional programme for Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries, relevant efforts by
the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan,
the European Union (EU) through the EU Border
Management Programme in Central Asia and
Border Management Northern Afghanistan, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation and the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan process, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) engagement with
Afghanistan, based on the 2011 Vilnius ministerial
declaration, and by means of implementation of the
OSCE project at the OSCE Border Management
Staff College in Dushanbe, inter alia, the training
26/38

25/06/2014

of Afghan law enforcement officers in combating
illicit drugs at the Domodedovo Police Academy of
Russia and their continued training in the United
States Drug Enforcement Administration Training
Academy, the Siberian Law Institute and the NorthWestern Training Institute of the Russian Federal
Drug Control Service.
“The Security Council calls upon States to
strengthen international and regional cooperation
to counter the threat to the international
community posed by the production, trafficking
and consumption of illicit drugs originating
in Afghanistan, with a view to its progressive
elimination, in accordance with the principle of
common and shared responsibility in addressing
the drug problem of Afghanistan, including
through strengthening law enforcement capacity
and cooperation in countering the trafficking
in illicit drugs and precursor chemicals and
money-laundering and corruption linked to such
trafficking. The Council also encourages Member
States to undertake further action, as well as to
consider, on the basis of concrete proposals by
UNODC and theInternational Narcotics Control
Board, through the United Nations Commission
on Narcotic Drugs and possible new international
initiatives aimed at strengthening the combat
against illicit trafficking in chemicals.
“The Security Council notes the ongoing
importance of the counter-narcotics issue to the
United Nations engagement in Afghanistan. It
reiterates the need for the Council to be kept
informed, including by the UNODC, of the threats
of drug-trafficking and related transnational crime
on situations on the Council’s agenda, notably
when examining the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and political missions.
“The Security Council reiterates its invitation
to the Secretary-General to consider the threats
resulting from drug trafficking and related
illegal activities as a factor in conflict prevention
strategies, conflict analysis, integrated mission
assessments, planning and peacebuilding support
and to consider including in his reports, analysis of
the role played by those threats in situations on the
Council’s agenda.
“The Security Council welcomes further
briefings on the situation of drug trafficking

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7208

in Afghanistan, as necessary, by the Executive
Director of UNODC.”

sacrifice and suffering the brave people of Afghanistan
have undergone to reach it.

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/12.

The attack of 23 May on the Indian Consulate in
Herat was a grim reminder that terrorism, not ethnicity
or tribal differences, is the greatest threat to peace and
stability in Afghanistan and to the Afghan people’s
chances of attaining a path to self-sustained economic
growth and prosperity. The discussion in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of the security situation in Afghanistan
is a sobering reminder of the extent of this danger. We
were distressed to learn that incidents in the south,
south-east, and east of the country alone accounted for
3,917 of the total number of incidents in the short period
between 1 March and 31 May.

I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): At the outset let me thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, and Ambassador
Tanin for their briefings. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his quarterly report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2014/420).
I would like to begin by paying tribute to the people
of Afghanistan, who have endured endless violence but
emerged triumphant every time. The conduct of the
first and second rounds of the presidential elections,
despite the threat of terrorist violence and intimidation
of elders of the community, is a testimony to the great
courage and democratic conviction of all the people of
Afghanistan, regardless of their age or ethnicity.
There is no better testament than these recent
elections to the fact that Afghanistan belongs to all
Afghans, not to any one group or ethnicity. There
is a fundamental understanding among the Afghan
leadership that while it may take a simple arithmetical
majority to win an election, it takes national consensus
and inclusiveness to build a strong democratic and
prosperous country. We congratulate President Karzai
on his leadership and statesmanship in ensuring the
accomplishment of this first political transition. His is
a special political legacy that will always be recognized
by the people of Afghanistan and the region.
We also congratulate all the presidential candidates
who participated in both the first and second rounds,
under extremely difficult security conditions. Their
act of participation in this democratic process and
rallying voters in large numbers, despite the trying
circumstances, may have done more for democracy
in Afghanistan than any other measure. The two
candidates who fought the second round also have the
onerous responsibility, along with the representatives of
other Afghan institutions, of ensuring that the process
is completed. The political transition that will take
place on 2 August will mark a significant milestone in
Afghanistan’s history, and we will never forget the great

The Secretary-General notes that there has also
been an increase in incidents where a variety of
Al-Qaida affiliates, including the Pakistan-based
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, have been regularly
making attacks on Afghan security forces alongside
actions by elements of the former Taliban regime. The
only way to defeat this scourge is through wholehearted
support from the international community aimed at
developing a prosperous, independent and sovereign
Afghanistan capable of defending itself.
Though the international community’s focus
has been on the security and political transitions
in Afghanistan, we must not allow our attention to
be diverted from the equally important issue of the
country’s economic development. In that context,
UNAMA and the United Nations agencies whose
activities it is supposed to coordinate have a significant
role to play. UNAMA has the important job of supporting
Afghan political institutions, but it must also work to
harness the unique capabilities of the United Nations
and its development agencies to expand humanitarian
assistance and development services to the most remote
villages in Afghanistan.
India’s commitment to assisting the people and
Government of Afghanistan as they build a peaceful,
pluralistic, democratic and prosperous country will
remain unwavering. In conclusion, we would like to
once again congratulate the people of Afghanistan
on their enthusiastic participation in the elections.
We want to express our full support for the political,
social and economic transition taking place there.
Afghanistan is standing at the threshold of a historic
transition, and we would like to convey our best wishes
to its people. At this critical juncture, we would like

14-4408927/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

to assure Afghanistan of the steadfast support of the
Government and people of India.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): In
the past few months Afghanistan has passed a series
of historic milestones. The elections of 5 April and
the runoff contest on 14 June were both significant
achievements. Threats from the Taliban and other
insurgent groups aimed at disrupting and discrediting
the democratic process did not deter the Afghans, who,
with many women and young people among them,
came out in their millions to cast their ballots in both
rounds. The fact that so many Afghans, particularly
so many women, participated in the electoral process
in order to make their voices heard, despite the efforts
of insurgents to discourage them, shows the degree to
which the Taliban has been marginalized among the
people of Afghanistan.
(spoke in English)
Canada acknowledges the work of the Ministry
of Interior and the Afghan national security forces in
ensuring that the elections could proceed. That they
succeeded, despite threats by insurgents to disrupt
them, is a testament to the increasing capacity of these
vital security institutions. Canada remains committed
to supporting the national security forces and to
strengthening their capacity to respond to threats and
provide security for the Afghan people. Nevertheless,
we are deeply concerned by the recent allegations of
fraud that have been made. We urge the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission to take all measures
necessary to investigate and resolve in a thorough and
transparent manner all allegations of fraud that have
been registered, in order to maintain confidence in
the electoral process. It is essential that the process,
including the adjudication of complaints, enables the
will of the Afghan people to be heard.
(spoke in French)
The months ahead will put Afghanistan’s new
leader to the test. Given that the international forces
will be leaving the country this year, Afghanistan’s
stability and security will depend increasingly on
well-trained and -equipped national security forces.
The international community has indicated that it
is committed to helping Afghanistan strengthen its
security forces, but that can be realized only if adequate
arrangements are put in place on the ground. We urge
the Government of Afghanistan to sign the bilateral
security agreement proposed by the United States and

28/38

25/06/2014

conclude a status of forces agreement with NATO as
soon as possible, in order to enable the international
community to begin planning the next phase of military
assistance to Afghanistan. It is also essential to ensure
accountability and transparency for the international
financing, including Canada’s commitment of
$330 million over three years starting in 2015, that has
been pledged in support to the Afghan national security
forces.
(spoke in English)
The commitment of the Afghan people to a
secure and democratic future is clear, and Canada
is committed to supporting that path. However,
Afghanistan’s full potential will never be realized until
the rights of all its citizens, especially women and girls,
are fully protected and realized. The future success and
stability of Afghanistan will be a direct result of the
full participation and empowerment of Afghan women.
Canada will continue to emphasize that more must
be done to ensure that women’s voices are heard and
listened to in all decision-making processes. In order
for Afghan women to be empowered, we must also
make sure that they are safe and secure.
Afghanistan
must
meet
its
international
commitments and implement its law on the elimination
of violence against women in order to protect Afghan
women and girls from sexual violence, abuse and
forced, early and child marriage. We have seen around
the world that successful peace agreements are those
that listen to the voices of women and girls, who are
the foundation of a society. The rights of women and
girls must be central to any eventual peace agreement.
Looking ahead to the parliamentary elections of 2015,
it is essential that the voice of Afghan women not be
diminished. We will continue to strongly support the
full political participation of Afghan women throughout
that process. As half of the population and more than
one third of the voters in the recent election, their voices
and their opinions are essential to building a stronger,
more secure and prosperous Afghanistan.
It is also imperative that Afghanistan’s new
leader ensure that the country continues to fulfil its
commitments under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. Canada’s $227 million in development
assistance between 2014 and 2017 are contingent upon
those key reforms. The Afghan Parliament has already
taken important steps towards achieving some of the
outstanding benchmarks. The anti-money-laundering
and combating the financing of terrorism laws are in
14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

the process of being adopted. Such laws are essential to
helping curb corruption and increasing the transparency
of Afghanistan’s financial sector.
We also welcome the approval of the Minerals Law
by the Wolesi Jirga, which, once adopted, will help
to lay the groundwork for Afghanistan’s long-term
economic development. There is still work to be done
to strengthen the mining regulations in order to guard
against corruption, to increase transparency and to
guarantee water rights for all Afghan communities, as
well as to ensure that Afghanistan’s extractive sector is
developed in a responsible and sustainable manner. We
urge the responsible ministries to put such regulations
in place as soon as possible.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, this year, Afghanistan has taken
significant steps to ensure the stability and security
of its territory. However, there are still challenges to
overcome. The Afghan Government must continue
its efforts in the areas of security, transparency and
respect for human rights. The terrorist networks
from neighbouring States that have set up on Afghan
territory must be held accountable for their actions.
Protecting the human rights of all Afghan citizens, in
particular women and girls, must be at the centre of a
possible peace agreement. Those are great challenges
but Canada is committed to working with the next
leader, chosen democratically by the people, so as to
help Afghanistan move forward without the undue
interference of its neighbours.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We congratulate
the people of Afghanistan on having successfully
conducted two rounds of presidential elections. Those
landmark elections should deepen democracy, bring the
first step of a democratic transfer of power and move
the country towards peace and stability. It is a defining
moment for Afghanistan and the region.
Afghanistan’s political continuity and national
reconciliation, as well as its security and economic
transitions, clearly hinge on a smooth democratic
transition. Afghan institutions now have an historic
obligation to take the electoral process towards its logical
end. It is time to build trust, complete the task at hand
and usher in a new era in the history of Afghanistan.
We believe that the Afghan elections are an internal
affair, led by Afghan institutions. It is the aspiration of

S/PV.7208

the people of Afghanistan to resolve differences within
the framework of the Afghan Constitution and laws.
We agree with Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš that it is indeed a time for engagement
and statesmanship.
For its part, Pakistan took a series of steps to
support a free, peaceful and secure electoral process
in Afghanistan. We bolstered security along the
Pakistan-Afghanistan border by deploying additional
troops, enhancing communications vigilance and aerial
surveillance and increasing patrols. Pakistan has no
favourites. Afghans are a proud people and masters of
their own destiny. We respect the democratic choice of
the people of Afghanistan and look forward to working
with the next leader. The people of Afghanistan realize
that the political transition will not deliver its full
dividends until a lasting political settlement is worked
out through an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghanowned reconciliation process. Pakistan is committed to
facilitating that process.
While acknowledging the professional strengths
that the Afghan National Security Forces have been
gathering over the years, both the Secretary-General
and the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) have warned that the Security Forces will
need support beyond 2014 to ensure their viability
and sustainability. The ongoing security, political
and economic transitions in Afghanistan must not be
thwarted or derailed. The projected drawdowns should
be prudent and responsible. They should not leave any
security vacuums and no one should harbour ambitions
to fill such vacuums. The world had to pay a heavy
price for the precipitous withdrawals in the 1990s. A
repeat of that precedent would be more costly to peace
and security.
There are forecasts of an economic downturn as the
war economy, we hope, changes into a peace economy.
The Secretary-General has cautioned that the decrease
in the physical presence of foreign troops should not
lead to a decrease in development assistance. The
misperception that Afghanistan was being abandoned
must be rectified. The international community has a
responsibility to avert a large-scale economic recession
in Afghanistan, which could lead to unemployment,
displacement and a greater reliance on the illicit
economy. The reconstruction efforts must focus on
policies that would stimulate growth and investment,
create jobs and facilitate the rehabilitation of refugees.

14-4408929/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

Pakistan continues to host 3 million registered or
unregistered Afghan refugees. We have been bearing
the burden of an even higher number of refugees for
the past 34 years. According to the Secretary-General,
the registered 1.6 million refugees alone represent
the world’s largest protracted refugee population. In
April, Pakistan and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees launched a solutions
strategy for the sustainable return and reintegration
of Afghan refugees. Recently, there has been a sharp
decrease, of about 64 per cent, in the return of refugees.
The international community must step forward to help
quicken the pace of repatriation of Afghan refugees
and the United Nations should assist the Afghan
Government in creating pull factors.
Pakistan is one of the victims of the opiates
trafficked from Afghanistan. We are glad that the
Afghan Government has intensified its counternarcotics campaign by conducting targeted operations,
dismantling laboratories, seizing illicit drugs and
eradicating opium poppy cultivation on hundreds of
hectares of land. Yet we realize that the overall pace
has slowed down and that we have a long way to go.
Pakistan, in collaboration with Afghanistan and Iran
as part of the Triangular Initiative, will continue to
work for more stringent drugs control and border
management.
Peace in Afghanistan has a direct bearing on
regional economic cooperation. In order to enhance
regional connectivity, as well as trade and energy flows,
Pakistan supports transregional projects, including
the Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project, the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India gas pipeline and infrastructure
development. Their success clearly depends on stability
in Afghanistan.
Pakistan-Afghanistan relations continue to be
marked by contacts and communication at the highest
level. President Mamnoon Hussain, who visited Kabul
last March, along with President Karzai, underlined
that the people of our two countries would tap the vast
potential for progress and prosperity. Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif, who has met with President Karzai
four times in the past year, is pursuing his vision of
a peaceful neighbourhood and stable and cooperative
relations with Afghanistan. Pakistan and Afghanistan
agree that terrorism and violent extremism pose a
grave threat to our two countries. We must fight the
scourge together. In that context, border management

30/38

25/06/2014

and border security are an abiding concern and priority.
Our Chief of Army Staff, General Rahid Sharif, visited
Kabul to discuss with his counterpart the security
situation in Afghanistan, ISAF drawdown and ways
to enhance bilateralism, with particular emphasis on
better coordination along the Pakistan-Afghanistan
border.
Pakistan and Afghanistan must not allow non-State
actors to influence their relationship. Because of the
fluid situation along the border, it is important to have
more frequent and real-time communication between
military and intelligence agencies to address mutual
concerns and build trust. Allegations made by Kabul
from time to time against cross-border shelling from
the Pakistani side are exaggerated and misinformed.
When our forces come under heavy attack by terrorists
from across the border, we act in self-defence.
We have launched a comprehensive operation,
Zarb-e-Azb, to deliver a fatal blow to foreign and local
terrorists hiding in our tribal areas. Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif, while addressing the Parliament on
16 June, said that we have started the operation to make
Pakistan a land of peace. Through those operations we
would purge selected areas of militants and terrorists,
dismantle terrorist entities and networks and establish
the full writ of the State. The operations in north
Waziristan should not be a cause for concern for the
Government of Afghanistan but a source of strength for
it.
We express our deepest condolences to the families
of the victims of recent flash floods and landslides in
Afghanistan. Pakistan sent three planes loaded with
relief supplies for the people stricken by the massive
landslide on 2 May in Badakhshan. Afghanistan
remains vulnerable to recurrent sudden and slow onset
disasters. As pointed out by the Secretary-General, the
United Nations should help Afghanistan develop a risk
reduction and risk management strategy.
We admire and commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his
effective, sensitive and results-oriented leadership of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
I also thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov,
for his briefing this morning.
Finally, I thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for the
very insightful, forward-looking and constructive
statement he delivered this morning.

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

The President (spoke in Russian): I would like to
remind speakers of the time limit for their statements
and ask them kindly to respect those time limits.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting. Due to time limitations,
I will make only the salient points of my statement.
Copies of my full text will be circulated in the Chamber.
Japan welcomes the adoption today of the
presidential statement on the Afghan presidential
elections (S/PRST/2014/11). We echo Security Council
members in welcoming the holding of the second round
of voting that took place on 14 June, as scheduled. The
voting was conducted in relative calm, although security
threats were witnessed in some areas. We express our
admiration for the Afghan people, the security forces
and all those involved in carrying out the election.
In support of the elections, Japan provided
$16 million. We hope that the process leading up
to the announcement of the final results, which is
scheduled for 22 July, will proceed in a fair, prompt and
peaceful manner. In that regard, it is essential that both
candidates, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf
Ghani, respect the mandate of the election bodies
and cooperate to avoid worsening the situation. Once
electoral complaints have been adjudicated according
to the law, both candidates and their supporters need
to accept the outcome. The electoral bodies, for their
part, must demonstrate transparency and integrity as
they count ballots and deal with complaints submitted
by the candidates. We hope to see the orderly transition
to an inclusive and reform-minded new Government
led by the new president. The new Government will
have to address important challenges, such as security,
reconciliation with the Taliban and sustainable
economic development.
Allow me to touch upon the third challenge,
namely, sustainable economic development, especially
in relation to the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, which many speakers referred to today.
Last month, Japan hosted an International Contact
Group meeting in Tokyo. Participants affirmed that the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework will continue
to serve as a reference for relations between donors
and a new Afghan Government. As both presidential
candidates have acknowledged, the future Government
will have the responsibility to implement Afghanistan’s
commitments made in Tokyo. We look forward to

S/PV.7208

seeing the tangible results of Afghanistan’s efforts on
the occasion of the follow-up ministerial meeting to
be held in London in November 2014. We also hope
that the London conference will serve as a venue for
the Tokyo Framework to be shared by the new Afghan
Government and the international community.
On a related note, we welcome the adoption today
of a presidential statement on the issue of illicit drugs
proposed by the Russian Federation (S/PRST/2014/12).
When I served as Japanese Special Representative
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, I had the pleasure of
initiating a joint cooperation project between Japan and
Russia on that issue. Under our joint efforts, 60 Afghan
security agents have already received training on
anti-narcotic law enforcement at the Police Academy
in Moscow. We believe that such efforts are useful with
a view to promoting the international cooperation that
today’s presidential statement calls for.
Let me conclude by referring to Japan’s
contributions to Afghanistan. Since 2001, we have
contributed a total of $5.4 billion to Afghanistan for its
development efforts. Japan is the second largest donor
after the United States. At the Tokyo Conference in July
2012, the international community made a commitment
to provide more than $16 billion through 2015. For its
part, Japan has been steadily implementing its promise
to provide up to $3 billion over five years. I would like to
reaffirm our commitment to stand by the Government
and the people of Afghanistan in their endeavours to
achieve long-term stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
his outstanding commitment to the democratization
process in Afghanistan. We also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Fedotov, and the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for their briefings.
Between now and the end of 2014, two crucial events
will mark the course of Afghanistan’s future. First, for
the first time in the country’s history, there will be a
handover of power from one head of State to another
based on a democratic process. Secondly, the completion
of the transition process where a mission supporting the
Afghan National Security Forces for training, advising
and assisting will replace the International Security
Assistance Force military presence.

14-4408931/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

The presidential run-off elections confirmed the
positive trend arising from the first vote. The high
turnout in the elections was a sign that Afghans, not
giving into fear, trust the democratic process and
have high expectations for a new President capable of
tackling the country’s problems.
The regularity of the entire election process, up until
the announcement of the new Head of State, is critical.
Only with the perception of a legitimate, credible,
transparent and inclusive process will the outcome be
accepted by the defeated opponents and public opinion
and thus allow for a peaceful political transition with
no upsets. The United Nations is directing its efforts
towards that perspective by reiterating the absolute
primacy of the election process, of the respect for its
rules and regulations and of the importance of dialogue
between the two candidates. In this delicate phase
following the second round of voting, it is essential that
both candidates and their supporters base their conduct
on moderation and a sense of responsibility, avoid
rushing to claim victory prematurely, and channel
complaints through the appropriate mechanisms. That
should be done with the awareness that the post-election
period requires the country’s utmost unity, with a view
to its civil and economic development, to be nurtured
by peace and stability.
The contribution of the Afghan National Security
Forces was decisive in guaranteeing the regularity
of the presidential and local elections, thus proving
their capability in successfully overcoming the heavy,
everyday challenge of controlling the country’s
territory. As to the insurgence, despite the higher
number of attacks and victims on this occasion than
during the first vote, once again attempts to derail the
elections failed. Nonetheless, we must be aware that the
stabilization of the country will take more time and that
we cannot let our guard down.
In view of completing the transition process,
the announcement by the United States on its future
presence in Afghanistan and on the time table of the
military withdrawal is welcome news. Clearly what
remains instrumental for post-2014 assets is the
signing of the bilateral security agreement between
Afghanistan and the United States, to which both
presidential candidates are receptive, and the finalizing
of the necessary legal framework for the presence of
NATO troops in the country.
Italy confirms its support for the peace process,
recognizes Afghanistan’s complete ownership and
32/38

25/06/2014

expects that it will not be affected by any setbacks in
its gains in democratization and civil and gender rights,
nor yield to terrorism. We reiterate our firm belief in
the fact that, without an internal reconciliation in
Afghanistan, there can be no prospects of stabilization,
nor can any possible stabilization be long lasting
without the genuine and determined contribution of the
other regional actors.
In such a momentous stage of Afghanistan’s
process of stabilization and development, it is vital, for
my country, to see that ambitions are not diminished
and that there will be no sacrificing the quality and
quantity of the benchmarks to be respected by the Kabul
authorities. We expect our Afghan friends to remain
committed to the Tokyo legacy and to reach clear and
measurable goals in sectors such as the democratic
and electoral processes, the fight against corruption,
administrative and economic governance and human
rights.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member States. The
candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; and Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.
I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2014/420) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ján Kubiš and United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Executive Director Yury Fedotov
for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for
his remarks.
I would like to reiterate our full support for the
important role played by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people and in
coordinating the international community’s assistance.
The role of the United Nations will be even more
important after 2014 in ensuring that the international
community’s assistance continues to reach people on
the ground. It is vital that UNAMA’s continued field
presence be preserved.

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Democracy and the rule of law are among the core
values of the European Union. We are committed to
supporting people’s legitimate aspirations to freely and
fairly elect the people that govern and represent them.
In the past few months, we have seen the Afghan people
repeatedly and bravely express their determination
to have their say as to who the next President of the
country will be. We pay tribute to the courage of people
who ignored the threat of violence from groups who see
the people’s will as an anathema and women who defied
the social conventions that continue to be conservative
in many areas to assert their rights.
In all elections, every vote matters. Every vote
counts. However, when people have shown this kind
courage and determination to have their say, it is all
the more vital that their votes and their will be fully
reflected. It is therefore critical that the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission ensure that their workings are
transparent. Candidates and voters need to be reassured
that the processes are objective. In particular, the online
publication of results from individual polling stations
must be timely, and the guidelines for the recounting
and auditing of votes should be consistently applied.
Equally, it is essential that the candidates and their
supporters allow the time and space for the institutions
to perform their duties and exercise self-restraint in
this delicate phase. It is important that both candidates
act responsibly and direct any complaints through the
appropriate mechanisms. Statements that prematurely
claim victory or risk inflaming tensions should be
avoided.
We look forward to working with the new President
and his Government to address the critical challenges
that remain in Afghanistan. I am pleased to announce
that, on Monday, the European Union’s Foreign Affairs
Council endorsed a new comprehensive strategy
for Afghanistan, which reiterates our continuing
commitment to assist in addressing those remaining
challenges.
Our aim is to support the development of
Afghanistan’s institutions to provide the resilience
needed to safeguard the progress achieved to date and
provide the platform for a more effective and ultimately
sustainable Afghan State. The European Union and its
member States provide more than $1 billion a year in aid
to Afghanistan, making it the largest beneficiary of our
assistance in the world. That shows that we are living
up to the international aid pledges made at the Tokyo

S/PV.7208

conference. However, to benefit from the full extent
of those pledges, the new Government of Afghanistan
also needs to show evidence of their reciprocal and
lasting commitment. The new Afghan authorities must
enact the political and economic reforms set out in the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework — reforms
that are so vital to the long-term political and economic
sustainability of Afghanistan. Urgent action to restore
economic confidence, establish a platform for growth
and jobs and maximize revenue collection is imperative.
Security remains a pressing challenge in
Afghanistan. The European Union asks the new
President to reach out to all Afghans and neighbouring
countries to invite them to contribute to the development
of a stable, prosperous and fully sovereign Afghanistan,
including through intensifying engagement in the
Istanbul Process. We support an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process as
a foundation for peace and stability in Afghanistan
and the region. Such peace and stability in the region
would be supported by collective action to address the
continuing threat from drugs and organized crime. That
should include urgent action to root out the corrupt
networks that continue to grow rich as a result of the
misery of others.
In conclusion, Afghanistan faces a new opportunity
to address the fundamental issues that continue to
threaten its stability and undermine its progress. I can
assure the Council that the European Union will remain
a steadfast ally in supporting champions of reform in
order to ensure a better future for all Afghans — the
sort of future they want and deserve.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš,
Executive Director Fedotov and Ambassador Tanin for
their respective statements.
I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The year 2014 is crucial for Afghanistan. It should
mark the first peaceful transfer of power in Afghan
history. In the recent elections, millions of Afghan
women and men have shown their commitment to
actively shape the future of the country. They want
their voices to be heard, and they want to see an end to
violence.

14-4408933/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

I congratulate the voters on their courage in the
face of threats and violence as well as the Afghan
National Security Forces, which were well prepared and
effective in securing the democratic process. We now
call upon both presidential candidates to respect the
authority of the Afghan Electoral Commission and to
accept the final outcome once all complaints have been
effectively adjudicated. I call to mind the statesmanship
of the candidates, displayed in accepting the first round
of results. The electoral process is not yet complete. As
this is an Afghan-led process, we urge all stakeholders
to promote national unity and to avoid appeals to ethnic,
tribal or factional interests. As Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon has stressed, at this critical juncture the need
is for statesmanship, not gamesmanship.
The
numerous
positive
developments
in
Afghanistan, including the elections on achievement
first and foremost of the Afghan people and its
institutions, will require our continued solidarity and
commitment. This includes support for the Afghan
National Security Forces. The signing of the relevant
security arrangements by the new Afghan Government
is a necessary condition for continued military support,
including through the Resolute Support mission.
As future international support will concentrate
increasingly on civilian assistance, United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
have a central role to play in coordinating those efforts
in support of the new Afghan Government.
No doubt, grave challenges lie ahead. That should
also caution us against overburdening UNAMA. The
Mission needs to be adequately resourced and present
throughout the country in order to fulfil its mandate.
The new Afghan Government will face a host of
significant challenges. We encourage our partners in
Kabul to include all members of society, especially
women, in decision-making processes and to continue
all efforts to protect and promote human rights; to
increase coordination and efficiency of international
support; to promote national reconciliation and fight
corruption as well as to implement its commitments
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
In conclusion, I wish to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubiš for his dynamic
leadership and want to assure the Afghan people and
the Secretary-General of Germany’s steadfast support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.

34/38

25/06/2014

Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš; the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Mr. Yury Fedotov; and Ambassador Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for their statements.
My delegation endorses the statement made by
the Head of the Delegation of the European Union.
I wish to add, in my national capacity, a number of
considerations for this debate.
Spain reiterates its congratulations to the people of
Afghanistan on holding the first round of the process to
elect a new President of the Republic and new members
of the provincial councils. We also commend them for
the way in which they conducted the campaign and the
voting in the second round, whose counting and legal
processes have not yet been completed. These historic
elections are critical to the ongoing transition process,
and therefore to the future of Afghanistan. They were
called to ensure the first democratic transfer of power
in the presidency of the Republic, thereby completing
the political transformation started 12 years ago by
the Afghans, with the support of the international
community.
It is important to highlight the exemplary
behaviour of the Afghan people, who flocked to the
polls with courage and resolve, defying the threats
of those who sought to derail the ongoing transition.
The statistics — which reflect a participation rate
of approximately 60 per cent in the first round, with
a 38 per cent share of female participation — make
clear the strong commitment of the majority to the
democratic process in the country. We also welcome the
commitment to maintaining public order shown by the
Afghan National Security Forces during the balloting.
It is vital that this process be completed successfully.
All political actors and State institutions, particularly
the electoral institutions, must show themselves worthy
of the brave citizens who, with their overwhelming
participation in the elections, bravely and resolutely
outlined the future they want for the country — a future
of democracy, peace and economic and social progress.
It is therefore imperative that, with respect to the
Constitution and laws of Afghanistan, all existing legal
mechanisms be in place to ensure that the will of the
people expressed at the polls is respected, and that the
entire process be conducted in a peaceful, responsible
and transparent manner.
14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

For all these reasons, I wish to join Spain’s voice
to those who have spoke before me in reiterating the
call on all actors — the candidates, the voters and the
institutions — to maintain to the end the exemplary
behaviour they showed in the early phases of the
electoral process.
For more than a decade, Spain has been strongly
committed to Afghanistan and the Afghans. Through
our development cooperation, which made Afghanistan
a priority target; the activities of our provincial
reconstruction team in Qala-e-Naw; and our support
for the country’s security and the training of its security
forces, Spain has responded to requests from Afghans
and assisted them in their process of nation-building.
Many significant challenges remain. Afghans can count
on Spain to remain at its side, as always, and support
them in their efforts to build a stable, prosperous,
democratic Afghanistan that cooperates with its
neighbours and remains fully sovereign.
I cannot conclude without reiterating Spain’s
gratitude and support for the role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to date and
that it is still expected to play in support of the decisions
and goals of the people of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union, and would
like to make a few remarks in its national capacity.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2014/420) and his Special Representative
Ján Kubiš and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) team for their dedication
and continued support for the people of Afghanistan in
fulfilling the tasks of the Mission.
First of all, Latvia acknowledges the remarkable
achievements Afghanistan has made in the past
decade, starting from very difficult circumstances. It
is imperative that the progress be sustained in order for
Afghanistan to emerge stronger after the transformation
decade.
Latvia supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace and reconciliation process. Inclusive and orderly
Afghan-led and Afghan-run elections, with a legitimate
process and outcome that are accepted by all, are
vital to consolidating democracy in Afghanistan and
tackling the country’s political, economic and security

S/PV.7208

challenges. Substantial progress has already been made
by the Government, the electoral bodies, the Afghan
National Security Forces, and the electorate in the
preparations for the elections and during the elections.
Latvia particularly welcomes the measures taken to
ensure the higher participation of women and the results
achieved in this regard. Now, at this critical juncture
for Afghanistan, everybody should assume their
responsibilities for establishing a strong foundation for
national unity and stability, and avoid any tensions.
Regional cooperation is crucial to the long-term
stability and economic development of Afghanistan
and the region as a whole, including Central Asia.
Latvia welcomes regional initiatives, in particular
the Istanbul Process. The active and constructive
engagement of all participants ahead of and after the
Ministerial Conference in China in August is important
for sustained progress in developing cooperation and
building confidence between Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Latvia commends the support expressed
at the highest level by China, India, Iran and Pakistan
for a smooth political transition in Afghanistan and
for constructive regional cooperation. We believe
that infrastructure projects that strengthen regional
connectivity greatly contribute to regional cooperation
and economic development. Afghanistan has made
remarkable progress in this regard.
In order to contribute to those efforts, on 3 and 4 June
Latvia hosted a high-level conference on transport,
logistics and trade routes on the theme “Connecting
Asia with Europe”, which this year gathered over 400
participants, including Government officials, foreign
policy experts and representatives of transport and
logistics companies from countries of the Far East,
South and Central Asia and Afghanistan, as well as
from partner countries in the China and Central and
Eastern European Cooperation Programme. Among
the high-level participants, we were also pleased to
welcome the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation
of Afghanistan.
The participants agreed that the synchronization
of infrastructure projects was important for long-term
stability and growth and that infrastructure projects
at the national level must be compatible with regional
developments in transportation, logistics and trade.
During its presidency of the Council of the European
Union in 2015, Latvia will continue to promote closer
cooperation with the countries of Central Asia, the
Far East and South Asia. In order to further develop

14-4408935/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

our common vision, Latvia will host the next annual
high-level conference in April 2015. Latvia will also
continue to contribute to capacity-building for Afghan
railroad and aviation experts.
Continued international support and cooperation
with Afghanistan are important for achieving sustainable
long-term progress. Mutual commitments made at the
NATO Chicago Summit and the Tokyo Conference
are the basis for partnership between Afghanistan and
the international community, matching international
political, security and financial support with a clear
Afghan commitment to sustained reform. At the same
time, appropriate legal frameworks should be in place
to enable the international community to provide
support in the security sphere after 2014 as well. Latvia
has already pledged its support for the Afghan National
Security Forces as of 2015.
Sustained economic growth and a State-building
process that is founded on the principles of good
governance, the rule of law and human rights, especially
the rights of women and children, should be the basis for
a democratic, prosperous and stable Afghanistan. This
is a crucial moment and an opportunity for Afghanistan
and all its citizens to build on the progress made and
to ensure long-term peace, security and stability in the
country. We should build a true long-term partnership,
led by Afghanistan and based on mutual commitments
to ensuring progress and sustained momentum. Let me
reassure the Council of Latvia’s ongoing involvement
in that regard.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
I should like, at the outset, to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš;
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov; and Ambassador
Tanin for their substantive statements.
I have the honour today to speak on behalf of
the member States of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO). The CSTO member States
support the role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts to support Afghanistan. We endorse
the approach of the Afghan leadership to ensure the
country’s progress towards peace, stability, prosperity
and broad cooperation with regional neighbours.
We pay tribute to the efforts of the Afghan people
themselves, who have striven in the face of numerous
36/38

25/06/2014

challenges to determine their own future and to assume
ownership of their own development and security. In that
context, we note the successful holding of the second
round of the presidential elections on 14 June. We hope
that at this historic turning-point in their country’s
history, the people of Afghanistan will come together
to address the challenges and ensure the equality of all,
respect for the law and the rights of various groups, and
justice and harmony.
The member States of the CSTO fully support the
efforts of the Afghan Government to move towards
national reconciliation. We suggest that this process
should be carried out under the leadership of Kabul and
on the basis of three well-known principles, namely,
that the rebels must lay down their arms, recognize
the Constitution of Afghanistan and sever their ties to
Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.
The member States of the CSTO are convinced
that it will not be possible to stabilize the situation
in Afghanistan in the long term or to effectively
address the challenges facing the country without a
comprehensive approach to existing problems. We are
gravely concerned by the surge in the activities of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorist and extremist
groups, illegal armed bands and criminal elements, and
in particular by their spread to the northern regions of
the country, which directly affects the interests of this
Organization in that zone. A major challenge at this
stage is clearly the problem of illegal drug production
and drug trafficking. The strong connection between
terrorism and illegal Afghan drug production is
particulary alarming, because it undermines Afghan
achievements in the sphere of security and its capacity
to ensure law and order in the country. We note with
concern funding and support for terrorist activities,
including income from the cultivation, production and
trafficking in illicit narcotics as a country of origin or
transit, which Afghanistan is, as well as illicit delivery
to the country of precursors.
The member States of the CSTO also express
their concern at the growth in the production of opium
poppy that was noted in the report Afghanistan Opium
Survey 2013, published by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The cultivation,
production, illegal trafficking and consumption of
opium in Afghanistan continue to pose a serious threat
to stability, security, socioeconomic development and
governance in thatcountry, the region and the world as a
whole. The member States of the CSTO strongly belive

14-44089

25/06/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

that the production, trade and trafficking of illicit drugs
from Afghanstan represent a threat to international
stability and provide a breeding ground for international
terrorism and organized crime. Combating the drug
threat is one of the main components for achieving
stability and security in Afghanistan and is an intrinsic
part of our overall efforts to combat the terrorist threat,
including a possible worsening of the situation given
the upcoming withdrawal from the country this year of
the International Security Assistance Force.
We support the important role of United Nations
agencies and UNODC in monitoring the drug situation
in Afghanistan and in helping to ensure security,
stability and socioeconomic developent in the country.
A significant contribution to addressing that can
be made by bolstering bilateral and multilateral
cooperation between Afghanistan and other countries in
the region. We reiterate our commitment to combating
the illicit drug trade and using the potential of regional
cooperational to combat Afghan drug trafficking. We
therefore accord great importance to the specialized
regional structures that work closely with UNODC. In
November 2007, the Central Asian Regional Information
and Coordination Centre for monitoring trafficking in
illicit substances and their precursors was established
in Almaty.
The member States of the CSTO reiterate their
readiness to continue to support Afghanistan’s counternarcotic efforts, including by training specialists for
law enforcement structures at national training centres,
providing necessary equipment and maintaining the
permanent anti-narcotics mechanism Operation Canal,
which was set up as part of the preventive operations
established under the aegis of the CSTO. We are
ready to enhance cooperation with the Afghan people,
United Nations specialized agencies, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
interested parties. We call for enhancing international
and regional cooperation in order to effectively and
jointly counteract the drug threat emerging from
Afghanistan, in line with the principle of common and
shared responsibility. We express our readiness to use
the potential of the coordinated work of the CSTO in
our foreign policy in order to enhance security and
stability in Afghanistan and in the region as a whole.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank Special
Representative Kubiš and Executive Director Fedotov

S/PV.7208

for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for
his remarks.
Afghanistan today stands at a crucial crossroads,
with key political, security and economic transformation
processes under way. Turkey believes that Afghanistan’s
future should be based on a conscious strategy that
draws strength from local ownership and leadership
and seeks to pull together various strands of efforts
into a meaningful whole. The success of those efforts is
vital for a peaceful, secure and stable Afghanistan that
can effectively serve the needs of its people.
The most important step in this direction has been
taken with the conduct of the presidential and provincial
elections. The enthusiastic voter participation amidst
grave security risks demonstrated the will of the
Afghan people to assume the ownership of their
own country. Turkey believes that despite the fragile
political and security atmosphere, the Afghan electoral
institutions — particularly the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission — have the necessary capacity to handle
any impasse or obstacle that might arise in the election
process, and trust that a successful political transition
will take place. We also believe that all stakeholders
will act responsibly and exercise self-restraint. At this
vital juncture, the international community should
keep investing in positive scenarios for the future of
the country.
The successful continuation of Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation efforts will constitute another
important step towards security, stability and political
transition. Turkey has supported from the outset the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, with the
High Peace Council at the core. We are fully aware of
the difficulties and challenges of the process. In this
context, we strongly condemn the attack last week on
the head of the secretariat of the High Peace Council,
Mr. Stanekzai, and hope that those responsible will
be swiftly brought to justice. We would also like to
stress that the increasing trend of civilian casualties is
worrisome, and increased attention to this phenomenon
is needed.
We are glad to observe the increasing regional
awareness and ownership related to finding sustainable
solutions to the problems of Afghanistan. As
international forces withdraw, regional cooperation and
commitment become increasingly vital to transforming
the region into a zone of peace, stability and prosperity.
Based on this vision, the region must come together to

14-4408937/38

S/PV.7208

The situation in Afghanistan

25/06/2014

transform common problems into mutual interests. In
this context, we appreciate all bilateral and multilateral
dialogue and cooperation efforts, and welcome the
positive momentum that has been reached in the
Istanbul Process. We look forward to the next Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference in China in August.

Our commitment to the needs of the United Nations in
Afghanistan is insurance for protecting the achievements
of the past 13 years on the ground. Turkey will always
remain in solidarity with the Afghan people and
continue to contribute to a safe, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan, as we have done for many decades.

To conclude, I would like to voice our strong
support for the crucial and comprehensive role the
United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan will continue to play in
supporting Afghanistan during and after the transition.

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

38/38

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

14-44089
