United Nations

S/PV.4993

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4993

rd meeting
Tuesday, 22 June 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Albert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Philippines)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Lucas
Mr. Aho-Glele
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
Role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building
Letter dated 1 June 2004 from the Permanent Representative of the Philippines
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2004/442)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-39844 (E)

*0439844*

S/PV.4993

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building
Letter dated 1 June 2004 from the Permanent
Representative of the Philippines to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2004/442)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Canada,
Egypt, Ireland, Japan, Nepal, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa and
Uganda, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Marjatta Rasi, President of the
Economic and Social Council.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the President of the Economic and Social
Council to take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Denis Caillaux,
Secretary-General of CARE International.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

I invite the Secretary-General of CARE
International to take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ian Martin, VicePresident of the International Center for Transitional
Justice.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Vice-President of the International
Center for Transitional Justice to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations. I
should like to draw attention to document S/2004/442,
which contains a letter dated 1 June 2004 from the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a background
paper on the role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
As another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I will not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the table and invite them to resume
their seats at the side of the Chamber. When a speaker
is taking the floor, the conference officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table.
Our topic today focuses on an important segment
of global society whose role is increasingly felt by
most people in post-conflict situations. Since peacebuilding is an important mandate of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Philippine presidency deems it appropriate
that we focus our debate on how the Security Council
could harness the participation of civil society
organizations in post-conflict peace-building. We have

S/PV.4993

distributed a concept paper on this issue, contained in
document S/2004/442. I should like to invite all
speakers to address the questions we have set out in the
concept paper.
I welcome the presence of the distinguished
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Madam Minister and
President, let me start by saying how pleased we are to
see you in our midst today and to congratulate you and
your delegation on organizing this timely debate.
Given its subject, I am very glad that civil society
representatives will participate in it.
The partnership between the United Nations and
civil society has grown considerably in recent years.
That reflects the increasing role of civil society in
helping to shape and scrutinize government policies
and in holding Governments accountable. It also
reflects the need, in an era marked by both global
integration and State fragmentation and failure, for
civil society to contribute to international decisionmaking.
Of course, civil society actors come in all shapes
and sizes. Many make outstanding contributions to
peace. Others, which I have in the past called “uncivil
society”, are drivers of conflict. If peace-building
missions are to be effective, they should, as part of a
clear political strategy, work with and strengthen those
civil society forces that are helping ordinary people to
voice their concerns and to act on them in peaceful
ways. By the same token, they should seek to reduce
the influence of forces that promote exclusionary
policies or encourage people to resort to violence.
The aim must be to create a synergy with those
civil society groups that are bridge-builders, truthfinders, watchdogs, human rights defenders and agents
of social protection and economic revitalization. That
can build reconciliation and lessen the appeal of those
who might try to reignite conflict. It can help ensure
that national and international actors are held
accountable. It can assist in building national
consensus on the design of post-conflict structures and
programmes. It can help prepare local communities to
receive back demobilized soldiers, refugees and
internally displaced persons, and it can give a voice to
the concerns of the marginalized. That is why there
should be a two-way dialogue between the United
Nations and civil society, not so that one can direct the

other but to ensure that our efforts complement one
another.
However, we should not see civil society groups
as peace-building partners only after we have arrived
in a country with a mandate in our pockets. On the
contrary, civil society organizations, local as well as
international, have a role to play in the deliberative
processes of the Organization, including the Council.
In recent years, civil conflicts and complex
emergencies have taken centre stage in the work of the
Council. That has deepened the need for the Council to
have a real understanding of the places and situations
in which it is engaged. I believe that Council members
can benefit from the expertise, focus and insight which
civil society groups bring to the table. I therefore
welcome the efforts the Council has made to strengthen
its informal relations with civil society groups. But the
time may have come for the Council to deepen its
dialogue with them and to place its relations with them
on a firmer footing.
Here I would ask the Council to pay serious
attention to the report released yesterday by the highlevel Panel on United Nations relationships with civil
society. I am extremely grateful to the Panel members
and to all who contributed to the report. Its
recommendations are practical and forward-looking.
We in the Secretariat are studying them carefully. I
trust that the members of the Council — and, indeed,
all Member States — will do the same.
I am particularly pleased that the Panel has
proposed a number of concrete measures to increase
the participation of civil society representatives from
developing countries, and the report offers many
innovative ideas to strengthen the partnership with
civil society in our humanitarian and development
work.
The report also has a number of practical
suggestions on how the Security Council might engage
more effectively with civil society, ranging from
making better use of the Arria formula, to holding
seminars on issues of emerging importance, to
convening independent commissions of inquiry after
Council-mandated operations.
The Security Council is, of course, a Council of
sovereign Governments dealing with the most sensitive
matters of war and peace. It should view the input of
civil society organizations not as an attempt to usurp
the role of Governments but, rather, as a way to add

3

S/PV.4993

quality and value to its decisions and to help ensure
that they will be effectively implemented.
I would like to remind the Council that many
civil society organizations — not just from the North,
but also from the South; and not just international, but
also local — have shown that they can make a real
contribution to the work of the United Nations in peace
and security. I therefore have high hopes for the
international conference on conflict prevention which
civil society groups have decided to hold next year in
response to the recommendation in my 2001 conflictprevention report.
Engagement with civil society is not an end in
itself, not is it a panacea, but it is vital to our efforts to
turn the promise of peace agreements into the reality of
peaceful societies and viable States. The partnership
between the United Nations and civil society is
therefore not an option; it is a necessity. I hope that,
through this debate, the Council will be able to develop
more comprehensive and concrete strategies for
strengthening its partnership with civil society.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his timely, important and encouraging statement, as
well as for his support for the theme that we have
adopted during our presidency. I thank him also for his
kind words of welcome.
I give the floor to the President of the Economic
and Social Council, Ms. Marjatta Rasi.
Ms. Rasi: I would like to thank the Security
Council President for the initiative to bring to light the
important role that the civil society can play in postconflict societies. I am very pleased to take part in this
debate in my capacity as President of the Economic
and Social Council.
There are different perspectives on the role of the
civil society, whether we refer to non-governmental
stakeholders, whose efforts complement the work of
international organizations and of Governments, or
whether we analyse the contribution of local actors,
which contribute to the peace-building process. All
these dimensions are very well reflected in the concept
paper provided by the President. I can touch upon only
some of the questions from the perspective of the
Economic and Social Council and in terms of
development concerns.
If we take a look at certain areas to which the
United Nations and the Security Council itself have

4

attached importance in their activities, we find that
civil society organizations (NGOs) are increasingly an
indispensable partner. I could mention rehabilitation
and reintegration at the local level, human rights, the
rule of law, health and other social programmes,
physical infrastructure, and the environment. The nongovernmental organizations help to implement
demobilization programmes, protect children from
involvement in armed conflict, and confront problems
caused by landmines.
United Nations agencies and other multilateral
organizations are often called upon to assume wide
responsibilities in relation to international cooperation
for relief and development assistance. NGOs are
significant actors in crisis and post-crisis situations.
Their number, diverse mandates and varying
operational capacities make coordination essential to
ensure the coherence and impact of their combined
efforts. Many donors rely on NGOs as channels for
their assistance, and, in that function, they are expected
to follow agreed policies and standards of behaviour. In
violent conflicts, NGOs are the principal delivery
vehicles, and other agencies, including the United
Nations, rely on them as implementing partners.
NGOs thus face particular challenges, and
international organizations and Governments should
support them in their efforts. Necessary coordination
between the actors can be improved through
information exchange, regular consultations and joint
needs assessments in the field. Transition from relief
work towards post-conflict reconstruction and
rehabilitation requires a shared understanding of the
longer-term commitments.
Conflict networks between external governmental
and non-governmental partners working on conflictrelated issues facilitate the sharing of knowledge and
experiences so as to enable them to act together in a
more effective way. Donor coordination is a constant
theme of Economic and Social Council deliberations.
Civil society institutions play a vital function in
the reconciliation process and in building national
consensus, and, through them, key social, religious,
professional and political interest groups are included.
A space is needed for civil society actors to participate
and to play a peace-building role. The media can serve
as a social educator to defuse potential conflicts. The
protection of human rights is vital in a vulnerable postconflict society. A diversified civil society means

S/PV.4993

reducing destabilization and bolstering support for
State institutions, so that peace-building efforts and
economic and social development can progress.
Lack of resources and capacity hinders
reconstruction efforts, and adequate assistance is
required for post-conflict needs, including fostering
civil society. Effective local capacity-building should
be supported across sectors and communities as well as
a wide range of civil society organizations. External
donor strategies always need to keep in perspective the
broader context and the specificity of a post-conflict
situation and the appropriate roles of the various
actors.
The importance of civil society in preventing
conflicts should also be part of our discussion, as it is
another dimension of the conflict-related work of the
United Nations. Early understanding of a potential
outbreak of conflict requires that we understand its
signals. Again, we should encourage networks with the
capacity to analyse, monitor and share information.
Collaboration among Governments, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
would enhance the ability to create an early response.
To that end, assisting in the development of regional
civil society networks is therefore worth considering.
However, the deeper causes of conflicts require a longterm preventive focus and addressing the basic
conditions of socio-economic development and
poverty.
Transition and development are receiving greater
attention in the activities of the Economic and Social
Council. Recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction
are regularly discussed with the humanitarian and
operative agencies. The Economic and Social Council
is uniquely placed to interact and consult with civil
society at the United Nations. Likewise, the Council’s
various subsidiary bodies — the functional
commissions — have established close contacts with
non-governmental organizations and with other private
entities to hear their views on the topics that the
intergovernmental bodies are addressing. Earlier this
year, for instance, the Commission on the Status of
Women adopted conclusions on women’s equal
participation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution and in post-conflict peace-building, which is
undoubtedly relevant to today’s topic.
As a concrete example, the Economic and Social
Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on Guinea-Bissau

and on Burundi have engaged with civil society
organizations in their efforts to consolidate peacebuilding with international support in the societies of
those countries. A dialogue with civil society has been
introduced to United Nations development activities as
a basic principle. In addition, the World Bank, in its
evolving post-conflict agenda, recognizes that the
dynamics of civil society in countries affected by
conflict pose a particular challenge.
Once again, Madam President, I welcome your
initiative to have this exchange of views to find
synergies among the main bodies of the United
Nations.
Creating
conditions
for
sustainable
development and for protecting the vulnerable who
suffer from violent conflicts are our common tasks.
Neither the United Nations nor Governments can
accomplish them alone.
The President: I thank the President of the
Economic and Social Council for her statement and for
welcoming the theme of the role of civil society,
especially in the reconciliation process and in building
national consensus in peace-building, which we also
consider to be a timely subject.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Denis Caillaux,
Secretary General of CARE International.
Mr. Caillaux (spoke in French): I should like to
thank the Government of the Philippines for having
invited CARE International to address the Security
Council today and for having organized this debate on
the role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building
following the numerous and sad conflicts that
characterize the present day. Such an initiative attests
to the strength of our Governments’ commitment —
and that of the communitarian organizations based in
the Philippines, whose activities are well known — to
this topic.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to pay tribute to the trailblazers
in civil society and peace-building — the women’s
groups and child rights advocates — to whom we may
credit a number of the Council’s historic resolutions
mandating their protection and participation in
peacekeeping efforts. I congratulate the Council on that
body of law, and I urge members to ensure compliance
on the ground.
Two days ago, I returned from a mission to
Sudan, where I had visited villages exhausted by

5

S/PV.4993

decades of war but newly invigorated by the peace
talks that are resuming today in Kenya under the
formidable mediation of General Lazaro Sumbeiywo.
One truth struck me as I visited community after
community: for peace-building to be successful, we
must all pause and imagine the daily struggles and
aspirations of ordinary citizens seeking a life free from
conflict and violence. Most of these individuals cannot
read or afford a transistor radio, yet there is so much
they need to learn about the peace process. For these
post-conflict civilians, there will first be a need for
basic security, landmine clearance and the predictable
capacity to grow enough food, collect enough clean
water, have access to basic health services and care for
and educate their children. At the very same time, there
will be a need to restore trust with their neighbours and
participate in the creation of economic opportunities to
absorb all the returning unemployed. And finally, there
must be a systematic analysis of the conflict, mapping
the constellation of causes, protagonists and victims in
its terrible course.
When we speak about civil society, we include all
groups of civilians not affiliated with the State, with
the Government or with any armed faction. These
include councils of elders, women’s groups, farmers’
associations and religious communities. Even amid the
ruins of failed States, these local organizations have a
profound stake in achieving the secure and rights-based
society necessary to rebuild and govern their country.
With the rise of internal armed conflicts and complex
emergencies, we increasingly work with societies
buffeted between armed conflicts and natural
calamities, resulting in geographical patchworks of
technical peace but actual insecurity.
The Council should be heartened by the
remarkable progress in peace-building that civil society
organizations have made in countries such as Sierra
Leone, Côte d’Ivoire, Burundi and Afghanistan, where
we work with myriad partners, including Governments,
international non-governmental organizations, local
civil society groups and, of course, United Nations
agencies. Our approach is to design programmes that
integrate basic activities with opportunities to engage
people from opposing groups and build experience in
preventing
conflict
through
contact
and
communication.
In Côte d’Ivoire, following the waves of killing
and retribution, we convened a meeting of the factions,
including rival Christian and Muslim groups, giving

6

them the responsibility to plan and manage the
reconstruction. By engaging in that economic
development process, those groups had many
opportunities for face-to-face conversations that helped
to cool the tensions from last year’s violence.
In Sierra Leone — where peace is well under
way — we adapted an agricultural programme to
ensure food security for isolated communities, which
integrated conflict resolution, human rights education
and training in management skills.
Even in countries with long-running ethnic
conflicts, communities with varying levels of stability
can engage in positive peace-building activities. In Sri
Lanka, for example, hundreds of households headed by
women gathered for the first time to assert to local
authorities their rights and needs. Concurrently, village
committees in one region launched, in a one-day event,
the largest distribution of birth certificates that they
had ever achieved, reinforcing principles such as
freedom of movement and the right of access to
education and basic services.
The experience of civil society organizations in
countries ranging from Cambodia to Bosnia and on to
Afghanistan has shown that providing education —
however informal — in emergencies stabilizes the
community and protects children from the risk of being
exploited or recruited into armed forces. In
Afghanistan, under the Taliban and since, international
non-governmental organizations, UNICEF, local
organizations and village leaders promoted these goals
by quietly educating thousands of girls and boys in
village and home-based schools.
The Security Council and Member States face a
new call to action based on a central lesson of
peacekeeping and conflict-resolution efforts of the past
decade. Tragically, many peace efforts falter from the
outbreak of local conflicts. To prevent that from
undermining national peace agreements, peacekeeping
mandates must reach beyond their traditional focus, on
the national level, to the heart of local communities.
As the Secretary-General has highlighted in his
recent report on the protection of civilians
(S/2004/431), local communities are under fire,
literally, more than ever before, and the humanitarian
workers seeking to help them have been attacked in
greater numbers in places like the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Afghanistan, the Middle East and Darfur.

S/PV.4993

Rising to these challenges, what specific steps
can the Council take to empower civil society groups
that are committed to genuine peace-building?
First, the Security Council should demonstrate its
leadership in the form of a strong presidential
statement, expressing its commitment to engage civil
society representatives, including women and children,
in all phases of peace processes. That statement could
make
the
following
recommendations:
first,
incorporate references to the protection and the
participation of civil society into Council resolutions
and reports of the Secretary-General on specific
countries. Secondly, create “Arria-Plus” formulas for
civil society consultations, in accordance with the
Cardoso Panel’s findings. They would offer greater
discussion and more regularity in scheduling.
A third recommendation could be to establish a
civil society forum for each peace process that would
formalize existing ad hoc consultative practices with
civil society sectors during peace processes. This
standing forum would provide expertise useful to
United Nations personnel and others supporting
negotiations, planning and implementation. Fourthly,
institute the Arria formula in the field, in accordance
with the Cardoso Panel’s findings, to enable Security
Council missions to consult more systematically with
civil society experts in the field.
A fifth recommendation could be to institute a
community observer programme for expert-level
officers of Security Council member States, placing
them
with
an
operational
non-governmental
organization for one week in a country that they follow.
That would strengthen Security Council decisions by
providing first-hand exposure to the political and
cultural context and the real life struggle of civilians
rebuilding their lives. And sixthly, request the
Secretary-General to submit an action plan to the
Security Council, drafted with civil society
participation, containing detailed guidelines for
conducting comprehensive analysis of the origins, the
dynamics and the actors related to each conflict.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General of
Care for his expression of support for our theme. I also
welcome the tribute he paid to trailblazers in civil
society and peace-building, especially to women’s
groups and child rights advocates. I also note with
interest his specific recommendations.

I now call on Mr. Ian Martin, Vice President of
the International Center for Transitional Justice.
Mr. Martin: I would like to express appreciation
to the Philippines presidency for deciding to highlight
the role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building,
and to the Council as a whole for taking another
significant step in its openness to hearing directly from
non-governmental organizations.
It is a particular privilege for the International
Center for Transitional Justice to address the Council.
Our Centre, which has offices in New York and Cape
Town, assists countries confronting legacies of mass
atrocity or human rights abuse. We are currently
engaged with more than 20 countries, and we work
closely with United Nations departments and agencies,
especially in countries where the United Nations is
engaged in post-conflict peace-building.
Above all, we work closely with local civil
society partners. Notwithstanding the significant
efforts of civil society organizations working
internationally, the more important sector of civil
society comprises the myriad national and local
organizations that must often confront acute challenges
of resources and security, particularly in post-conflict
societies. Hearing their voices is more important, but
more difficult, than hearing ours. Without purporting to
speak for them, we can reflect something of the
experience of our local partners and see it as the
responsibility of international non-governmental
organizations to create more opportunities for local
voices to be heard.
It is no surprise that the initiative in considering
the role of civil society should have come from the
Philippines, a country renowned for having a vibrant,
energetic and diverse civil society. In this context, we
can certainly look to the Philippines for guidance and
inspiration.
One of the most fundamental challenges of postconflict peace-building is to confront the past while
building a just foundation for the future. There is no
one-size-fits-all approach, and in our work the
International Center for Transitional Justice has
learned a crucial lesson: whatever the answers are, they
must emerge from or resonate within civil society.
Strategies to address past abuses generally
include criminal prosecution of perpetrators of serious
crimes; truth commissions; reparations packages,

7

S/PV.4993

including, but not limited to, financial compensation;
efforts to honour the memory of victims; rigorous
analysis of institutional culpability; efforts to reform
institutions, including vetting of personnel; and
reintegration and reconciliation initiatives.

commission’s role, and insufficient consultation with
local civil society. In Liberia, too, the appointment of
truth commission members has preceded any
meaningful civil society engagement or legislative
mandate, hindering the commission’s progress.

These
measures
should
be
seen
as
complementary, not as alternatives, and a strategy
should be debated and developed in a comprehensive
manner. Alongside that strategy must be a parallel and
related strategy for building the rule of law for the
future, which the Council has recognized as crucial to
peace-building.

Civil society engagement is equally essential for
the success of other transitional justice measures. The
ability of reparations to afford some satisfaction to
victims is facilitated by victim and civil society
participation in the design and implementation of
programmes, while the mobilization of significant
resources is likely to require the support of a broad
coalition.

Ideally, a democratic Government would set these
strategies after a national debate and the fullest
consultation with civil society, informed by
international standards and best practices. In postconflict reality, political leadership may be divided,
fragile and of untested legitimacy, with the United
Nations and the international community heavily
involved in the decision-making, or, in extreme cases,
bearing formal transitional authority. This reality may
make it difficult, but also more vital, to engage civil
society, as premature government or international
decisions will prejudice success.
During the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), the
establishment of the Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation was preceded by intense civil
society debate, informed by international experience.
As a result, the Commission not only reflects best
practices from around the world, but incorporates a
particularly successful innovation drawing on East
Timorese
tradition:
community
reconciliation
processes involving the most local civil society,
including traditional leaders.
In Sierra Leone, too, the establishment of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission was preceded by
public workshops and conferences, with strong civil
society engagement, which helped incorporate policies
relating to children, women and the involvement of
traditional leaders in community reconciliation. In both
East Timor and Sierra Leone, the selection of
Commissioners was a transparent process with a
central role for civil society.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
however, the prospects for a successful truth
commission have been prejudiced by inappropriate
political appointments, preceding reflection on the

8

Prosecution of major perpetrators is, of course, a
State responsibility, but it is sometimes only through
the efforts of civil society and victim groups that the
State is persuaded to act against impunity. Each
successful
prosecution
concerning
military
responsibility for atrocities against civilians in
Guatemala succeeded only because civil society carried
out most of the relevant investigations and appeared in
court on behalf of the victims. In Timor-Leste, civil
society organizations are instrumental in ensuring that
the emerging judicial system conforms to international
standards of due process and in encouraging judicial
independence. The Council should listen to civil
society voices in Timor-Leste and Indonesia, and not
only to Government views, regarding the unacceptable
ongoing impunity of the major perpetrators of crimes
against humanity in East Timor in 1999 and earlier.
Where prosecutions are proceeding, their
intended contribution to restoring or establishing trust
in the rule of law requires effective outreach into
victim communities. The Special Court for Sierra
Leone has been hugely assisted by local civil society
organizations in its outreach. In Rwanda, the local
showings and discussions of video recordings of
perpetrator trials by a civil society organization have
increased understanding in communities where victims
and perpetrators now live together.
Efforts to build the rule of law have too often
proceeded as if they are technical exercises to develop
judicial, police and corrections systems according to
external models. A rule-of-law strategy must be rooted
in local conditions and developed with local civil
society. Despite some positive examples, this is as yet
a poorly developed aspect of rule-of-law peacebuilding.

S/PV.4993

The involvement of local and national civil
society is not only helpful in designing more
satisfactory approaches; it is irreplaceable if peace and
justice are the goals. Yet there are challenges in
securing
broad,
representative
civil
society
participation. The most obvious partners may be those
organizations with pre-existing capacity, while victim
organizations may be non-existent or disempowered.
Emphasis should be placed on capacity-building, on
reaching out beyond the capital and particularly on the
importance of involving women’s organizations in all
elements of peace-building. The direct participation of
women in official institutions must be an explicit
priority, but it is through civil society participation that
women’s contribution to peace-building can be more
fully realized.
The direct access of civil society organizations to
the Security Council can be valuable to both, and we
welcome the recommendations of the Panel of Eminent
Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations for
enhancing such access. We strongly support the Panel’s
insistence that this should occur not only in New York,
but whenever the Council goes on mission to postconflict countries, where its members can be more
accessible to local civil society organizations as well as
to the local representatives of international nongovernmental organizations. The voices of civil society
must be heard when peace settlements are being
negotiated and when missions to implement them are
being planned and post-conflict needs assessed.
But the regular openness to civil society will
depend on the peace-building missions and agencies in
the field. There is a clear need to ensure that best
practice is spread to missions that local civil societies
do not currently perceive as open to their advice and
involvement. The expectations that the Council
conveys to the leaders of the missions it mandates and
the extent to which it remains alert to the involvement
of civil society are crucial to promote the effectiveness
of the alliance between the United Nations and civil
society, and thus the effectiveness of peace-building
itself.
The President: I thank the Vice-President of the
International Center for Transitional Justice for his
kind words of support for our initiative. I also take this
opportunity to thank him for recognizing the modest
contributions of the Philippines civil society
experience in facing challenges as we continue to build
peace in our society.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): Madam President, I wish at
the outset to welcome you and to express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Philippine delegation
for convening this important meeting on the role of
civil society in post-conflict peace-building. My
delegation welcomes the participation of the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the Economic and Social
Council.
A word of praise goes to the representatives of
civil society organizations invited to take part in this
meeting. Their presence here is recognition of the
important role played by civil society in international
life — an importance acquired by their relationship
with the Security Council and their potential for
dynamic cooperation in the struggle for peace and
international security.
The engagement of civil society in fulfilling the
goals of the United Nations is steadily growing, as are
the depth and quality of that commitment. It makes
cooperation with civil society an essential element in
strengthening the efficiency of the United Nations. By
their intervention and commitment, civil society
organizations have become a sort of moral reserve for
the international community, filling a gap that defence
of national interests by States is not always able to fill.
The concept paper proposed by the presidency to
guide our work raises a number of questions that are
self-explanatory on the important role that civil society
and its organizations play in international life.
Interesting changes have been taking place in the
perception of Governments, particularly those facing
post-conflict situations, of the role of civil society.
That perception is evolving from deep distrust towards
a better understanding of the potential and important
role of civil society in education for peace and in basic
activities of reconstruction and development leading to
the establishment of solid partnerships.
In many countries, civil society organizations
have become a niche where many women and men
with social sensitivity can put into practice efforts and
ideas for the common well-being. It is essential to
ensure, in those circumstances, the full participation of
those people in post-conflict peace-building.
The establishment of a climate of tolerance and
respect for different views on alternative strategies to

9

S/PV.4993

strengthen peace and national reconciliation is a
cornerstone for the participation of civil society in
social processes. The Security Council, with its great
authority, has an essential role to play in strengthening
civil society in post-conflict situations by using its
influence and striving for the establishment of such an
environment of tolerance and democracy.
The studies produced by civil society
organizations and the proposals they present are of
great value in assisting the Security Council and its
members in dealing with most critical and complex
crisis situations. Over the years their presence on the
ground has been instrumental in providing information
on extremely grave situations that otherwise would
have gone ignored. In many instances, it was the
information and actions of non-governmental
organizations that prompted the international
community to act. A new partnership has emerged in
which civil society and its organizations are crucial
factors in the mobilization of national and world public
opinion and in channelling that commitment to specific
causes
such
as
post-conflict
peace-building,
humanitarian relief, DDR, landmines and HIV/AIDS.
In such contexts we stress as a landmark the role
played by civil society in the international campaign
for banning landmines, which lead to the 1997
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines.
In Angola, civil society and its organizations are
playing an ever-increasing and decisive role in national
reconciliation and peace-building. Civil society in
Angola is steadily becoming a vibrant and powerful
social force. Its organizations — local, national and
international — now work in partnership with the
Angolan Government in the consolidation of peace, the
fight against poverty, demining, raising awareness of
HIV/AIDS, the fight against epidemics, providing
education and health, and in cooperating for the
development of Angola. The partnership with civil
society became a vital component of the efforts
deployed by the Angolan Government and by Angolan
society as a whole to overcome the wounds of war.
To conclude, I would like to say a word on
regional approaches to post-conflict reconstruction and
the role of civil society. The African Union has been
engaged for many years with African civil society
organizations by attaching great value to their role in
the promotion of development and in fostering postconflict peace-building. It is widely recognized that

10

peace-building policies in Africa should encompass a
comprehensive strategy that includes State institutions
and civil society, acting in partnership, as a means to
bestow ownership in the solution of very complex
problems, such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; refugees and displaced persons; national
reconstruction
and
long-term
post-conflict
reconciliation — issues that go well beyond
Governments and the United Nations.
Finally, we seize this opportunity to commend the
report of the Panel of Eminent Persons on United
Nations-Civil Society Relations, released yesterday. It
is our belief that the work of the Panel is of great
importance for further improving the partnership
between the United Nations and civil society in postconflict peace-building. We hope that this meeting,
which is taking place at a very timely moment, will
contribute to establishing a solid conceptual and
operational framework with a view to strengthening the
relationship between the Security Council and civil
society in the search for peace, reconciliation, justice
and social progress.
The President: I thank the representative of
Angola for his expression of support for our initiative,
as well as his valuable comments on our concept paper
on the role of civil society. He also cited the new
partnership that is emerging between and among
various stakeholders in national reconciliation and
peace-building, especially as they relate to Africa.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam, for having
organized today’s debate on a novel and stimulating
subject. This is a first insofar as the topic is concerned
and because you have taken the initiative, for the first
time in the history of the Council, to ask the
representatives of two eminent non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to participate in our
deliberations.
I should like to begin by taking this opportunity
to pay a well-deserved tribute to the global nongovernmental organizations, which have become the
essential interlocutors of Governments, and to all
NGOs — large and small, global and local, from the
North and the South — that are now indispensable
protagonists of human progress. I wish to pay a
particular tribute to French NGOs, the “French
doctors” and many others in all areas. My country, as

S/PV.4993

statist in its traditions as it is, is aware of the acclaim
NGOs bring to France throughout the modern world.
Fortunately, our Council has informal working
arrangements with the major NGOs represented in New
York. I believe that such relations are productive and
useful for three reasons.
First, many NGOs are engaged in the field and
therefore have first-hand information and are
sometimes the sole or the last presence in certain
situations. This was the case, for example, in Liberia,
certain parts of Côte d’Ivoire and Uganda.
Secondly, given their information sources on the
ground, NGOs can play a valuable role in providing
early warning. That was just recently the case in
Darfur, where, together with the voice of our
Secretary-General, it was Médecins sans Frontières and
other NGOS that sounded the first alarm.
Thirdly, the legitimacy that accrues to NGOs
from the involvement in the field in such areas as
human rights violations, refugees and child soldiers
sometimes allows them to assume the task of
awakening consciences, which is of great importance
in the contemporary world.
Is it possible or desirable for working relations
between the Security Council and the NGOs
represented in New York to be further extended? We
can certainly make better use of the practice of holding
Arria-formula meetings, preparing for them more
assiduously
and
more
frequently
including
representatives of local NGOs or of civil society. We
believe, however, that we must avoid making such
meetings more formalized, which would prove to be
more cumbersome than beneficial.
Today’s debate is also an opportunity to consider
together the topic of the role of civil society and its
representatives in post-conflict situations. We have
heard the statements made earlier by the SecretaryGeneral of CARE International and by Ian Martin. We
believe that the conclusion to be reached is that, in a
post-conflict period, the intervention of external
protagonists and the imposition of external models are
not sufficient. For instance, Ian Martin very clearly
explained how delicate balances must be sought with
respect to justice in the transitional period and the rule
of law. This is not primarily a technical problem or an
exclusively political problem; it is a social problem as
well. We must rely on actors who can make progress:

local civil society actors. The same can be said in the
humanitarian sphere if lasting solutions are to be
found; in the economic area if we are to find ways to
ensure genuine recovery; and so on.
On that basis, is it possible to define a strategy of
alliance between the United Nations and civil society
actors in peace-building? My delegation feels that such
is the course we must adopt. We must move forward
cautiously, yet begin to think about this. I say
“cautiously”, first, because we must respect the
initiative and independence of civil society
organizations themselves; secondly, because one must
in this regard prioritize the case-by-case approach and
it is thus difficult to establish general rules; and thirdly,
because the Security Council is merely one actor
among others in the United Nations in this realm. It is
clear, for instance, that the Economic and Social
Council can provide an especially useful forum in this
regard. On that very topic, we await with interest the
result of its forthcoming discussion of the transition
between
the
post-conflict
humanitarian
and
development phases.
Within the parameters of the precautions I have
cited, I believe that some thought can be given to
certain elements of strategy. This can be done most
specifically. I shall not refer to all of the proposals put
forward by delegations. If members wish to see ours,
they are available in the written text of my statement.
These proposals can be clustered under certain
headings representing potential elements of an alliance
strategy between the United Nations and civil society
actors.
The first element of this strategy would be to
identify more specifically the points at which peacebuilding must necessarily mobilize civil society, for
example, as concerns the role of private enterprise in
reintegrating ex-combatants, or civic campaigns to
prepare for elections.
Secondly, we must strengthen communication in
both directions, between representatives of civil
society and United Nations authorities in the field. As
regards the Security Council, this can be done within
peacekeeping operations. Here I agree with what
Mr. Caillaux said. One might even envisage one day a
cross-cutting resolution that would develop such
communication in our peacekeeping operations.
The third strategic element is for representatives
of civil society to associate themselves earlier on with

11

S/PV.4993

the policies that have been laid down by the United
Nations. For example, representatives of the economic
circles of the country involved might attend donor
conferences.
The fourth element of strategy would be to
involve civil society more closely in implementing
United Nations reconstruction efforts. Here, also, you
will find in my paper specific practical steps that could
be taken to develop existing efforts through, for
example, increased local recruitment by peacekeeping
operations or the development of linguistic capabilities
of persons participating in those operations.
I would like to add one last proposal, because it
seems to me that this subject presents a problem that
must be dealt with. Frequently in post-conflict
situations, the weakness of civil society — and indeed
sometimes its collapse — is a handicap in and of itself
to peace-building. Our strategies must probably be
adapted to the degree of maturity, vitality and structure
of the civil society in question. In this regard, it seems
to me that it might be useful, at least on an
experimental basis and in a limited number of cases at
the beginning, to have reports assessing civil society in
some countries. I think that we could proceed by
analogy with what economists do in their reports on
human development. In line with today’s debate, such
reports on the development of civil society should not
be prepared by Governments or by institutions.
However, they could be the outcome of collaboration
between major global non-governmental organizations
that have experience in this area, as well as
organizations from local civil society. Such work, to
ensure its objectivity, might also use scientific
methodology of an academic nature, such as the
interesting work by Professor Helmut Anheier, of the
Center for Civil Society of the University of Southern
California, in conjunction with the London School of
Economics. While Professor Anheier’s work is
somewhat different, since he is dealing with global
civil society, it nonetheless forms a basis that could be
used for more specific reports on civil society in
certain countries.
My last thought illustrates our deep-rooted
conviction on the entirety of this subject. Just as the
concept of human development has made an essential
contribution to economic thinking, and just as today we
can no longer think of peacekeeping operations without
including the protection of civil populations, we can no
longer conceive of peace-building in post-conflict

12

situations without having a full knowledge of civil
society and without trying to build dialogue or
coordinate with organizations that express the diversity
and vitality of civil society at the local level. I think
that therein lies the importance of this debate that the
presidency of the Philippines has had the fortunate
initiative of organizing today.
The President: I thank the representative of
France for highlighting the participation of
representatives of civil society in our deliberations. I
also note your reference to the great work of Médecins
sans Frontières, which I think everyone here
recognizes. We note the questions you have raised, as
we begin to think of the interplay of the various actors
in peace-building. We look forward to looking into the
proposals contained in your paper.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Madam
President, we, like other speakers, are very grateful to
you for convening this important discussion and for the
preparatory work that your delegation has carried out.
We welcome you here, and thank you for taking the
time to chair this debate. It is also most welcome that
you have arranged for us to benefit from the thoughts
of the President of the Economic and Social Council,
which remind us here in the Security Council of the
Economic and Social Council’s rich interaction with
civil society. I would also particularly welcome the
presence here today of Denis Caillaux and Ian Martin
of CARE International and the International Center for
Transitional Justice for the expert insights and
proposals that they have given us. Finally, I associate
my delegation with the statement to be delivered later
today by the Irish Presidency on behalf of the
European Union.
Today’s debate gives us an opportunity to explore
these issues in more detail, but it should not — and I
am sure it will not — be our last opportunity to do so.
The subject is too important. The United Kingdom
believes that civil society in its broadest sense has an
essential role to play in all phases of the conflict cycle,
not just peace-building but conflict-prevention and
post-conflict reconstruction as well. At the
international level, civil society organizations play a
key role in holding Governments and international
organizations to account. In the Council, our work has
often benefited from the expert knowledge of civil
society organizations. We have benefited today and we
can do more. Their efforts have helped and are helping

S/PV.4993

us to develop new policy and legal frameworks and to
better define best practice.
Civil society’s contribution at the regional level is
also increasingly important, as our Angolan colleague
has reminded us. As regional organizations such as the
African Union develop their capacities for conflict
management and peace-building, civil society
organizations are going to need to plug into these new
streams of work. Provision of grass-roots information,
provision of early warning, sharing of best practice and
acting as implementing partners — these are just a few
of the areas in which civil society organizations can
help regional organizations fulfil their potential for
peace-building. At the national and local levels, as both
our non-governmental organization representatives
have reminded the Council today, local people and the
groups that represent them have a fundamental role to
play in the reconciliation and rehabilitation process.
Re-establishing legal structures and bodies for
transitional justice and the rule of law is one area of the
post-conflict peace-building phase towards which civil
society, and, in particular, religious and community
leaders can contribute.
Underlying all these peace-building issues is the
need to build new relationships between government
service providers and communities. In that context,
civil society needs to be involved in the planning,
implementation and monitoring of community-based
programmes. As the Secretary-General has reminded
the Council this morning, that is a two-way process.
United Nations peace-building should promote civil
society, just as civil society can assist United Nations
peace-building. Countries with a strong civil society
tend to be more resilient in the face of the stresses and
strains of our globalizing world.
This morning, the Secretary-General challenged
the Council to respond to the recommendations of the
Cardoso Panel on civil society and United Nations
relations. The report (A/58/817), issued only yesterday
morning, contains some far-reaching recommendations.
We hope they will enhance exchanges with civil
society both in New York and in the field, and we look
forward to considering them in detail over the coming
weeks. But I wanted to respond in preliminary way to
the report’s paragraphs 95 to 100 and its proposal 12
on how civil society can strengthen the Security
Council.

One can address this question under many
different headings — and the French Ambassador has
offered us several thoughtful ones this morning. I
would myself suggest three. The first is the question of
sustained communication and coordination between
civil society organizations and the United Nations
system at the field level. This is important in the
context of monitoring and evaluation: to identify what
works well and what does not and to highlight specific
issues of concern to the Security Council, including
early warning, which we discussed in an earlier, recent
debate.
Thus, effective communication and coordination
mechanisms need to be considered in the planning and
implementation phases of United Nations operations.
In that context, the Panel recommends that Security
Council field missions should meet regularly with the
appropriate local civil society leaders and other
representatives of civil society. This morning,
Mr. Denis Caillaux urged the Council to consider an
“Arria-plus” formula on the ground. That seems to me
entirely welcome, and to some extent, we are pursuing
that in the Council’s mission to West Africa this week,
engaging with a range of civil society actors and
hearing their views.
I would just observe that the West Africa mission
is trying to cover some eight countries in nine days.
That limits the amount of time for interaction with civil
society. It seems to me that this points inevitably
towards a redesign of Security Council missions to the
field. I think they need to be smaller so that they can be
more frequent.
Another proposal from the Panel that is relevant
to this question of communication and coordination at
the field level is the idea of convening independent
commissions of inquiry following United Nations
operations mandated by the Council. The suggestion is
that perhaps a global public policy committee,
connecting national foreign affairs committees, could
serve as such as a commission. I certainly think this
deserves careful consideration because we believe it is
important that lessons should be learned from each
United Nations operation. At the same time — and I
am looking at Mr. Ian Martin here — I am not sure that
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on
the ground want to spend each waking minute thinking
about what the independent commission is going to say
on their performance when it is all over. So, we need to
find a happy medium.

13

S/PV.4993

My second heading is the role that civil society
organizations have to play in the direct exchange of
information with the Council here in New York on
countries under the Council’s consideration. We are
already benefiting from the Arria-formula meetings
and using them to receive accurate, reliable and
independent information from the field, which is
crucial to sharpen the focus of Security Council
resolutions and peacekeeping mandates in order to help
ensure that they have the maximum impact where they
count, which is in the field. So, I am sure that we will
look positively — but as the French Ambassador has
pointed out, on a case-by-case basis — at improving
the planning and effectiveness of the Arria-formula
meetings, which is the first proposal of the Cardoso
Panel. This morning, Mr. Caillaux offered the Council
the suggestion — if I understood him correctly — that
New York delegations and country experts should
spend some time in the field. I can report to him that
my delegation will enthusiastically accept the next
invitation of CARE International.
Finally, my last heading — and it is an important
one — is the role that we believe civil society must
play as the Council develops the international legal
framework on key security and protection issues, such
as gender, children, HIV/AIDS, mine action and
refugees, to name but a few. Over recent years, the
Council has adopted a catalogue of resolutions that
have helped establish best practices on key issues
relevant for post-conflict peace-building. We think we
need to, and can, push this agenda further by including
agreed best practices in the Council’s resolutions and
asking the right questions of reports.
In that context, the Cardoso Panel’s suggestion
for an experimental series of Security Council seminars
to discuss issues of emerging importance to the
Council, which the Panel suggests would be
particularly relevant in the context of the Council’s
consideration of generic peace-building issues, looks to
us to be an attractive one.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom, especially as he welcomed me so
warmly. I am delighted to be here. We also appreciate
his valuable comments and very specific suggestions.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Madam Minister, we are very happy to see
you presiding over this meeting of the Security Council
and leading the Philippine delegation, which has been

14

providing a very effective presidency for the current
month.
The Security Council’s consideration of the
various conflict situations on its agenda and the
experiences of United Nations peacekeeping operations
have shown that restoring solid peace and achieving
genuine settlements in countries that have undergone a
crisis is possible only by means of a comprehensive
approach. An integral part of that approach is civil
society’s participation in that process. Civil society’s
active participation is an important requirement for
achieving
true
national
reconciliation.
That
participation spans a broad range of activities, from
establishing national commissions on truth and
reconciliation and organizing international dialogues to
participating in transitional Governments of national
unity.
Civil society is an important link between a
Government and the various political groups and often
emerges as a factor in the promotion of peace talks and
in overcoming obstacles to national reconciliation.
Unfortunately, not all participants in civil society take
unbiased positions that are politically neutral. The
outbreak of violence that took place in March in
Kosovo and the recurring crises in Haiti are persuasive
evidence of the importance of establishing a mature
civil society for post-conflict consolidation.
Peace-building work can be most effective when
a national Government successfully interacts with civil
society and peacekeeping missions, with a key role
played by the United Nations. An important role can
also be played by regional organizations and by
international non-governmental organizations. It is
clear, therefore, that the United Nations could help
pool the efforts of all the participants and channel them
into a common, constructive direction.
The activities of civil society are closely
interwoven with the question of the protection of
human rights. It is only natural; NGOs, in their work
with civil society, unfortunately encounter instances of
human rights violations, to which they react. Moreover,
non-governmental organizations can serve as a
barometer, detecting trends that could pose a threat to
the stabilization process. In that way, they can be a key
element in conflict-prevention machinery at an early
stage. We must also bear in mind, however, that
information provided by NGOs can sometimes be of a
subjective nature.

S/PV.4993

The experience of the United Nations in various
parts of the world makes clear the indissociable link
between the establishment of peace and fully fledged
socio-economic recovery for those in countries that
have suffered from conflicts. Our discussion today
corroborates the importance of interaction between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
in the area of post-conflict peace-building and
restoration. That is the area where, first and foremost,
mutually complementary efforts must be made by the
principal organs of the United Nations, including
appropriate consideration of the potential of civil
society.
We believe that, with respect to the work of
NGOs in rendering humanitarian assistance and
helping those in need, we have an international
clearinghouse for these matters — namely the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
has at its disposal a full array of interaction
mechanisms in that area. The Inter-Agency Standing
Committee is also a very effective instrument for
coordination.
The role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding is not limited to the provision of assistance in
the resolution of thorny humanitarian and socioeconomic problems. In the restoration process, it must
also be a driving force in State-building and in setting
up criminal justice and rule of law systems. Without
the active participation of civil society, it is impossible
to work, on a solid and long-term basis, for the
restoration of a normal civilian life and ensure the
irreversibility of the peace process as well as the
establishment of political institutions and judiciary and
law enforcement systems.
A comprehensive approach to resolving such
crisis situations requires uninterrupted and consistent
work in the transition from one phase to the next. In
that regard, it is of great importance to have the
political support of the Security Council for
peacekeeping efforts, which are to be carried out under
the Charter of the United Nations and through the
relevant United Nations organs and its specialized
agencies. It is the active involvement of civil society
organizations in such peace-building efforts that will
help truly to strengthen the role of NGOs in postconflict situations.
Finally, in terms of the interrelation between the
Security Council and NGOs, it is our delegation’s

opinion that a positive kind of practice has developed
in this type of cooperation, which pleases us. That
practice is based on the Charter of the United Nations
and relates to the real need for communication between
the Security Council and civil society. It does not seem
to us that we should deviate from the framework of
that practice.
The President: I wish particularly to thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for the kind
words he addressed to our presidency. I am sure
Ambassador Baja is very happy to hear your
expression of recognition.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to say to you, Madam Minister, how
pleased I am to see you presiding over the work of our
Council. I should like to thank you for having chosen
this subject, which is very topical and relevant, as its
consideration coincides with yesterday’s publication of
the long-awaited report on relations between the
United Nations and civil society.
The report of the Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations corroborates
the fact that civil society is now a pivotal actor at all
levels and that the United Nations, as an
intergovernmental agency, must, in the interests of
effectiveness and openness, establish renewed relations
with this very useful partner. That is true of all the
major agencies of the United Nations and, of course, of
the Security Council as it discharges its mandate for
peace.
Along those lines, I would note that the
commendable effort towards openness made by the
Council in the last decade vis-à-vis representatives of
civil society through the more frequent use of the Arria
formula remains, unfortunately, somewhat limited in
scope and has a tendency to increase and to entrench
the representational imbalance between the North and
the South.
From that standpoint, the establishment of a fund
aimed at strengthening the capacity of civil society in
countries of the South, advocated by my delegation for
some years now and now recommended by the Panel of
Eminent Persons, could contribute to correcting that
imbalance and could help us hear the voice, too long
ignored, of the NGOs of the South as well as the voices
of all peoples of the world.

15

S/PV.4993

Turning to today’s topic, it is clear that NGOs,
which are actively involved in various critical tasks in
areas where the United Nations is sometimes absent,
make an invaluable contribution to global efforts to
stabilize those countries that are emerging from
conflict.
The evolution of the concept of peacekeeping on
the one hand, and, on the other, the fact that
peacekeeping operations have become more and more
complex, should, from our standpoint, prompt the
Council to embark upon a complete overhaul of its
approach to the question of peace-building, including
ways to broaden and strengthen the effective
contribution of civil society to that process, by drawing
inspiration from, inter alia, some of the
recommendations made by the Panel of Eminent
Persons.
In reality, a mutually beneficial partnership has
already developed between the Security Council and
civil society in conducting peace processes, based on a
division of labour. NGOs already assume the role of
peace adjuncts for the Security Council — a task they
perform with courage, despite the fact that their
representatives on the ground sometimes put their lives
at risk.
The experience and the expertise that NGOs have
developed from practical interaction can be extremely
useful to a Security Council that is confronted with
situations that are increasingly complex and where
expertise and direct knowledge may sometimes be
lacking. That experience and knowledge are too
important to be neglected or ignored; the Council must
make the best possible use of them. What is more, it
must rely more resolutely on national and international
civil society to succeed in establishing peace.
It is obvious that, by definition, the peacebuilding phase represents the area where we must
rethink
and
redefine
cooperation
between
governmental and non-governmental organizations
through clear sharing of their roles and responsibilities.
Indeed, in this critical phase for the future of peace
processes, civil society can make an even more
valuable contribution to peace-building because it
often interacts directly with citizens and in many cases
knows how to win their trust.
From that perspective, we believe that the task of
reconciliation and national reconstruction cannot be
successfully accomplished unless it is carried out by a

16

dynamic and engaged civil society. Indeed, the fragility
of peace processes is often due to the weakness or
marginalization of civil society. Peace agreements
negotiated and concluded by armed factions whose
main concern remains taking or sharing power give
short shrift to the representatives of civil society. In
fact, such representatives are often targeted by
violence, because they are seen as competitors at worst
and as nuisances at best.
Unfortunately, Security Council action is too
often influenced by that vision, and therefore, its
resolutions are seen as dominated by the security
dimension dictated by a feeling of urgency. Resolutions
1528 (2004) and 1545 (2004) — concerning the United
Nations operations in Côte d’Ivoire and in Burundi,
respectively — do not mention the role of civil society,
while resolution 1509 (2003), on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, refers to it only fleetingly.
However, those are multidimensional missions that
should have accorded to civil society its due place.
The assistance of the community of international
non-governmental organizations is valuable, but it
cannot substitute for the even more important role of
local associations. We believe that ownership by
national
non-governmental
organizations
of
reconstruction tasks is vital. Therefore, rebuilding civil
society must be among the priority objectives —
together with restoring State authority and
strengthening State institutions — that we must set,
because in many cases the major challenge for
countries emerging from conflict is national
reconciliation, and civil society is well placed to
contribute to that process.
The desire to live together and the feeling of
belonging to a national collectivity that transcends
religious and ethnic ties are often undermined by
conflicts fed by mutual hatred and the will to destroy.
The contribution of all is therefore essential to meet
this challenge. Members of the clergy, intellectuals,
journalists and humanitarian and human rights
organizations, but also the business community, can
thus play a major role in spreading a culture of peace,
repairing the social fabric, restoring a national sense of
belonging and putting in place the conditions required
to establish a democratic society and to resume
economic activity.
The ownership process also depends on civil
society’s involvement in the development of a crisis

S/PV.4993

exit strategy that coincides with the closure of the
peace operation and the establishment of a normalized
United Nations presence in the country. The sooner and
the more closely civil society is involved in managing
the transition period, the more effectively it will
contribute to the peace process and to the achievement
of lasting peace and stability.
The President: I thank the representative of
Algeria for highlighting the mutually beneficial
relationship that exists between civil society and the
Council in addressing complex situations, especially in
peace processes.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America): First,
let me express my delegation’s appreciation to you,
Madam President, for leading the Council’s
deliberations on a topic of complexity and genuine
importance and for providing us with the non-paper
that has formed the basis for our discussion. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, who was here
earlier; Ambassador Rasi, for her contribution; and Mr.
Denis Caillaux and Mr. Ian Martin, who represent two
of the key players in this important endeavour. Their
presence adds significance to our debate and is clear
evidence of their personal commitment to finding
creative ways for civil society organizations to engage
with the United Nations to better meet future
challenges.
In his inauguration speech, President Bush said,
“A civil society demands from each of us goodwill and
respect, fair dealing and forgiveness”. It is up to each
of us, as individuals, to embody those traits within civil
society organizations. In the United States, of course,
civil society plays a vital role in complementing the
efforts of Government or even in taking the lead in key
issues, particularly at the local level. It is up to us, as
Governments, to tap into the power of civil society to
help achieve international peace and security.
Civil society organizations can flourish in
societies where good governance and the rule of law
are applied; where political institutions are strong;
where civil and political rights are fully recognized;
where participation in electoral processes is
guaranteed; and where human rights, freedom of
expression and independent media are respected. The
presence of a healthy civil society is more likely to
create a lasting peace. Hence, it is important that the
United Nations support the growth and inclusion of

civil society organizations, particularly in post-conflict
situations.
The importance of civil society in those scenarios
as a source of information, but also particularly as a
check on the abuses of power and as a guarantor of
democratic institutions, has been underlined as a
specific illustration in the recent preparations for the
Council’s West Africa mission. The Council held an
Arria-style meeting to foster the dialogue between civil
society organizations and the United Nations. Nongovernmental organizations were able to highlight
concerns for the region and for individual countries,
and Council members will follow up with meetings
with civil society organizations while they are on the
ground.
Of course, we look for a back-and-forth
interaction with civil society organizations not just
when we need to discuss a particular issue — such as
the mission — but over a regular period of time, and
we find it very valuable to listen to the views of those
who are on the ground and who have the expertise in
shaping our positions and our opinions. In addition to
the Arria-style meeting, the Council mission will
benefit from the contributions of civil society
organizations in informing their future deliberations on
these issues, and it will ensure that they are familiar
with a full range of voices within the countries,
including the voices of those who may not yet be
represented at the political level in countries in
transition and of those who may have useful critiques
of the political leadership.
Having a home to return to is a great task for any
post-conflict peace-building society. Among the most
significant potential resources now available to assist
nations in their efforts at post-conflict peace-building
is the United Nations itself. In its deliberations two
weeks ago, the Council focused on civilians in armed
conflict. Finding homes for such displaced persons
poses a unique and special challenge. In addition,
finding a home to return to plays a role in
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes and activities, in which civil society
organizations play an integral role.
The strong presence that civil society groups
maintain on the ground has provided us early warning
signals with regard to the crisis in Darfur. That crisis is
an example of how civil society groups such as CARE
and Doctors Without Borders, as has been mentioned,

17

S/PV.4993

can assist in addressing that very serious problem. The
situation in Darfur has rightly been called the greatest
humanitarian disaster today. Civil society organizations
have played an important role in increasing attention to
the crisis, and they will continue to play a vital role in
bringing an end to violence, saving lives and helping to
rebuild a shattered society.
In closing, I would just like to point out that
Ambassador Rasi mentioned that there should be an
active role for the Economic and Social Council. We
also believe that the Economic and Social Council and
its various ad hoc advisory groups provide an
important link with civil society and will allow us to
benefit from their expertise as we move forward. We
also share Ambassador Thomson’s view that early
warning from the field and dialogue on an ongoing
basis in the field between civil society organizations
and the United Nations are absolutely vital. My
delegation looks forward to hearing from others,
particularly the Secretary-General’s high-level panel,
on the role of civil society organizations not only in
peace-building but also in conflict prevention.
Lessons learned from the past may help us
address ways to better support future peace-building
efforts. Our challenge is to instil confidence in the
proposition that conflict, no matter how tragic, can
give way to human and social betterment, and civil
society organizations can effectively contribute to that
noble end.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for highlighting the need for a healthy
civil society and the role of the United Nations in
ensuring that health.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to welcome Minister Delia Domingo Albert
and the initiative of the Philippines to hold this open
debate of the Security Council on the role of civil
society in post-conflict peace-building. We also
welcome the participation in the debate of Ambassador
Marjatta Rasi, President of the Economic and Social
Council, Mr. Denis Caillaux, Secretary-General of
CARE, and Mr. Ian Martin of the International Center
for Transitional Justice.
As we know, post-conflict situations are complex.
Their consequences include not only the obvious
military and security dimensions, but also particularly
political, economic, social and humanitarian aspects
that are essential to ensuring stability and that often not

18

only affect the society directly involved, but also
transcend national borders and increasingly assume
regional dimensions.
The statements we have heard this morning have
highlighted the enormous challenge inherent in postconflict peace-building for affected societies as well as
for the regions involved and the international
community as a whole, including, of course, the United
Nations. That is why, during its Council presidency last
January, Chile promoted a debate on post-conflict
national reconciliation. Therefore we attach great
importance to the topic presented by the Philippines,
which emphasizes what occurs in post-conflict
situations.
The
nature
of
contemporary
conflicts,
increasingly of intra-State origin, has changed the
manner of dealing with them, with regard to both
preventing them and resolving them. Post-conflict
peace-building requires multidisciplinary approaches
in which civil society and non-governmental
organizations have an important role to play.
As the report of former President Fernando
Henrique Cardoso on civil society (A/58/817) has
highlighted, “constructively engaging with civil society
is a necessity for the United Nations, not an option”.
Civil society, composed of various non-State actors,
has played important roles in supporting conflict
prevention, and it therefore has no less an important
role to play in peace-building phases in order to make
peace sustainable.
Many civil society organizations are active in the
areas of protecting human rights and international
humanitarian law. They have played a key role in the
search for justice and in reconstructing judicial powers
in post-conflict situations in order to, among other
things, impede impunity when there have been mass
human rights violations.
Other organizations develop important activities
in more specific areas, such as those aimed at
preventing illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and protecting civilians in armed conflict. They also
have had positive experience in promoting impartiality
among the media, in their capacity to mediate between
conflicting interests and in providing early warning of
imminent humanitarian crises and in raising public
awareness in that respect. Therefore, they are key
actors that must be present and contribute in a

S/PV.4993

coordinated manner with State actors and the United
Nations.
The Security Council must seek the active
participation of the broadest sectors of civil society. In
particular, it should try to ensure that the civil society
involved in these processes includes not only
international actors, but also local ones, including
women working in the field to build peace, in
accordance
with
Security
Council
resolution
1325 (2000), which reaffirms the important role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in peace-building.
Allow me to touch upon another specific aspect
to which members of civil society can contribute. I am
referring to action in the private sector. Businesses,
obviously
different
from
non-governmental
organizations, are neither philanthropic entities nor
peacekeeping organizations. They are engines of
wealth production that pursue profit. However, because
of the nature of their activities they are endowed with a
certain sensitivity and conditions required to achieve
their goals, which can help anticipate the onset of
conflict and can help generate conflict prevention or
mitigation strategies. In the area of peace-building,
businesses can, with their local partners, mobilize the
will of broad economic and social sectors. Businesses
can offer financial support for productive quick-impact
projects, for example, through employment initiatives
for former combatants. Often it is precisely the lack of
employment of former combatants that causes conflicts
to re-emerge. That is an important aspect of sustainable
peace.
The possibility also exists to explore the idea of
matching funds — parallel contributions; that is, cofinancing of reconstruction projects in which a
business could contribute the same amount that a donor
Government
does
to
finance
disarmament,
demobilization or reconstruction projects. Of course, in
the case of the business sector, it is certain that it will
be advisable to develop a set of incentives to encourage
a country to be involved in the peace-building phase.
The United Nations can assist with that.
I wonder how many businesses now stand ready
to create employment in order to raise hope in Haiti
and to earn money in a country that is close to
important markets and has a highly skilled labour
force. This is a concrete challenge to civil society in
the post-conflict peace-building phase.

Finally, as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has indicated in its reports to the
Security Council, the post-conflict period is the most
important phase because funds must be made available
not only to provide humanitarian assistance to save
lives, but also to contribute to projects with a decisive
impact on ensuring sustainable peace. In many case, a
long-term commitment must be made.
We commend you once again, Madam, for having
convened the Security Council to address today’s
important topic, which can have a tangible effect on its
work in addressing conflicts and their aftermath.
The President: I thank the representative of
Chile for welcoming and giving full value to this open
debate on this most important subject.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you, Madam, most especially for being
here with us today and for your guidance of this
important debate.
The delegation of Spain thanks the Philippines
presidency for having taken the very timely step of
convening this debate on the vital role of civil society
in post-conflict peace-building. It is a timely initiative
because only yesterday we received the report prepared
by the Panel of Eminent Persons on United NationsCivil Society Relations, chaired by Mr. Cardoso. We
know that the report will have a great impact on our
future thinking on this issue. It is timely also because
today, more than ever, the international community
needs the cooperation of organized civil society in
undertaking the most important tasks towards fulfilling
the principles and objectives of the United Nations.
We also thank the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the representatives of civil society
for their presence at and valuable contributions to
today’s debate.
The Presidency of the European Union will be
taking the floor later in the meeting, and my delegation
of course endorses the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Ireland on behalf of the Union. I
should like to summarize here the general thrust of that
statement.
First, we stress the importance of the
participation of civil society in developing effective
multilateralism.
Secondly,
we
support
the
establishment of relations of close and healthy
cooperation among all actors in peace-building, and

19

S/PV.4993

encourage civil society organizations to provide moral
support for the population and local structures. Thirdly,
we believe that we must further develop machinery to
govern United Nations interaction with the
representative organizations of civil society, which we
feel to be more necessary today than ever.
As to civil society and effective multilateralism,
we do not see this purely as an instance of international
institutions and the United Nations system’s being
brought to bear to solve problems that cannot be
addressed solely by States. Multilateralism is effective
only if all forces in the international arena are brought
together, including an increasingly transnational civil
society that can often extend itself further and have a
more decisive impact than States or inter-State
organizations. Multilateralism will not be effective
unless all actors take part in an open and participatory
way in the establishment of values and norms and of
working mechanisms and methods that underlie such
international action. Such participation must, of course,
be present in political processes of peace and security
throughout the world.
Since the 1990s, we have been faced with an
increase in the number of conflicts with local or
regional significance that are both persistent and
recurrent. The effects of such conflicts do not
disappear upon the mere cessation of hostilities. Their
societal effects persist over time, with serious
consequences for the civilian population and an impact
on the stability of the States and the regions affected.
Only resolute and coherent action on the part of the
international community over long periods can prevent
or avert recurring conflict.
At the same time, the concentration of such
conflicts in certain regions may be a disincentive to
external peace-building initiatives. On many occasions,
external actors — essentially States and international
organizations — may be put off by complex situations,
particularly those in remote, isolated areas. Civil
society can meet such challenges, using its increasingly
global networks to go where others either do not wish
to or cannot go. We must therefore work to ensure
shared complementarity among all actors, beginning
with national actors themselves, who are first and
foremost responsible for post-conflict peace-building.
Together, we must find effective criteria for cases
where international organizations and States, as
external actors, abandon the field. Similarly, national
Governments are responsible for defining areas in

20

which civil society can become involved in peacebuilding.
When civil society is properly organized, it can
go further, and frequently make room for more open
dialogue at the local level, than States and other
international actors. That is why protection and respect
for their activities are vital. Such dialogue and mutual
cooperation should in no way require civil society
organizations to become subject to governmental
actors. While sovereignty must be respected and noninterference in domestic affairs observed where they
establish legitimate limitations to participation, there
must be free participation in the peace-building
process. Dialogue between civil society organizations,
Governments and international institutions must be
promoted and strengthened. If initiatives to build peace
have not been fully generated and supported internally
in the countries affected, and thus fail to generate
external support for local capacities, such action will
ultimately prove to be unproductive.
Civil society plays a function that we often deem
to be crucial in conflict prevention and solution, as
well as in meeting the humanitarian needs of
populations devastated by conflicts. Those functions
must be enhanced, as the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General, among others, have indicated, the
latter in his report on the prevention of armed conflict.
Also, in the context of the European Union we could
refer to the recent conference on the role of civil
society in the prevention of armed conflict, whose
action-oriented agenda was adopted on 2 April in
Dublin.
In addition to all that, and as important is it is, we
believe that civil society organizations have a moral
role. I refer to the moral function of focusing their
actions on direct support to civilians, promoting their
security, their social well-being and respect for their
identity and their fundamental rights and liberties. It is
a matter of acting not only in the immediate peacebuilding phase, but of working for a post-conflict
transformation that would bring with it true peace. This
moral function must include support especially to the
most vulnerable persons, such as women and children,
so that they can be central actors in peace-building and
the most direct beneficiaries of its results.
We believe in the application of Security Council
resolutions that refer to women, to peace and security
and to the protection of children and generally the

S/PV.4993

protection of civilians in armed conflict. That postconflict transformation, by which all of the actors must
work with one accord, will be more viable to the extent
that international civil society devotes its efforts to
complementing and strengthening organizations in
local civil society so that such objectives can be
attained. Improving the capabilities and resources of
civil societies in countries emerging from conflict is a
prerequisite for rectifying inequalities between civil
societies in the North and the South.
Together with this, we believe that in this moral
work civil society must direct its efforts towards the reestablishment of justice and the rule of law. Following
a conflict situation, it is essential to try to provide, for
the populations that have been afflicted by the
confrontation, justice for what has occurred in the past
as much as justice for the present and the future. That
work must be tackled in coordination with local
organizations of civil society and government
institutions, as well as together with support from
States and interested international organs. It must also
be incorporated into the sphere of education as one of
the means for preventing the reappearance of the
conflict.
Civil society calls for a process of dialogue with
the United Nations system on how the shared
objectives can be achieved, particularly in post-conflict
peace-building. We trust that the thinking process and
the discussion that commenced with the publication of
the Cardoso report will shed further light and make it
possible to make concrete progress in this direction.
We believe that interaction between the United
Nations and civil society does not exclusively fall
within the purview of any of the principal organs in the
Charter. All have their own functions in this process.
The United Nations as a whole and its Member States
must give careful thought, starting now, to how we can
deal more effectively with the challenges of peacebuilding and, in that context, how better to develop
dialogue with civil society organizations.
The Security Council, insofar as it is concerned,
without abandoning its primary responsibility to ensure
peace and security, must seek opportunities for
consideration, for action, with other principle organs of
the Organization, especially the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat. In
that meeting point, civil society can also participate to

the extent that it is considered that its contribution
would be productive.
Then the United Nations might define broad
parameters for common action in the field of peacebuilding. Dialogue between the Security Council and
civil society actors should be made deeper, employing
existing informal machinery. Constructive dialogue
with Security Council missions in the field should also
be encouraged. The representatives and special envoys
of the Secretary-General and resident representatives
also bear particular responsibility in establishing
positive dialogue with representatives of civil society
in each situation in each affected country. Coordinated,
sustained work on the part of all should contribute to
progress in addressing post-conflict situations and
peace-building.
This discussion on the participation of civil
society in peace-building is making headway, largely
thanks to the activities undertaken by the Philippine
presidency. We are sure that from now on it will
continue to make progress and to take effective steps in
the direction that we all wish.
The President: I thank the representative of
Spain for underscoring the timeliness of this meeting
following the recent release of the Cardoso report on
United Nations relations with civil society.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We welcome your
presence, Madam President, and the initiative of the
Philippines presidency in organizing this open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General for his presence this
morning and for his important statement. We also
acknowledge the presence of the President of the
Economic and Social Council and her valuable
contribution.
The non-paper circulated by Ambassador Baja
has helped guide the Council’s thematic deliberations
today, which, we hope, will benefit all, the victims of
conflict in particular. We are also happy to see two
respected non-governmental organizations — CARE
International and the International Center for
Transitional Justice — participating in the discussion.
We appreciate their work, both in the field and in the
deliberative process.
The role and contribution of civil society in
United Nations processes have dramatically increased,
especially in the last two decades. This ever-evolving
relationship has been the subject of a number of

21

S/PV.4993

reviews, discussions and studies. We express our
appreciation to President Cardoso and other members
of the Panel of Eminent Persons on United NationsCivil Society Relations for their comprehensive report.
It is a well-intentioned effort that will contribute a
great deal in streamlining the engagement of civil
society with the United Nations processes. The
report — in particular, the proposals contained
therein — will be carefully studied. Hopefully, the
general membership will pronounce itself on the report
in due course. We look forward to detailed discussions
on it by the Member States. My delegation will remain
constructively engaged in the process.

contribution
through
fostering
peace-building
relationships and consolidating the peace process. Civil
society can work in tandem with the United Nations
agencies on the ground, in particular with
peacekeeping missions operating under Security
Council mandate, to help with the safe return of
displaced populations, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants, assistance for economic and
social progress and re-establishing the rule of law. A
truly credible civil society organization enjoying the
confidence of all actors can even facilitate the
stimulation of political dialogue and harness the energy
of the people in a constructive direction.

Since the demise of the cold war era there has
been an upsurge in the number and the intensity of
conflicts all over the world. Triggered by one or a mix
of several factors — economic deprivation, social
disintegration, cultural discrimination and political
difference — those conflicts engender complex crises
in terms of human suffering, institutional instability
and pervasive underdevelopment. There is an everincreasing need for the international community to
evolve a comprehensive, integrated and coherent
response to those conflicts. In this context I wish to
recall that Pakistan has already proposed the
establishment of ad hoc composite committees of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council to effectively address the
complex crises in their political, economic and social
dimensions.

Efforts to strengthen civil society is a necessity
that can be facilitated by the international community
in a number of ways, such as by assisting local
communities and individuals in designing programmes,
by providing capacity-building services and access to
financing and by establishing legal entities such as
cooperatives. These local civil society organizations
can serve as an effective and efficient bridge between
local authorities and the international community,
including donor communities. They can even help in
identifying priority reconstruction and development
projects and in monitoring the judicial utilization of
resources.

Over the last decade, international peacekeeping
operations in post-conflict situations have vastly
expanded in character to include multidimensional
nation-building and establishing or reviving State
structures. This necessitates an interactive interface
among the relevant United Nations entities, led by the
Security Council and a host of local, national, regional
and international actors and stakeholders, all working
in synergy. The Security Council, through its debates
and resolutions, can guide the further development of a
peace-building doctrine. International civil society
organizations can help by sharing their field
experience, best practices and lessons learned in the
Council’s deliberative process, such as the Arria
formula meetings, open debates, seminars and informal
interaction.
While structural causes of conflicts need to be
addressed by States, a reinvigorated civil society, the
bedrock of any State system, can make a valuable

22

Since each post-conflict situation presents a
unique set of circumstances, there cannot be a onesize-fits-all model of governmental, intergovernmental
and civil society interaction. Therefore, the Council
may consider tailoring such activities on a case-by-case
basis, weaving them into each individual peacekeeping
mandate. Peace missions should expand their efforts to
build on existing local resources and utilize local
actors and civil society organizations. Proactive
involvement of international civil society organizations
beyond humanitarian assistance and, where applicable,
capacity-building of local civil society, could be
counter-productive.
The Council could consider enhancing the
effectiveness of the existing mechanisms by making
use of the contribution that civil society may be able to
offer. The Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council’s missions and
peacekeeping operations could all be asked to consult
the local civil society in a structural way. They need to
ensure that the civil society organization is broadbased, inclusive, participatory and, most importantly,

S/PV.4993

indigenous. In fact, the whole process should be
domestically owned rather than imposed from outside.
Finally, the fact that many conflict situations
arise from the politics of poverty and scarcity cannot
be ignored. Post-conflict peace-building will inevitably
have to be built upon the provision of hope for a better
tomorrow to destitute and desperate people. Thus
economic and social development must constitute an
integral part of the international community’s
endeavours to promote peace and reconciliation on a
sustainable basis. The United Nations and its family of
organizations, as well as civil society, have a vital role
to play in generating equitable social economic
development in these countries and regions for
effective and sustainable peace-building.
The President: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for citing the need to engage and strengthen
civil society organizations in the United Nations
processes.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Madam President, first of all, we would like to
welcome you as you preside over this session. We
thank the Secretary-General and the President of the
Economic and Social Council for their statements. We
would also like to welcome the representatives of
CARE International and the International Center for
Transitional Justice to our discussion today.
Our debate today is significant, not only because
the role played by civil society organizations in the
international arena has attracted increasing attention,
but also because the Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations has just
published its report, entitled “We the peoples: civil
society, the United Nations and global governance”
(A/58/817). In recent years, many organizations from
civil society have actively participated in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts and post-conflict
peace-building. They have done a lot of work that
deserves to be recognized for promoting peace in the
African countries concerned, for helping the
reconstruction in Afghanistan and calling for a fair and
just resolution to the issue of the Middle East. These
actions have valuably supplemented the efforts of the
international community in ameliorating humanitarian
situations and accelerating the peace process. We
encourage and support civil society organizations in
continuing their constructive role in post-conflict
reconstruction.

I would like to take this opportunity to make the
following comments: First of all, the involvement of
civil society organizations in post-conflict peacebuilding should be guided by the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, which are the
most powerful instruments for promoting the peace,
development and progress of humankind and thus also
provide crucial guidance in the proper settlement of
conflicts and peace-building. Governments and the
international community should not be the only ones to
strictly follow these principles. Civil society
organizations also have an obligation to abide by them.
Only by so doing will civil society be able to maintain
its correct orientation while engaging in relevant
activities. Also, and of equal importance, the will of
the Government and people concerned in a conflict
should be attentively heeded. Local culture and
religious traditions should be fully respected. At the
same time, the principles of objectivity, justice and
neutrality should be upheld. Involvement with any
party to the conflict should be avoided. In this way, the
efforts of civil society organizations will be welcomed
by the local general public and will be able to get twice
the results with half the effort.
Secondly, civil society organizations should
actively complement the efforts of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, in helping
post-conflict countries and regions seek sustainable
peace. The main responsibility for post-conflict
reconstruction in various fields should no doubt be
borne by the United Nations, other international and
regional organizations and the Governments concerned.
Civil society organizations should support the central
role of the United Nations, assisting in the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and should enhance their coordination and
cooperation with the various United Nations agencies.
They should also actively offer ideas and advice on
how to accelerate peace and reconstruction. On the
other hand, the United Nations should also strengthen
its communication with civil society through
appropriate means and heed its opinions and
suggestions. The Arria formula meetings and the
contacts between the Security Council missions and
civil society are both very useful experiments. In this
respect, we note that the report of the Panel of Eminent
Persons has put forward several recommendations on
strengthening relations between the Security Council
and civil society. Those recommendations deserve our
careful study. I would like to emphasize that the

23

S/PV.4993

international community should pay more attention to
civil society in the developing countries and encourage
them to participate more actively and, if necessary, to
provide support for them.
Thirdly, the focus should be on assisting in
economic reconstruction and sustainable development.
Civil society organizations possess advantages of
resources, expertise and skills. Not only do they have a
role to play in such areas as providing humanitarian
relief, promoting the administration of justice and
advocating national reconciliation, they also have
much to do in mobilizing international support to help
countries in conflict areas develop their economies,
eradicate poverty, increase employment, restore
infrastructure and enhance national and local capacitybuilding.
Conflicts today are increasingly complex and
varied. In such circumstances, integrated and
systematic strategies must be adopted to realize the
goals of post-conflict reconstruction. All actors
concerned in the international community should be
actively involved in this process, carry out their own
mandates and do what they can while strengthening
cooperation.
In resolution 57/337, the General Assembly
reaffirmed the importance of civil society’s supporting
role and invited it to pursue practices that foster a
climate of peace, help to prevent or mitigate crisis
situations and contribute to reconciliation. We expect
civil society organizations to continue their efforts
towards that end.
The President: I thank the representative of
China for recognizing in his statement the growing
importance of civil society in global governance,
especially in accelerating peace processes.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to express our
honour and pleasure that you, Madam President, are
presiding over the work of the Security Council today.
We are thankful to you for the initiative taken by the
delegation of the Philippines in proposing for debate an
issue as important as the role of civil society in postconflict peace-building. We are also thankful to
Ambassador Rasi, President of the Economic and
Social Council, Mr. Caillaux, Secretary-General of
CARE International and Mr. Martin, Vice-President of
the International Center for Transitional Justice, for
having so ably introduced the item on the Council’s
agenda.

24

Governments and the United Nations system do
not deal in isolation with the complex challenges of
post-conflict situations. Indeed, the success of peacebuilding efforts requires political wisdom, the
mobilization of a wide range of actors and the ability to
make full use of the expertise, resourcefulness and
other comparative advantages of non-State sectors of
society. Organized civil society may play a central role
in relieving governmental structures strained by peacebuilding efforts. It should be seen as an effective
partner in reconstruction efforts, and its work in the
field, such as humanitarian assistance, poverty
alleviation and the protection of human rights, can
make post-conflict management considerably easier by
helping diffuse tensions that have the potential to
rekindle conflict. Moreover, its work tends to be very
cost-effective in times of tight budgets.
In order to take full advantage of civil society’s
contribution to post-conflict peace-building, we should,
in the first instance, consolidate the active dialogue and
cooperation between it and the Council. The nongovernmental organization (NGO) Working Group on
the Security Council, established in 1995, is now a
useful forum for debate, equally beneficial to Council
members and NGO constituencies, providing a twoway flow of information and expertise.
In addition, dialogue can be furthered by
resorting in a more systematic way to meetings under
the Arria formula, which allow the particular
experience and insight of NGOs to help in the
Council’s debates. Civil society and NGO
representatives should have a greater opportunity to
brief Council members, provide answers to their
questions and be fully updated on Council activities.
The particular role played by the representatives of
civil society at the national and local levels cannot be
dispensed with, as they usually have the benefit of lifelong knowledge of the characteristics and realities of
the local economic, cultural and social environment.
The Council can benefit from that knowledge when
assessing the needs on the ground. The Council’s
missions, one of which is taking place now in West
Africa, offer unique opportunities for such an
assessment through unobstructed exchanges with civil
society, free from constraints.
However, the contribution of civil society to
peace-building is not limited to the exchange of ideas.
Inclusion of a significant number of sectors of civil
society in peace-building has increased chances for

S/PV.4993

stable and lasting peace. Assessment by independent
actors closer to the field can provide crucial inputs to
peace-building. Research networks, for instance, can
interpret information, thus strengthening early-warning
capabilities with respect to problems in post-conflict
peace-building. In a similar way, local civil society
leadership, which has strong ties to communities, can
detect tensions, unrest and sources of imbalance long
before Governments or peace-builders perceive them.
Their expertise and contact with society can also be
useful in the elaboration of exit strategies, as they can
help avoid premature counterproductive withdrawals
that would jeopardize the results of the international
effort.
In addition, peace-building efforts already rely on
the participation in post-conflict situations of NGOs as
members of a larger partnership. NGOs have been
called upon to provide assistance and a wide range of
services. Humanitarian organizations in particular have
been a key factor in supporting and protecting victims,
especially women and children, in situations of conflict
when other forms of protection are not available. Their
voice should continue to be heard during the peacebuilding process. The ability of community leaders and
NGOs to provide creative solutions for fulfilling a
community’s needs can help increase complementarity
between governmental efforts and civil society
initiatives. Creative solutions, including the sharing of
limited resources, shelter and information, can
sometimes fill gaps in peace-building.
As is well known, civil society is not monolithic
and uniform. In this composite of very diverse and
dissimilar groups, we must be able to identify the
representatives of true public interest that can be active
in helping to promote peace. Authentic representatives
of civil society must not be confused with pressure
groups, lobby groups and others, whose purposes do
not necessarily reflect the legitimate aspirations of the
people.
Governments must use regulations to balance
conflicting interests. Thus, State regulation and
coordination are fundamental to enhancing synergy
among the various partners in peace-building. The
Security Council must keep in mind the need to
encourage civil society actors to behave responsibly
and constructively in the promotion of peace, tolerance
and reconciliation. In that regard, special attention
should be paid to the role of the media in post-conflict
situations. As the world saw in Kosovo last March, the

media’s power of penetration and influence can be
misused to sow hatred and incite violence. The same
ability to reach the masses, though, could be put to the
service of the cause of democracy and human rights
standards, which are key to the success of peacebuilding and to preventing the recurrence of conflict.
The positive contribution of the media to the peacebuilding process is therefore particularly valuable.
The Panel of Eminent Persons on United NationsCivil Society Relations, established by the SecretaryGeneral to review the guidelines in practices regarding
that field, concluded that we need constructive
engagement with civil society in order to be able better
to identify global priorities and to mobilize all
available resources to address the complex challenges
of today.
The Panel, chaired by former Brazilian President
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, sees this opening up of
the United Nations not as a threat but as a “powerful
way to reinvigorate the intergovernmental process
itself.” Let me add that the Panel seeks to correct the
representational imbalance at the United Nations
between non-governmental organizations from the
South and those from the North.
We consider dialogue, positive participation and
partnership as cornerstones of a strategy of
empowerment that will allow civil society to become
an even more active partner in peace-building and no
longer be only the main, passive victim of conflict. We
are convinced that supporting a strong, participative
civil society amounts to supporting the cause of peace
and stability.
The President: I thank the representative of
Brazil for his kind and warm words of welcome and for
citing the significant role of civil society as an
effective partner in the reconstruction and post-conflict
peace-building efforts of the Council. I should like to
take this opportunity to convey, through you, our
appreciation to President Cardoso for his important
work and contribution.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): Madam President, my
delegation feels honoured by your presence at the helm
of the Security Council. I would like to congratulate
you for having arranged a discussion on a theme which
will allow for productive elaboration on the
improvement of United Nations peace-building efforts.
It is very timely.

25

S/PV.4993

I wish also to express our satisfaction at the
presence among us this morning of the SecretaryGeneral and of Ambassador Rasi of Finland, President
of the Economic and Social Council.
We join other members of the Council in
expressing appreciation of the contributions made by
representatives of CARE International and of the
International Center for Transitional Justice (ICTJ).
I should like also to mention that Romania
associates itself with the statement which is to be
delivered by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf of
the European Union.
The approach to peace-building continues to
evolve in response to the changing nature of each
conflict. The term encompasses the full range of
commitments undertaken by the international
community to assist countries in achieving sustainable
peace and development. In its presidential statement of
20 February 2001, the Security Council recognized the
role of peace-building in preventing the outbreak,
recurrence or continuation of armed conflict through
political, developmental, humanitarian and human
rights programmes and mechanisms. However, despite
the mobilization of a peace-building doctrine, realities
on the ground reveal a simultaneous demand for
continued commitments to peace-building and a need
to re-evaluate the normative, policy, operational and
institutional approaches to peace-building.
In that regard, we welcome the topic of our
debate today as a means of fostering discussion on
enhancing the capacity, knowledge, resources and tools
of the United Nations to achieve better outcomes in
future peace-building efforts. The question of how to
ensure a deeper involvement of civil society
organizations in peace-building is a natural component
of that framework. Their value to the work of the
United Nations has been repeatedly affirmed in this
very Chamber, where we recognized that they are
instrumental in all processes associated with the
consolidation of peace after conflict. That is
documented by their active involvement in peacebuilding efforts and derives from a number of factors.
In many cases, they have a firsthand
understanding of conflicts, which is always a crucial
element in conflict management. Moreover, in contrast
to the transient nature of peacekeeping efforts, their
continued presence on the ground affords them
opportunities to build long-term relationships, thus

26

creating a sense of trust among opposing political
groups. The longevity of their presence and the
creation of trust provide civil society organizations
with an accessibility international actors frequently
lack.
In addition, through their contacts with
conflicting parties, civil society actors are in a position
to spot emerging crises, thus becoming invaluable
resources for an early-warning system for any
preventive work. Needless to say, since most conflicts
today have at their core ethnic or religious issues, it is
the neutral actors, such as multi-ethnic or multifaith
civil society organizations, that are able to gain the
trust of opposing parties and mobilize ethnic and
religious dialogue.
Given the potential of civil society actors in terms
of knowledge and intuitive understanding, emphasis
should be placed on promoting improved collaboration
between the United Nations system and civil society
organizations, in order to make peace-building
activities more productive, sustainable and costeffective.
Peace-building encompasses phenomena such as
participation, empowerment and national ownership,
aimed at the emergence of a sustainable polity within a
post-conflict environment. We must foster home-grown
political processes in which civil society shares with
the international community and local governmental
actors the ownership of the reconstruction process.
Furthermore, dialogue among civil society actors must
be facilitated to allow for discussions, nurture
transformations, build consensus and translate policy
into practice. Particularly in countries where
communities are distrustful of each other or where
conflict has eroded societal structures, we must explore
all effective models for participatory peace-building
through
collaboration
between
civil
society
organizations and the United Nations system and its
mechanisms and partners.
As members of the Council and other
representatives are aware, we will hold, during the
Romanian presidency, a thematic debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in stabilization processes. In that
framework, we will welcome any innovative
approaches to enhancing the regional capacity for
peace-building through the inclusion of civil society
organizations in endeavours towards that goal.

S/PV.4993

Strategies must be designed, regionally and locally,
that aim to strengthen these private organizations, build
their capability for more effective collaboration and to
develop mechanisms for participation in all stages of,
and processes related to, peace-building.
Yesterday saw the public release of the report of
the Secretary-General’s Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations. We commend
the recognition therein of the enhancement of the
Council’s informal relations with civil society, as we
have often come together at the right time, especially
in such areas as human rights or humanitarian affairs.
Such an understanding of has the potential to create the
most appropriate avenues and mechanisms for
cooperation in order better to implement our tasks.
The President: I thank the representative of
Romania for the kind words he addressed for me, for
welcoming me to the Council and for highlighting the
work of civil society organizations in achieving better
outcomes in peace-building due to their presence on
the ground in areas of conflict.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Permit me at the outset
to thank the Philippines presidency for having
convened this important meeting. We welcome your
presence in the Chair, Madam President, because it
shows how much importance you attach to this
important subject. We would also like to warmly thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the Economic
and Social Council, Mr. Caillaux and Mr. Martin for
their remarks. We salute the Secretary-General’s
leadership in pushing for enhanced and meaningful
interaction between the United Nations and civil
society. We stand ready to support any action that will
bring that critical relationship more closely in line with
the realities of globalization and the complexities of
many other new global challenges of today.
The Presidency of the European Union will touch
upon a number of important issues that are not covered
by my statement. Needless to say, I fully associate
myself with the remarks to be delivered later in this
debate by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.
Experiences
with
numerous
post-conflict
situations since the end of the cold war have shown
that post-conflict peace-building processes that do not
sufficiently involve local actors — of which civil
society organizations are a central part — are doomed
to failure. That applies to the work of United Nations

peacekeeping missions, to wider United Nations efforts
for development and stability and to national
Governments. Germany is a strong promoter of a
culture of conflict prevention and dialogue. For that
reason, the federal Government has devised and is
implementing an action plan on civilian crisis
prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding. In this concept, civil society plays an
indispensable part in peace-building and therefore
forms a cornerstone of our strategy.
One of the many important contributions that
civil society provides is invaluable information that
forms part of an early-warning system on emerging
conflicts. In order to preserve the strength of those
contributions, it is important to respect civil society’s
independence from Government. Civil society has a
role that is as indispensable as it is distinct from
Government and from the military. We wish to pay
tribute to the instrumental role that internationally
active non-governmental organizations have played in
bringing about three major breakthroughs that are
cornerstones of the international conflict prevention
and post-conflict peace-building architecture: the
Ottawa Treaty on landmines, the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons and the International Criminal Court. None of
those three would have been feasible or possible to
implement without the help of civil society.
Germany is also a strong supporter of the global
partnership for the prevention of armed conflict that
was established to enhance the role of civil society in
developing effective action to prevent violent conflict.
In order to focus on the role of another crucial group of
non-State actors in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, Germany, as a past President of the Security
Council, initiated a debate on the role of business in
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peace-building.
Having said that, we are fully aware that stable
and strong Governments are an equally important
precondition for sustainable peace-building. The final
decisions and responsibility must remain with
Governments. Even the most ingenious creativity of
the civil sectors, including civil society, will not
succeed in bringing about peace and stability if the
decision-making mechanisms of an effective State are
missing. Somalia, I believe, is a case in point.

27

S/PV.4993

I would now like to focus on a few points that are
of practical relevance to the Council. In Germany’s
view, the Council’s recent record on interaction with
civil society is, by and large, a good one. We are
pleased to note that the report of the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel of Eminent Persons on United NationsCivil Society Relations, which was published
yesterday, seems to share that assessment. Our initial
impression of the report’s recommendations is very
positive. The recommendations on making better use of
Arria-formula meetings and field visits are eminently
sensible, and our experience of contacts with nongovernmental organizations throughout the Security
Council’s mission to Afghanistan has been extremely
positive, dealing as it did with the complexity of the
situation on the ground. We are also prepared to
explore creative new ways of enhancing cooperation,
such as Chatham House Rules-based seminars.
On the issue of civil society strategies to be
pursued by the United Nations field presence, I would
like to recall recommendations that were made at a
seminar held in 2003 in Istanbul, chaired by Mrs. Nafis
Sadik and representing, inter alia, the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.
Those
recommendations
included
systematic consultation with civil society members
through assessment teams preparing new peace
operations; secondly, regular consultative meetings
between civil society and the highest United Nations
representative; thirdly, the establishment of a nongovernmental organization coordinator at a senior level
in the United Nations field presence; fourthly, the
instruction of incoming United Nations mission leaders
and personnel by local civil society leaders with regard
to in-country norms and cultural traditions; and lastly,
transparent and factual information on mission
activities and funding in national languages so that
civil society may effectively interact with the United
Nations mission. We support those recommendations.
We trust that, on that basis, a creative and cooperative
relationship among civil society, the Security Council
and the United Nations system as a whole can be
further enhanced and developed.
The President: I particularly welcome the
representative of Germany’s expression of readiness to
support any action that will bring about more
enhanced, cooperative and meaningful interaction
between the United Nations and civil society.

28

Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your laudable effort to organize this
public debate on a very timely subject: the role of civil
society in post-conflict peace-building. We are also
pleased to note the participation of many civil society
actors and the President of the Economic and Social
Council in this debate.
The issues of, inter alia, rebuilding State
institutions, promoting democracy, restoring essential
services, resuming economic and social life, promoting
the return and reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons and carrying out disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes for ex-combatants are
considerations that led us to engage in this debate on
the role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building
from the perspective of the country approach and
interaction that must be developed between the
Security Council and the national scene to lead that
process.
The complexity of post-conflict peace-building
processes requires a division of labour based on the
comparative advantage of the presence of various
actors as a way to ensure synergy among various actors
of civil society — heterogeneous by nature — and
other interested parties. In that context, civil society
has its role to play in all areas covered by the peace
process, since all the actors and the relations among
them constitute the framework of the social and
economic life of a given country and thus the well
from which nations draw their human resources to
build peace and achieve prosperity.
In these conditions, we would emphasize that
civil society is a very important interlocutor for
achieving peace and establishing peace processes as a
whole and in all aspects. Civil society can also
effectively play the role of bringing pressure to bear to
mobilize social non-violence and ensure good
governance
by
promoting
transparency
and
streamlining the use of public resources.
With regard to humanitarian and social
assistance, civil society can help meet the challenge of
providing the basic needs of the population,
particularly the reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons and the rehabilitation of former combatants. In
that context, its role can be crucial in identifying needs
and in mobilizing national and international solidarity
for planning the return and the reintegration of

S/PV.4993

displaced persons. Civil society can also undertake
relief activities with international partners on the
ground, to provide emergency assistance to affected
populations and ensure support to reinforce social
welfare activities, as well as income-generating
activities.
The Security Council could expressly stipulate in
peacekeeping operations mandates the need for civil
society to fully play a role that is commensurate with
its potential, as well as the need to ensure that civil
society has the assistance necessary to become a truly
effective partner in peace processes. That is
particularly true for the least developed countries of
Africa, where civil society organizations have few
opportunities to mobilize resources locally, given their
limited means.
We are also of the view that we must strengthen
Security Council members’ recourse to missions, in
follow-up of peacekeeping missions, by sending small
Council missions to concerned countries, and thereby
encourage greater interaction with civil society on the
ground. The objective envisaged would be to gather as
much firsthand information as possible to assess as
well as possible the progress made and to guide the
Council’s actions in order to make them as effective as
possible.
Holding well-organized local Arria-formula
meetings on the ground could contribute to that. That
approach should enable a better grasp of analytical
elements before embarking on the planning and the
implementation of exit strategies of complex
peacekeeping operations. It should also allow for better
planning between the emergency phase and the
stabilization phase strategies in the medium and long
terms and facilitate relay and coordination among all
facets of the United Nations system.
Civil society should also ensure that national
reconciliation be a priority, for example, through truth
and reconciliation commissions, which are critical
instruments. Civil society has a distinct comparative
advantage in that area, particularly through religious
organizations whose moral authority can be very
important. In order to succeed, national reconciliation
efforts must be conducted in a manner removed from
all feelings of adversity; rather, they must be conducted
in terms of promoting harmony and persuasion to
enable people to understand the need for justice and to
facilitate
victim
identification
and
resource

mobilization for their compensation. Thus, the
involvement of civil society can be a barometer of the
degree of ownership of the peace-building process.
The President: I thank the representative of
Benin for the wide-ranging concerns that he has raised
that relate to the role of civil society as an effective
interlocutor in peace processes.
I should now like to make a statement in my
capacity as the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Philippines.
Indeed, our discussions could not have come at a
more opportune time, as the views expressed here
today certainly enrich the elements of the Cardoso
report (A/58/817) on United Nations relations with
civil society, recently released by the SecretaryGeneral.
I thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan and
Marjatta Rasi, President of the Economic and Social
Council, for their valuable inputs in today’s debate. I
also thank Mr. Denis Caillaux of CARE International
and Ian Martin of the International Center for
Transitional Justice, for their views on the role of civil
society in post-conflict peace-building, which clearly
reflect their vast experience in this area. I must confess
that I am overwhelmed by all the constructive
contributions they have given in the consideration of
our chosen theme.
Indeed, the wounds of conflict are manifold.
They touch upon sensitive roots imbedded in peoples’
psyches. The healing process should therefore lead to a
recovery of confidence, an assurance of integrity and a
deeply internalized sense of peace. This requires a
delicate but firm touch moved by an intimate
understanding of and sympathy with a people. By its
nature, civil society is gifted with such understanding
and sympathy.
In efforts to rebuild peace on more enduring
foundations, Governments, as well as the United
Nations, can be helped by a caring and sharing civil
society. Civil society must be compassionate but
resolute, helping suffering peoples let go of negative ill
feelings, grasp the value of reconciliation, concentrate
on reintegration and reconstruction and rehabilitate
society through hard work and dedication.
With the help of civil society, Governments and
the United Nations should aim to restrengthen the
national self-confidence and social fabric of

29

S/PV.4993

traumatized peoples and to encourage and to assist
them to help themselves overcome enormous human
security challenges.

international; and they must be flexible, capable of
adjustment to changing circumstances and continuing
assessment.

The ruin of factors of production, economic
breakdown, and conflict-caused poverty, the collapse
of law and order and the exacerbation of long-standing
fractiousness must be addressed with professional
sobriety.

There is absolutely no doubt that civil society can
help formulate and implement strategies, contributing
information, know-how, fervour and even financial and
material resources. What is now imperative for the
United Nations is to have a clearer view of its relations
with a civil society that has grown in size and numbers.
Cognizant of its intervention mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
profiting from the normative idea of Heifetz and
Linsky in their book Leadership on the Line, which
entails

We are witnesses to the cooperative effort in
recent years of national Governments, the United
Nations and numerous representatives of civil society
in such places as Afghanistan, the Balkans, East Timor
and West Africa, to which many members have
referred. We are poised to pursue the same cooperative
endeavour in Iraq.
The partnership of civil society with the United
Nations in post-conflict peace-building can start from
the very design of the project blueprint. Civil society
can assist in identifying, understanding and addressing
root causes of conflict, in helping formulate
collaborative reconstruction strategies and perhaps
even in resolving conflict itself.
In the actual peace-building phase, civil society
can, with United Nations coordination, assist in
providing relief, health, education and other public
services; spur economic revival and social recovery;
promote advocacy of human rights, ethics and the rule
of law in catalysing total human development, for it is
with such development that a more lasting peace is
achieved.
Owing to civil society’s grassroots charisma,
manifested in its participation in the reconciliation,
reconstruction and rehabilitation process — even its
mere presence can be therapeutic, a balm to sore
wounds — it can evoke a deeper realization of life’s
worth after the havoc of war. Civil society’s
participation is therefore vital for public support and,
consequently, for the greater legitimacy of peacebuilding endeavours.
I need not dwell on the elements of cogent
strategies, including those for post-conflict peacebuilding. We all realize that they should be
comprehensive in scope and in implementation detail.
They must be integrated, recognizing the symbiotic
relationship of legal, political, economic, social and
cultural concerns. They must be participative, with
contributions from all stakeholders, national and

30

“getting on the balcony and stepping back to have
a perspective of what is happening while
remaining fiercely on the ground”,
the United Nations should base its engagement with
civil society on policies, mechanisms and procedures
that are coherent, consistent and predictable.
Birgitta Dahl, one of the eminent persons tasked
by our Secretary-General to consider such engagement,
has reported on her Panel’s endorsement of four
normative paradigms: first, the United Nations role of
convening, facilitating and leading partnerships not
only of Governments, but also of all stakeholders,
including civil society; secondly, country-level focus in
analysis and implementation; thirdly, encouragement of
greater parliamentary and national standing committee
participation; and fourthly, a shift from an omnigovernmental bias to a multilateral society mobilizing
the cooperation of coalitions of the willing, following
the “highest common principles”.
These paradigms deserve serious attention, not
only for the involvement of civil society organizations,
non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
in post-conflict peace-building, but also for their
involvement in other issues of global concern.
Let me interject at this point a notion that is by no
means new, but deserves keener appreciation: the role
of faith groups, as civil society actors, in conflict
prevention and post-conflict peace-building. Religions
do preach peace, not violence; forgiveness, not
revenge.
Upholding
human
dignity,
justice,
accountability and the rule of law, they exercise a
strong moral influence. Based on in-depth appreciation
of problems, their inputs to conflict-prevention and

S/PV.4993

post-conflict peace-building plans and implementation
should be optimized.
Clearly, as we have heard today, there is a
consensus on the crucial role of civil society in global
issues. The Secretary-General’s report to the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly should
spur bold and pragmatic action, for it provides us with
the mechanics of accreditation, the procedures of
consultation, the equilibrium of North-South actors and
of stakeholders with differing views, the sharing of
costs, and similar practical matters that impact on good
order. The delineation of roles and a sound respect for
leadership and coordination must be present. This
leadership and coordination are expected of us in the
United Nations.
The Philippines looks forward to a meaningful
outcome of the Secretary-General’s initiative of
convening an international NGO conference in 2005 on

the role of civil society in the prevention of armed
conflict. We believe that this dialogue will further
crystallize the partnership of the United Nations, civil
society and other stakeholders, including the religious
sector, particularly in post-conflict peace-building.
When conflict ends, healing must begin, and civil
society, Government and the United Nations must
stand together, bravely, past the frontiers of conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are still a number of speakers remaining on
my list for this meeting. I intend, with the concurrence
of members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m. this afternoon.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.

31
