32

General AHemhly-Eighth Session

_{f) Efforts sl--ould be intensified to . increase the
number and improve the quality of public elementary
and secondary schools; training for indigenous teachers
should be expedited; a mass education programme
should be instituted; attention should be devoted to
vocational trahing, particularly in agricultural and veterinary science; and facilities for further studies should
be expanded by granting ~n adequate number of s~~olarships to enable Somalis to take advanced trammg
courses abroad ;
( g) Review should be continued of all special leg:islation relating to Somaliland which was enacted pnor
to the trusteeship administration and which is still in
effect, with a view to revising legislation found to be
inconsistent with the letter or the spirit of the Trusteeship Agreement ;
3. Recommends also to the Governments of Jtaly
and Ethiopia that they should intensify their efforts to
achieve a final, just, equitable and friendly settlement
of the question of the frontier between the State of
Ethiopia and the Trust Territory of Somaliland in
order that this problem may be finally settled before
the date appointed for the attainment of independence
by Somaliland ;
4. Requests the Advisory Council, in its annual report, to give precise information on the implementation
of the present resolution, together with its observations, comments or suggestions as to the means of
carrying out the recommendations contained in the
resolution.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

756 (VIII). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly,
l. Takes note of the report 23 of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 4 December 1952 to
.21 July 1953;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council, in its
future deliberations, take into account the comments
and suggestions made in the course of the discussion
of the report of the Council at the eighth session of
the General Assembly.
47.lst plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
757 (VIII). Petitions from the Ngoa-Ekele Com•
munity, Cameroon& under French administra•
tion, concerning adjustment of their land
complaint
The General Assembly,
Having heard the declaration 2 • and answers 25 of
the representative of the Ngoa-Ekele Community,
Cameroons under French administration,
Bearing in mind the observations and explanations 28
given by the Administering Authority,
1. Notes the steps already taken by the Administer~
ing Authority to assist the Ngoa-Ekele Community to
settle on other lands ;
2. Suggests to the Administering Authority to take
all necessary steps which can in a satisfactory manner
23
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth
Session, Supplement No. 4.
u See, docui;aent A/C,.__4/255.
25 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 382nd and 387th meetings.
26 Ibid.

alleviate the difficulties experienced by the N goa-Ekele
Community in the process of their re-establishment;
3. Recommends that assistance be also given by the
Administering Authority to the Ngoa-Ekele Community for it to avail itself of whatever legal recourse
remains open in connexion with the lands on which they
were originally settled and whatever further compensation might be possible;
4. Recommends to the Administering Authority to
further its purpose of allotting to the Ngoa-Ekele
Community an adequate area of lands by delimiting
these lands in accordance with the legal procedures obtaining in the Trust Territory;
5. Invites the Trusteeship Council to examine this
question in the light of the present resolution and to
include in its next report to the General Assembly
the results of its examination.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

758 (VIII). Hearing of petitioners from .the
Trust Territory of the Cameroons under
French administration

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Trusteeship Council has not yet
considered the problems concerning the Trust Territory of the Cameroons under French administration,
which are referred to in resolution 655 (VII) adopted
by the General Assembly on 21 December 1952,
Bearing in mind that the Council has stated in its
report 27 that it will consider this matter at its next
regular session,
Having again heard representatives of the organizations of the Cameroons under French administration, 28
l. Reaffirms resolution 655 (VII) adopted on 21
December 1952 ;
2. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council to give
preferential attention to this matter at its next regular
session;
3. Also recommends to the Council that, in considering this matter, it should also take into consideration the statements of the petitioners and the comments
made by the members of the Fourth Committee at the
current session of the General Assembly; and that it
should include a special study of this matter in its
report to the General Assembly for consideration at
the ninth session.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

* * *

NOTE

ELECTION OF TWO MEMBERS TO THE COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION FROM NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES
In accordance with the terms of resolutions 332 (IV)
and 646 (VII), the Fourth Committee, at its 395th
meeting on 7 December 1953, elected, on behalf of the
General Assembly, two members to the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories to
fill the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms
of office of Cuba and Pakistan.
The States elected were: BURMA and GUATEMALA.
2 7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 4.
28/bid., Fourth Committee, 388th, 393rd and 394th meetings.
