4

General AHembly-Eighteenth SeHion

Yugoslavia to provide relief for the victims of the
earthquake and to restore normal living conditions for
the people,
N otinq also the preparation by the Government of
Yugoslavia of a five-year plan for the reconstruction
of the city of Skoplje,
Taking note of the assistance rendered to the people
of Skoplje by many nations, by organizations of the
United Nations family and by other organizations, and
noting with satisfaction that the spirit of international
solidarity demonstrated on this occasion has transformed
the reconstruction of Skoplje into a real symbol of
friendship and brotherhood among peoples,
1. Expresses its deep sympathy to the people of
Skoplje and the Government of Yugoslavia dver this
disaster;
2. Endorses the recommendation contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 970 (XXXVI) of
29 July 1%3 inviting Member States to consider what
further assistance they may be in a position to offer
to Yugoslavia, and appeals to them to assist the
Yugoslav Government in the execution of the five-year
plan for the reconstruction of Skoplje;
3. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the heads of the specialized agencies, the Executive Directors of the World Food Programme and
the United Nations Children's Fund, the Managing
Director of the Special Fund, and the Executive Chairman of the Technical Assistance Board, to bear in mind
the immediate and long-term needs of the Yugoslav
Government in connexion with its plan for the reconstruction of Skoplje when deciding on the services to
be provided to Member States in the light of the funds
available.
1240th plenary meeting,
14 October 1963.

1886 (XVIII). Report of the Intemational Atomic
Energy Agency
The General Assembly
Ta.kes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1962-1963. 1
1253rd plenary meeting,
30 October 1963.

1887 (XVIII). Report of the Security Council
The Genera/, Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1962 to 15 July 1963. 2
1253rd plenary meeting,
30 October 1963.

1888 (XVIII). Measures in connexion with the
hurricane which has just struck the territories of Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago
The General Assembly,
Noting with deep regret the tragic cor.sequences of
the hurricane which struck the Caribbe:in area-espe1 Annual Report of the Board of GIYJ:rnors to the GenMCI
Co"f"enct, 1 July 1962-30 June 196?, Vienna, July 1963, and
supplementary report (A/5471 and .•.dd.1).
2 Official Records of the Ge,,r:al Assembly, Eighteenth
S11.riOfl, Supplement No. 2 (A/5'J2).

cially the territories of Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago-resulting in
the loss of thousands of lives and causing considerable
material damage,
Considering the urgent measures adopted by the Governments of the above-mentioned countries to alleviate
the suffering of the victims of the hurricane, reconstruct
the devastated areas and restore normal living conditions
in those areas.
Noting with particular satisfaction that many States,
international bodies and organizations in the United
Nations family have taken immediate steps to help the
victims of the hurricane,
1. Expresses its deep sympathy to the peoples of
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and
Trinidad and Tobago over the loss of human life and
the material damage caused by the hurricane;
2. Invites Member States and non-governmental organizations to study ways of providing large-scale
assistance, either individually or collectively, to the
above-mentioned territories in order that they may
make a more effective effort to rehabilitate the devc>stated areas, and asks them to furnish such assistance
generously ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the United Nations agencies concerned to bear
in mind the immediate and future needs of the affected
countries and to provide assistance, in connexion with
their rehabilitation plans, from available resources, obtaining where necessary the authorization of the gov. erning bodies of their respective organizations.
1254th plenary meeting,
1 November 1963.

1898 (XVDI). Report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Improvement of the Methods of
Work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling with appreciation the initiative taken by
the President of the sixteenth session of the General
Assembly in his memorandum of 26 April 1962 on the
methods of work of the Assembly, 8
Recalling its decision of 30 October 1962 establishing
the Ad H oc Committee on the Improvement of the
Methods of Work of the General Assembly and its
resolution 1845 (XVII) of 19 December 1962, by which
it decided to continue the Committee,
Having considered the report submitted by the Ad
H oc Committee in pursuance of the above-mentioned
resolution,•
Conscious of the need to adapt its methods of work
to the changed circumstances in the General Assembly,
in particular those resulting from the recent increase
in the number of Member States,
Concerned however to avoid reducing in any way
the possibilities for action available to the Genera]
Assembly under the Charter of the United Nations and
the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
Convinced that it is in the interests of the Organization and of Member States that the work of the General
Assembly should be carried out as efficiently and
expeditiously as possible and that, save in quite exS [/Ji.d., Seventeenth Sessio-n, Anne:rts, agenda item 86, document A/5123.
• Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, document A/5423.
