A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/133
18 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 114 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/632/Add.2)]
48/133.

International Year of the World’s Indigenous People,
1993

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations set forth
in the Charter is the achievement of international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian
character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for
fundamental freedoms for all without discrimination as to race, sex, language
or religion,
Recognizing and respecting the value and the diversity of cultures, as
well as the cultural heritage and the forms of social organization of the
world’s indigenous people,
Recalling its resolution 45/164 of 18 December 1990, in which it
proclaimed 1993 the International Year of the World’s Indigenous People, with
a view to strengthening international cooperation for the solution of problems
faced by indigenous communities in areas such as human rights, the
environment, development, education and health,
Conscious of the need to improve the economic, social and cultural
situation of the indigenous people with full respect for their distinctiveness
and their own initiatives,
Appreciative of the contributions made to the voluntary fund for the
Year opened by the Secretary-General,
Noting the establishment of the fund for the development of indigenous
peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean as one kind of support for the
objectives of the Year,
/...

A/RES/48/133
Page 2

Taking note of the recommendation of the World Conference on Human
Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, that an international decade
of the world’s indigenous people should be proclaimed, 1/
Noting the need to continue strengthening the initiatives taken as a
result of the Year,
Recalling the request to the Subcommission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities that it should complete its
consideration of the draft universal declaration on the rights of indigenous
peoples,
1.
Calls upon the United Nations system and Governments that have not
yet done so to develop policies in support of the objectives and the theme of
the International Year of the World’s Indigenous People and to strengthen the
institutional framework for their implementation;
2.
Recommends to all thematic rapporteurs, special representatives,
independent experts and working groups that they pay particular attention,
within the framework of their mandates, to the situation of indigenous people;
3.
Urges the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights to continue
to solicit actively the cooperation of specialized agencies, regional
commissions, financial and development institutions and other relevant
organizations of the United Nations system for the promotion of a programme of
activities in support of the objectives and the theme of the Year;
4.
Appeals to the specialized agencies, regional commissions and
financial and development institutions of the United Nations system to
continue to increase their efforts to take into special account the needs of
indigenous people in their budgeting and in their programming;
5.

Requests:

That reports of the three technical meetings, first provided for
(a)
in paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 46/128 of 17 December 1991, be
included in the final assessment proceedings provided for in paragraph 12 of
the same resolution and that their conclusions be included in the report of
the Coordinator for the Year to be submitted to the General Assembly at its
forty-ninth session;
(b)
That the Commission on Human Rights convene, from within existing
resources, a meeting of participants in the programmes and projects of the
Year, in the three days preceding the twelfth session of the Working Group on
Indigenous Populations of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities, to report to the Working Group on the
conclusions that can be drawn from the activities of the Year with a view to
the elaboration of a detailed plan of action and the establishment of a
funding plan for the International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People;

____________
1/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 32.
/...

A/RES/48/133
Page 3

6.
Stresses the relevance for the solution of problems faced by
indigenous communities of the recommendations contained in chapter 26 of
Agenda 21, 2/ including their implementation;
7.
Notes with satisfaction the holding at Manila of a Global Youth
Earth-saving Summit which, by its reaffirmation of the role of traditional
cultures in the preservation of the environment, underscored the right to
cultural survival;
8.
Welcomes the proposal for a gathering of indigenous youth in 1995,
an "Indigenous Youth Cultural Olympics", as a follow-up to the Year, to be
held in conjunction with the International Decade of the World’s Indigenous
People and the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, to reaffirm the
value of traditional cultures, folk arts and rituals as effective expressions
of respective national identities and as a foundation for a shared vision for
peace, freedom and equality;
9.
Stresses that the governmental and intergovernmental activities
undertaken within the context of the Year and beyond should take fully into
account the development needs of indigenous people and that the Year should
contribute to enhancing and facilitating the coordination capabilities of
Member States for collecting and analysing information;
10.
Notes that there is a continuing need within the United Nations
system to aggregate data specific to indigenous people by means of enhancing
and facilitating the coordination capabilities of Member States for collecting
and analysing such data;
11.
Requests the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, at its forty-sixth session, to complete its
consideration of the draft universal declaration on the rights of indigenous
peoples and to submit its report to the Commission on Human Rights at its
fifty-first session;
12.
Requests the Coordinator for Year, in the report to be submitted
to the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session on the activities developed
and the results achieved within the context of the Year, to include an account
of the response of the United Nations system to the needs of indigenous
people;
13.
Expresses its appreciation for the work undertaken for the Year
by Governments, the Coordinator for the Year, the International Labour
Organisation, the Goodwill Ambassador, Ms. Rigoberta Menchu, indigenous and
non-governmental organizations, the Commission on Human Rights and the Working
Group on Indigenous Populations.
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993
_______________
2/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. 1/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
