\ II

Resolution, adopted on the report, of the Fourth Committee

11. Emphasizes the desirabililj of sending a \ 1s1ting
mission to the Territory and requesh the administering
Power to facilitate the dispatch nf such a mission at l he
earliest possible opportunity;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next -..ession, including the
possible dispatch of a visiting mi:,sim1 to Bermuda at an
appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to lhe General Assembly
at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 Dcccmhcr 1987
42/87.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the queslinn of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the reporl ol
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,.lg
Recalling its resolution l'il4 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Guam, in particular General Assembly resolution 4112"
of 31 October 1986,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy im
plementation of the Declaration in respect of 1he Tern
tory,
Having heard the statement of the representative of tht
United States of America, as the administering Power.
relating to Guam, 40
Taking note of the statement by the representative of the
administering Power that the Guam Commission on SelfDetermination, which was appoinled in February 1984.
had completed its work on the draft text of a Commonwealth Act, and that voters would be required, in a referendum, to pronounce themselves on the draft text, and
noting that the Guam Legislature had appropriated
$183,000 to fund a voter education programme,
Taking note of the statement by the n:presentative of the
administering Power that the United States Department
ofDefense had planned to release an additional 1,435 hectares of land to the territorial Government in I 986,
Noting the potential offered for diversifying and developing the economy of the Territory, for example, by commercial fishing and agriculture, and taking note of lhe
statement of the representative of the administering Power
that the draft Commonwealth Act seeks to promote economic development by establishing a free 1radc -.one between Guam and the United States of America,
Taking note of the statement of the representative of the
administering Power that provisions of the draft Commonwealth Act would recognize the distinct cultural identity of the Chamorro people. the indigenous inhabitant-. (lf
Guam,
Aw~re of the special circumslanc·cs oflhe geographical
locat1on and economic condition, uf lhc Territnry and
bearing in mind the necessitv of di, crsifying and strength-

39

Official Records o/ the Generul h1,·111hlr. /-or11 1,·m11d S,•,11,-,1,
Su£f'lement No. 23 (A/42/].1). d1ap, Ill. \' ,111d IX
Ibid., f'ortv-\econd \1'\\/rn1. Fourth ( ,1111111/f,'( '1lth llll"l'lt11g ;ii d
corrigendum. •

253

ening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Re< a/ling the dispatch m 1979 ofa United Nations visiting mission to the Terntory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and reiterating that the possibility of sending a
further visiting mission to Guam at an appropriate time
should he kept under review,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementat ion of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
10 Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Guam; 28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Guam to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence' 10 Colonial Countries and Peoples;
l. Reaffirm., its conviction that such factors as territonal size, geographical location, size of population and
limited natural resources should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration, which fully applies to
Guam.
4. Reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness
among the people of Guam of the possibilities open to
them with regard to their right to self-determination and
calls upon the United States of America, as the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to expedite the process of decolonization strictly in
accordance with the expressed wishes of the people of the
Territory;
5 Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in the Territory could constitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration and that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the existence of such bases
and installations does not hinder the population of the
Territory from exercising its right to self-determination
and independence in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
b.
Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures not to involve the Territory in any
offensive acts or interference against other States and to
comply fully with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions
of1he General Assembly relating to military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under
their administration:

7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, to promote the economic and
-,ocial development of Guam and, in that connection, calls
upon the administering Power to take further steps to
strengthen and diversify the economy of the Territory,
with a view to reducmg ih economic dependence on the
administering Power:
8. Reiterates that one of the obstacles to economic
growth in Guam, and particularly to agricultural development. is the holding of large tracts of land by the United
States federal authorities, and calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Government. to expedite the lransfer of land to the people of the
Tcrrit()ry:
'>
Relll'rates its cull upon the administering Power to
suppllrt measures by the territorial Government aimed at
removing constraints to growth in the areas of agriculture
and commercial fishing and to ensure development in
tlw,,t· areas to the fullest extent;

General Assembly--Forty-second Session

254

10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the right of the
people of Guam to the natural resources of the Territory.
including its territorial waters, and to establish and main
tain control over the future development of those n>
sources, and requests the administering Power to take the
necessary steps to protect the property rights of the people
of the Territory;
11. Reaffirms the importance of continued efforts by
the territorial Government, with the support of the admin ·
istering Power, towards promoting the Chamorro language and culture;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Guam at
an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assem
bly at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December /987

42/88.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly.
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 35
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Deccmbc1
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
American Samoa, in particular General Assembly resolution 41 /23 of 31 October 1986,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to American Samoa, 40
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards the
full implementation of the Declaration in respect of
American Samoa,
Noting the continuing process of constitutional reviews.
through consultations with the people and through the
work of a constitutional review committee,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Recalling the dispatch in 1981 of a United Nation~ visiting mission to the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and considering that the possibility of sending
a further visiting mission to American Samoa at an appro·
priate time should be kept under review,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American
Samoa; 28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countrie~ and Peoples:

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographica 1 location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exernse by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to American
Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to take all necessary
steps, taking into account the rights, interests and wishes
of the people of American Samoa as expressed freely in
conditions leading to real self-determination, to expedite
I he process of decolonization of the Territory in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Declaration and reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness among the people of
American Samoa of the possibilities open to them in the
exercise of their right to self-determination and independence:
5. Calls upon the administering Power to consider
favourably the expressed request of the people of American Samoa to appoint the Chief Justice and other memhers of the judiciary of the Territory themselves;
6. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, to promote the economic and
~ocial development of American Samoa and calls upon the
administering Power to intensify its efforts to strengthen
and diversify the economy of the Territory and to make it
more viable in order to reduce its heavy economic and financial dependence on the United States and to create
more employment opportunities for the people of the Terntory:
7. Expresses the hope that the development planning
process initiated under the first five-year development plan
will he strengthened;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of American Samoa to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective measures to ensure their right to own and dispose of those
resources and to establish and maintain control of their future development with a view to creating conditions for a
halanced, diversified and viable economy;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue to promote close relations between the people of the Territory
and the neighbouring island communities and to facilitate
co-operation between the Government of American
Samoa and the regional institutions in order to enhance
the economic and social welfare of the people of the Territory:
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
dispatch of a further visiting mission to American Samoa
at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power. taking into account, in particular, the
wishes of the people oft he Territory, and to report thereon
f() the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987

42/89.

Question of the United States Virgin Islands

The General 4ssembly,
Having considered the question of the United States Virgm Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
, he Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
