S/2016/233*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 March 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 43 of Security Council
resolution 2211 (2015). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since my report of 24 December 2015 (S/2015/1031), including with
regard to the situation on the ground, progress made by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the implementation of its commitments under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region, the electoral process and progress made by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) in the implementation of its mandate. The report also includes
an update on progress in the strategic dialogue between MONUSCO and the
Government and the joint development of an exit strategy for MONUSCO.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The electoral impasse persisted with mistrust deepening around the proposal
by President Joseph Kabila to hold a national dialogue in order to address the stalled
process. Political parties that are members of the presidential majority continued to
support the national dialogue process. On 28 December 2015, in Kinshasa, the
spokesperson for the Parti lumumbiste unifié (PALU), a member party of the
presidential majority, stated at a press conference that PALU was in “full support”
of the national dialogue, as it would help resolve issues linked to the electoral
process. On 4 January 2016, in Kinshasa, during a march commemorating martyrs
of the liberation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Henri Mova Sakanyi, the
leader of the Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie, the dominant
political party in the presidential majority, called on all national stakeholders to
support and participate in the national dialogue proposed by President Kabila.
3.
Opposition parties continued to voice concern that the national dialogue could
be used by the Government to prolong the stay of the President in office beyond
* Reissued for technical reasons on 15 March 2016.

16-03552* (E)

150316

*1603552*

S/2016/233

November 2016 or lead to a change in the Constitution to abolish the two -term
presidential limit. The Front citoyen 2016, an opposition coalition that was
established on 30 December 2015 bringing together civil society organizations,
citizen groups and the main opposition parties and platforms, including G7 (a group
of seven dissident political parties) and the Dynamique de l’opposition, announced
that it would reject participation in the national dialogue, called for respect of the
Constitution and opposed any slippage in the electoral calendar and a third term in
office for President Kabila. As mentioned in my last report, the President of the
Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS), Etienne Tshisekedi, called for
the appointment of an international facilitator as a condition for UDPS to participate
in the dialogue. He reiterated his request in a communiqué issued on 31 December.
4.
In that increasingly polarized political context, both the opposition and the
presidential majority, each supported by a segment of civil society, announced a
series of demonstrations in February 2016. On 8 January, the Dynamique de
l’opposition announced a timetable for organizing a series of peaceful
demonstrations between January and March to support the holding of transparent
and credible elections and to protest against any slippage in the electora l calendar or
attempt to change the Constitution.
5.
On 14 January 2016, the African Union issued a statement that conveyed the
support of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, for President Kabila’s initiative to hold a national dialogue. The statement
announced the appointment of former Prime Minister of Togo and member of the
African Union Panel of the Wise, Edem Kodjo, to hold consultations in Kinshasa for
the launching of the dialogue. In a joint statement issued on 18 January in response,
the opposition platforms G7 and the Dynamique de l’opposition noted that the
communiqué of the African Union had failed to reflect the actual situation on the
ground and regretted that it had not made any reference to respect for th e
Constitution and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. On
the same day, UDPS underlined the need to hold a national dialogue to prevent
President Kabila from running for a third term. On 20 January, the Government
issued a statement welcoming the position of the African Union and the mission of
Mr. Kodjo. In the same statement, the Minister of Information and spokesperson for
the Government, Lambert Mende, noted the “encouragement and support” of the
African Union, the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo and the United
Nations for “promoting the holding of a national dialogue” that would foster an
environment conducive to peaceful and transparent elections.
6.
The African Union envoy undertook initial consultations in the Democr atic
Republic of the Congo from 19 to 22 January 2016. He met with President Kabila
on 19 January, following which he held three days of consultations with national
stakeholders. While G7 and Dynamique de l’opposition platforms, along with the
Front citoyen 2016, declined invitations to meet with him, Eve Bazaiba, from the
Mouvement de libération du Congo, a member party of the Dynamique de
l’opposition, met with the envoy. She reportedly reiterated the position of the
platform against the holding of the national dialogue, highlighting the risk that it
would be used to circumvent the Constitution and prolong the stay of President
Kabila in power beyond 2016.
7.
On 4 February 2016, Mr. Kodjo met with UDPS President, Etienne Tshisekedi in
Brussels in an effort to encourage him to commit to the launching of the national
dialogue. Following the meeting, Mr. Tshisekedi issued a communiqué stating that

2/18

16-03552

S/2016/233

UDPS was adhering to the Constitution and was committed to a “democratic
alternative to power in 2016”, while rejecting a dialogue that had been unilaterally
planned by President Kabila. On 6 February, Mr. Kodjo returned to Kinshasa for
another round of consultations with the Government, political parties and other actors.
8.
On 16 February 2016, the African Union, the European Union, the
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie and the United Nations issued a joint
communiqué urging all Congolese political actors to spare no effort, within the
framework of the country’s Constitution, to ensure the successful ho lding of
elections, preserve peace and deepen democracy, including through a political
process. The communiqué recalled that the decision by the African Union to appoint
Mr. Kodjo as Special Envoy and that his efforts on the ground fell within the
framework of the relevant instruments of the African Union, including the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. The communiqué also stressed
the importance of dialogue and urged all Congolese political actors to extend their
full cooperation to the African Union envoy. In response, G7 indicated in a
statement issued on 20 February its readiness to participate in direct negotiations
among political actors rather than in the dialogue proposed by President Kabila. G7
also called on the four organizations that had co-signed the communiqué to do
everything possible to ensure that President Kabila would respect the Constitution.
Furthermore, G7, while welcoming the mention of the African Union Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance, regretted that the communiqué had failed to
mention the “massive human rights violations and restrictions on individual and
public freedoms” in the country. On 21 February, the Secretary -General of the
presidential majority and Speaker of the National Assembly, Aubin M inaku,
expressed regret at the refusal by the opposition to take part in the national dialogue
and indicated that the proposal by G7 (in its 20 February statement) to appoint an
interim President if presidential elections were postponed beyond November 201 6
would violate the Constitution. On 22 February, media reports indicated that
Toussaint Tshilombo, former Minister of Information and senior member of the Parti
du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie, had said that the 16 January joint
communiqué had mentioned the “timely” holding of elections and not adherence to
constitutional timeframes.
9.
As foreshadowed in the timetable announced by the Dynamique de
l’opposition coalition for a series of peaceful demonstrations (see para. 4 above),
the opposition staged a “ville morte” protest on 16 February 2016, which was
observed mainly in Bukavu, Goma, Kinshasa, Moba and Uvira, and to a lesser
extent in Lubumbashi and Mbuji-Mayi. In Kinshasa, police were stationed at major
intersections, while some shops were closed or opened later in the morning. No
major incidents were reported. Assessments of the outcome were polarized: the
presidential majority characterized it as a “resounding failure”, while opposition
parties declared it a success and urged President Kabila to draw appropriate
conclusions from the “widespread mobilization”.
10. MONUSCO registered over 45 arrests of individuals in Goma, Kinshasa,
Lubumbashi and Uvira in relation to the protest. Many of those arrested were civil
society activists or opposition members, including a member of Parliament, Martin
Fayulu, who was temporarily detained ahead of the “ville morte” protest on
14 February. While the majority of those arrested were subsequently released
without charges, including Martin Fayulu, the trial of six members of the Lutte pour
le changement movement before a magistrates’ court in Goma commenced on

16-03552

3/18

S/2016/233

18 February. On 24 February, each was sentenced to two years in prison. On 5 March,
an appellate court in Goma reduced each sentence to six months.
11. During my visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from 23 to
24 February 2016, I met with President Kabila, his Prime Minister and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and with representatives of political parties in the ruling
coalition, the opposition and civil society. I encouraged all parties to pursue
dialogue and exercise restraint in addressing the challenges related to the electoral
process, with a view to upholding the principles enshrined in the Constitution.
12. Throughout the period under review, my Special Representative continued to
use his good offices to promote political dialogue among political actors across the
spectrum and representatives of civil society, encouraging stakeholders to reach a
consensus to overcome the impasse on elections. He also urged all parties to resolve
their differences through peaceful means and to avoid violence.
13. My Special Representative further intensified his engagement with President
Kabila, who indicated his readiness to enhance cooperation with MONUSCO and to
re-engage in discussions on the joint development of an exit strategy for
MONUSCO. Two meetings on that matter took place between the MONUSCO
leadership and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond Tshibanda. On 11 January
2016, President Kabila authorized the resumption of cooperation between the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO in
operations against armed groups. On 28 January, MONUSCO and the Government
signed a technical arrangement outlining the modalities of that cooperation, and on
23 February FARDC command issued an operational order to implement the
arrangement and resume MONUSCO-supported neutralization operations.
14. The Government continued its efforts towards implementation of its national
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. On
31 December 2015, President Kabila signed two presidential decrees, pardoning nine
members of the political-religious movement Bundu Dia Kongo who were serving life
sentences, as well as all prisoners, foreign and Congolese alike, of 70 years of age or
older who were not serving sentences for violent crimes. On 5 January 2016, the
Minister of Justice, Alexis Thambwe, announced that 1,200 low-level offenders who
had served at least one quarter of their sentences would be released, indicating that
that decision and the presidential decrees were aimed at easing the political situation
ahead of the national dialogue. With regard to decentralization, some measures were
taken by the Government to implement the 9 December 2015 decree defining the
responsibilities of the special commissioners appointed in November to administer
the 21 new provinces until provincial and gubernatorial elections were held. The
implementing directives accompanying the decree were issued to the commissioners
on 7 January 2016. Finally, in the area of security sector reform, the draft
Programmatic Law on the Armed Forces that had been pending since 2013 was
reviewed by an interministerial committee and President Kabila.
15. MONUSCO continued to support the implementation of the national
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Through
international coordination mechanisms, MONUSCO continued its efforts to promote
coherence in the provision of assistance to the Government on security sector
reform by international partners. Some progress was achieved in strengthening the
logistics capacity of FARDC. However, additional funds need to be allocated by the
Government to support and sustain FARDC operations.

4/18

16-03552

S/2016/233

B.

Preparation for elections
16. The National Independent Electoral Commission continued to experience
difficulties with electoral preparations, resulting in continued delays. According to
its president, Corneille Nangaa, the main constraints were the need to amend the
legislative framework, the pending disbursement of funds by the Government and
an outstanding political decision on options for a partial or full revision of the
voters’ registry.
17. On 10 January 2016, the president of the Commission indicated in the media
that the Commission was working on a revised electoral calendar and that the
projected timeline would likely extend beyond the constitutional timeframe for the
presidential election. On 14 January, the G7 platform held a press conference,
condemning the statement as “playing into the hands of the presidential majority
and intentionally violating the Constitution”. The platform proposed a calendar for
holding provincial, legislative and presidential elections simultaneously during the
last quarter of 2016 to ensure that the constitutional time frame would be respected.
G7 also called on the Government to assume its responsibilities for resolving
obstacles preventing the Commission from moving forward with the organization of
elections.
18. On 2 February 2016, the Prime Minister, Matata Ponyo, announced that
$22 million had been disbursed to the Commission, which was followed by a second
disbursement of $20 million on 18 February. On 10 February, the Commission
announced the launch of an invitation to tender for the acquisition of equipment and
services for the updating of the voters’ registry and the publication of a calendar for
the indirect election of governors and deputy governors of the 21 new provinces, to
be held on 26 March.
19. On 28 January, in a meeting with international partners, the Commission
announced its decision to undertake a complete revision of the voters’ registry,
initially projected to take about 16 months. Some partners expressed concern about
the timeline. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior, Evariste Boshab,
confirmed that the Government had committed to disbursing $300 million to the
Commission for electoral preparations. A number of donors indicated their readiness
to support the revision of the voters’ registry, provided that an a greed electoral
calendar and a disbursement plan for Government funds to the Commission were in
place.
20. As mentioned in my last report (S/2015/1031), the Commission requested
MONUSCO to provide logistical support for the updating of the voters’ registry.
Further to that request, my Special Representative met with the President of the
Commission on 11 January 2016 and with the Vice-President of the Commission,
Norbert Katintima, on 26 January to discuss preli minary plans for revising the
voters’ registry.
21. The multi-partner basket fund for the Projet d’appui au cycle électoral au
Congo, managed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
remained funded at only around 6 per cent of the estimated bu dget of $123.3 million
to support the electoral process.

16-03552

5/18

S/2016/233

C.

Security situation
22. The security situation remained volatile in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and deteriorated in parts of North Kivu and Ituri provinces. The Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), the Union des patriotes pour la défense des innocents and other Mayi -Mayi
groups remained active in Beni and Lubero territories (North Kivu), as did the
Forces de résistance patriotiques de l’Ituri (FRPI) in Irumu territory and Mayi -Mayi
Simba in Mambasa territory (Ituri), constituting a significant threat to civilians.
23. In North Kivu, FARDC focused its efforts on neutralizing ADF through its
Sukola I operation. Although weakened, ADF continued its brutal attacks against
civilians, FARDC and MONUSCO. Since 24 December 2015, suspected ADF and
affiliated elements have staged at least 22 attacks, killing 26 civilians and
18 FARDC soldiers. A serious incident involving suspected AD F elements occurred
on 24 December when five civilians were killed in Vemba, east of Mavivi, with
another attack on 5 January 2016 in Nyaleke, east of Beni, resulting in the killing of
an additional five civilians. On the same day, suspected ADF elements a mbushed
FARDC soldiers along the Mbau-Kamango road, killing two soldiers and wounding
three others. On 13 January, the FARDC position at Opira, south of Eringeti, was
attacked by suspected ADF elements, killing six FARDC soldiers, prompting
FARDC and MONUSCO to increase patrolling in the area.
24. MONUSCO supported FARDC operations by targeting ADF positions with
attack helicopters and artillery on several occasions, resulting in a yet -to-be
determined number of ADF casualties. Specific targets were identi fied by unmanned
aerial surveillance systems and in coordination with FARDC. Suspected ADF
elements and other armed elements affiliated with the group fired at MONUSCO
helicopters in Beni territory on 11 and 16 January 2016. Although the helicopters
were struck by gunfire on both occasions, there was no damage or injury reported.
25. The FARDC Sukola II operation against FDLR continued in North and South
Kivu provinces without support from MONUSCO. In North Kivu, operations
continued to be conducted in the Nyanzale and Tongo areas, in Rutshuru territory,
with new operations also launched in southern Lubero and eastern Walikale
territories. The thrust of the new operations added to increased tensions between the
Hutu and Nande communities, fuelled by a series of attacks by a newly emerging
coalition of local Mayi-Mayi groups, which was perceived as supporting the Nande
community, on FDLR positions in and around Buleusa and Lusamambo. There were
also FDLR counter-attacks in an attempt to regain ground lost to the FARDC and
Mayi-Mayi coalitions. On 30 and 31 December 2015, suspected FDLR elements
attacked the villages of Bukumbirwa, Buyamusha and Tusala, west of Buleusa, and
looted and burned a large number of homes, resulting in a spate of retaliatory
killings on both sides, abductions, the mass displacement of civilians and the
burning of hundreds of houses. The violence has resulted in the displacement of
some 75,000 persons since October 2015. The most serious incident occurred on
7 January 2016, when suspected FDLR elements attacked the village of Miriki, in
Lubero territory, killing 16 civilians from the Nande community. Following the
attack, tensions between the Hutu and Nande communities in and around the village
increased. North Kivu authorities deployed additional officers of the Congolese
National Police and FARDC soldiers to the Buleusa and Lusamabo areas in an
attempt to facilitate the return of some civilians who had fled the violence.

6/18

16-03552

S/2016/233

26. In South Kivu, Sukola II operations continued in Kabare, Kal ehe, Mwenga and
Shabunda territories, although there were reports that FDLR had returned to parts of
Mwenga territory, especially to areas from which FARDC had withdrawn. FARDC
continued operations against Mayi-Mayi Raiya-Mutomboki factions in Mwenga and
Shabunda territories and Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba in Fizi territory, triggering the
surrender of 332 Mayi-Mayi Raiya Mutomboki and Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba
elements. MONUSCO received unconfirmed reports of infiltration by armed
elements from Burundi and Rwanda, mainly into Uvira territory. FARDC and
MONUSCO continued to conduct patrols in the border area between South Kivu
and Burundi.
27. In Ituri province, military operations against FRPI continued with the joint
FARDC-MONUSCO operation “Clean Sweep” to dismantle FRPI camps in areas
northwest of Aveba. FARDC moved a battalion to the region from Kisangani to
reinforce its positions. However, suspected FRPI elements continued to pose a
serious threat to civilians by conducting violent looting raids and abductions in
South Irumu territory. In Mambasa territory, Mayi-Mayi groups continued to attack
civilians and loot their property, mainly around mining sites and markets, resulting
in the killing of 17 civilians, the wounding of 8 and the rape of 1 woman between
24 December 2015 and 18 February 2016. In addition, relations between the Bila
and Nande communities remained strained following the abduction and
assassination of a Bila traditional chief by suspected Nande assailants on
13 January. In January, MONUSCO and provincial authorities started a community
dialogue programme to prevent the escalation of ethnic tensions in Irumu and
Mambasa territories.
28. Tensions and violence re-emerged between the Hema and Lendu communities
over issues related to access to land and cattle theft in Irumu territory, resulting in
the killing of four members of the Lendu community in December 2015 in the
Lagabo area, and one on 26 January 2016 in Tshabo. In addition to sensitization
efforts by provincial authorities, MONUSCO engaged with r epresentatives of both
communities in Lagabo to advocate for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
29. Between 150 and 200 elements of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), mainly
from the Central African Republic remained in eastern Democratic Republic of th e
Congo as a result of pressure from the African Union Regional Task Force in the
Central African Republic. They continued attacks on civilians, including ambushes,
lootings and abductions in Ango and Bondo territories in Bas -Uélé province. During
the period under review, LRA also abducted 24 persons, mostly for use as porters;
15 of those abducted later escaped. Acts of banditry by unidentified armed elements
believed to be Congolese using the modus operandi of LRA and poaching by LRA
elements continued in Bas-Uélé and Haut-Uélé provinces. MONUSCO supported
FARDC-led operations against residual LRA elements, including by establishing
three mobile operating bases in Bangadi, Duru and Faradje, in Haut -Uélé, from
23 December 2015 to 15 January 2016. Together with FARDC troops and the
African Union Regional Task Force, the operations focused on gathering
intelligence on LRA positions.
30. In Tanganyika province, in South Kivu, Mayi-Mayi elements affiliated with the
Yakutumba group launched repeated attacks on the FARDC navy base near Kabimba
on the shores of Lake Tanganyika. Although they did not gain control of the base,
their presence remained a threat to the local population. Mayi -Mayi Kata-Katanga

16-03552

7/18

S/2016/233

also continued to pose a threat to the civilian population in Manono and Moba
territories, particularly in areas where FARDC had a limited presence.
Protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups
31. MONUSCO continued to focus on efforts to protect civilians, including
through the neutralization of armed groups in areas of concern. The Mission also
continued to carry out some military activities with FARDC, with a particular focus
on operations against ADF in the Beni area and FRPI in Ituri province. Four joint
MONUSCO assessment missions and two joint protection team missions were
carried out to those areas with a view to updating plans and enhancing the
protection of civilians under threat. The MONUSC O force conducted day and night
patrols and mobile deployments and rehearsed quick air deployments of the rapidly
deployable battalions.
32. In Beni territory, the MONUSCO force intervention brigade redeployed one
company operating base to enhance security in the town of Erigenti following
earlier ADF attacks. MONUSCO police pursued the implementation of its joint
strategy with the national police to enhance security in the town of Beni. Joint
patrols and training of national police officers contributed to the stabilization of
Beni and prevented killings, looting and targeted attacks.
33. Following the suspected FDLR attack on the village of Miriki on 7 January
2016 in Lubero territory, where clashes between FDLR and Mayi -Mayi groups
exacerbated ethnic tensions, MONUSCO swiftly reinforced the Miriki company
operating base and deployed civilian staff to enhance its protection response. In
response to advocacy by MONUSCO, the national authorities redeployed
45 national police officers and reinforced FARDC in the area. MONUSCO also
supported the police in securing nearby camps for internally displaced persons and
refugees. Threats of retaliatory attacks on a camp of Hutu internally displaced
persons sheltered near the company operating base in Miriki were aver ted through
the joint efforts of the Congolese authorities, humanitarian actors and MONUSCO.
34. National, provincial and traditional authorities in Miriki undertook initiatives
with MONUSCO support to promote dialogue and reconciliation in southern Luber o
territory. In Rutshuru territory, MONUSCO facilitated dialogue among ethnic
communities and supported the establishment of a traditional peace committee to
improve inter-communal relations. In Kinshasa, MONUSCO met with Hutu and
Nande representatives in Parliament to advocate for political action to prevent
further violence and find new solutions to neutralizing armed groups in Lubero and
surrounding areas.
35. The Community Alert Network system transmitted an average of 190 early
warning alerts per month. Ninety per cent of the alerts resulted in a response; the
remaining ten per cent received no reply owing to insufficient deployment of
FARDC and Congolese police, lack of logistical means available to Congolese
security forces, insufficient coordination between MONUSCO and FARDC against
ADF and FDLR, and suspects fleeing before response teams arrived.
36. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to support the efforts of
MONUSCO to protect civilians, destroying 75 explosive remnants of war,
214 weapons, 1,537 munitions and 170,233 small arms ammunition items for
FARDC. An adequate explosive hazard management capacity will remain important.

8/18

16-03552

S/2016/233

D.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration/disarmament,
demobilization repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
37. Further progress was made in the implementation of Phase III of the
Programme national de désarmement, démobilisation et réintegration (PNDDR),
even though the Government had not disbursed additional funding for the
programme since November 2015. The Unité d’exécution du PNDDR demobilized
575 combatants during the period under review, bringing the total number of former
combatants demobilized since the inception of the programme in May 2015 to 5,330.
On 22 January 2016, MONUSCO resumed the provision of food and non-food items
to Phase II of PNDDR, which it had suspended since 20 September 2015.
38. Clashes erupted on 24 February 2016 between FDLR ex-combatants and
FARDC in the Government-run Kitona camp over allegations of the killing of an
ex-combatant. The incident reportedly resulted in the killing of at least seven people.
The MONUSCO-funded re-insertion centre also suffered considerable damage.
39. Construction continued on two re-insertion preparation centres in Kamina and
Kitona, funded by MONUSCO, with construction completed on 29 January 2016 in
Kitona. Some 2,660 former combatants in Kamina and 1,546 in Kitona are taking
vocational training courses, which are expected to end on 31 March. The World
Bank trust fund to support the reintegration phase became operational, and
contributions have reached $26 million. At the same time, there were reports that
FARDC had recruited 301 former combatants from the Kitona camp and another
280 from Kamina camp into its ranks.
40. MONUSCO continued to provide food, medicine and fuel to support 1,348
former FDLR combatants and their dependants in transit camps at Kanyabayonga
(North Kivu) and Walungu (South Kivu), as well as in the Government -run camp at
Kisangani (Tshopo).

E.

Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
41. The Government through its Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for Areas
Emerging from Armed Conflict (STAREC) programme, with support from
MONUSCO, began to prepare new stabilization initiatives to be funded in 2016
from the newly established Stabilization Coherence Trust Fund, which was set up
through funding commitments of the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, the
Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland. These initiatives aim to implement provincial stabilization strategies and
plans, with a focus on enhancing community dialogue with State representatives,
strengthening security and State authority, providing economic recovery activities
for vulnerable populations and addressing other conflict-related grievances.

F.

Human rights situation
42. The human rights situation continued to be a source of serious concern during
the reporting period. MONUSCO identified a trend towards increasingly restricted
political space with increasing violations of the right to freedom of opinion,
expression and peaceful assembly. The Mission continued to document violations,

16-03552

9/18

S/2016/233

including arbitrary arrests and harassment of civil society activists, media
professionals and leading members of opposition parties, as well as the disruption of
some opposition meetings and demonstrations or the refusal by Government
officials to permit such activities. Most of those violations were committed without
investigation or other corrective measures being taken by the national authorities.
The national police and the Agence nationale de renseignements were allegedly
responsible for perpetrating the majority of the reported violations. Since my last
report, at least seven demonstrations planned or organized by opposition parties
and/or civil society organizations have been violently rep ressed, dispersed by
security forces or banned by local authorities. At least nine demonstrations, five of
which were organized by the presidential majority, took place during the same
period without interference by the authorities.
43. Armed groups, including ADF, FDLR, FRPI, LRA and Mayi-Mayi, continued
to commit serious human rights abuses in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri
provinces. During the reporting period ADF combatants were responsible for at
least 29 serious human rights violations. FRPI combatants were allegedly
responsible for 52 serious human rights violations, FDLR for 25 violations and
Nduma défense du Congo (NDC) and Mayi-Mayi Nyatura for 11 and 10 violations,
respectively. From 5 to 13 January 2016, MONUSCO deployed a joint verification
team to the Kayna, Kirumba, Luofu and Miriki areas in North Kivu to investigate
allegations of serious crimes perpetrated by some of those groups. The team
interviewed over 120 sources and confirmed a total of 162 human rights violations
and violations of international humanitarian law committed by some of those armed
groups between 1 November 2015 and 7 January 2016. The abuses were reportedly
committed in the context of ethnically targeted attacks launched in order to gain
control over territory.
44. MONUSCO, through its prosecution support cells, continued to provide
technical support to military justice authorities undertaking investigations and
convening mobile courts in a number of locations in Ituri, North Kivu, South Kivu
and Tanganyika provinces, for a range of crimes including murder, rape and the
recruitment of child soldiers. The Mission also provided support to the civilian
justice authorities in investigating and prosecuting grave crimes perpetrated in the
eastern provinces. Through the Serious Crime Support Unit of the United Nations
Police Division, MONUSCO reinforced the capacity of the national police to
investigate the financing of armed groups and their involvement in the trafficking of
natural resources. MONUSCO also trained Congolese civilian, police and military
staff in prisons in Bunia (Ituri) and Uvira (South Kivu) on prison security and
incident management.
45. On 2 January 2016, President Kabila promulgated a law implementing the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Sexual violence
46. Sixty persons were reported to be victims of conflict-related sexual violence,
including eight girls and one boy. Armed groups were responsible for 83.3 per cent
of those abuses and State actors for 16.6 per cent. MONUSCO continued to
investigate allegations of the rape of at least 20 women in Walikale territory
between 5 and 12 January 2016. In areas of risk in North Kivu, MONUSCO
conducted market patrols with a view to enhancing the protection of women. The

10/18

16-03552

S/2016/233

United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
and MONUSCO continued to support the Government in developing a draft law on
the protection of victims and witnesses.
Child protection
47. MONUSCO documented 242 cases of grave violation of children’s rights,
which represented a significant increase compared with the last reporting period,
when 199 such cases were documented. A total of 174 children (156 boys and
18 girls) were separated or escaped from armed groups during the period under
review, which indicated an increase in the release of children by armed groups in
comparison with the previous reporting period. The main armed groups recruiting
children were FDLR (49), FRPI (29), Mayi-Mayi Nyatura (29), Mayi-Mayi Rayia
Mutomboki (17) and NDC Cheka (13). Fifteen boys formerly associated with armed
groups were detained by FARDC (13) and the national police (2) in Ituri and North
Kivu, five of whom remain in detention.
48. With the support of MONUSCO and the United Nations International
Children’s Emergency Fund, the Commandement général des écoles militaires
(CGEM) screened new FARDC recruits and found 84 children among them. The
children were subsequently separated from FARDC. In January, CG EM requested
the FARDC Joint Chiefs of Staff to apply sanctions against members of the
recruitment team.

G.

Humanitarian situation
49. As I witnessed during my visit to the eastern part of the country on
23 February 2016, the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains a source of serious concern, the result of the activities of armed
groups, intercommunal violence, continued displacement and an influx of refugees.
Military operations against armed groups also led to populat ion displacement in
some areas.
50. Humanitarian access continues to be hampered by insecurity. An increasing
number of humanitarian actors were forced to suspend programmes owing to
security threats in Irumu territory (Ituri), Beni and Lubero territories (North Kivu)
and Shabunda territory (South Kivu), affecting thousands of people in need.
51. During the reporting period, there were 1.5 million internally displaced
persons and some 169,000 refugees in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Among the refugees, over 100,000 are from the Central African Republic, some
30,000 from Rwanda and approximately 23,000 from Burundi. The dismantling of
sites for internally displaced persons in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
by the Government, without sufficient consultation of the humanitarian community,
contributed to the further displacement of some of the most vulnerable populations,
especially women and children. On 12 January 2016, the closure by the Government
of the camp at Mukoto, in Masisi territory in North Kivu, resulted in 4,250 persons
being displaced once again. The humanitarian community encouraged the
Government to respect its international obligations, including those related to the
closure of sites for internally displaced persons.

16-03552

11/18

S/2016/233

52. The Humanitarian Response Plan for 2016 has a budget of $690 million and
addresses the needs of 6 million people in need of assistance, which represents an
increase of 800,000 people as compared with 2015.

H.

Economic situation
53. Despite continued macroeconomic stability with an annual inflation rate of
around 0.8 per cent, an estimated budget deficit of $1.3 billion for 2016 was
announced during a meeting of the Council of Ministers on 22 January 2016. Some
reports attributed the announced deficit to the continued fall in the prices of primary
export commodities. In an effort to stabilize and stimulate the economy, the Council
of Ministers adopted a set of measures on 26 January with a view to promoting
greater transparency in extractive industries, streamlining the management of Stateowned companies, attracting foreign investments by promoting a better business
climate and, encouraging public private partnerships.

I.

Regional developments
54. Little progress was made towards the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations of 12 December 2013, including with respect to the repatriation of
ex-Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) elements, despite the initiatives of the task force
established in December 2015 by the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region on the repatriation of ex-M23 elements.
55. On 14 January 2016, members of the Technical Support Committee of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework met in Nairobi to review developments
in the region and progress in the implementation of the Fr amework. On 28 January,
in Addis Ababa, in the margins of the African Union Summit, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Framework held a meeting at the ministerial level. I
have provided detailed information on the objectives and outcomes of those
meetings in my report of 9 March 2016 on the implementation of the Framework
(S/2016/232).
56. On 11 February 2016, the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the United Nations, Ignace Gata Mavita wa Lufuta, wrote
to the Security Council expressing concerns about the infiltration of recruited,
trained and armed refugees from Rwanda into Burundi through South Kivu and
called for respect for the commitments made under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework (S/2016/140). Senior officials of the Government of
Rwanda have denied on several occasions any involvement by Rwanda in such
activities.
57. On 24 February 2016, I attended the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment
Conference hosted by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
Kinshasa, to promote investment in the Great Lakes Region as a means of ensuring
durable peace and security.

12/18

16-03552

S/2016/233

III. Deployment of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and implementation of its mandate
58. In resolution 2211 (2015), the Security Council endorsed my earlier proposal
for a reduction of the authorized strength of MONUSCO by 2 ,000 troops, which has
been completed.
59. As indicated in my report on the future of United Nations peace operations
(A/70/357-S/2015/682), I have instructed all missions to communicate to
Headquarters any instances of refusal to follow orders given by the Force
Commander or the Police Commissioner, whether on grounds of new national
caveats or others. The Secretariat will immediately inform the Member State
concerned and the Security Council on a regular basis. Where no remedial action is
forthcoming, the unit concerned will be repatriated.
Force transformation
60. The effective transformation of the MONUSCO force remains an important
objective. This will proceed in parallel with efforts to enhance inter operability
between the Framework and force intervention brigades, while continuing efforts to
ensure good performance.
61. Capability development will provide the MONUSCO force with the right
equipment, training and resources to operate optimally. In tha t context, the
deployment of the first rapidly deployable battalions is under way, and the first
deployment of a company took place from 22 to 24 February 2016. Progress was
also made towards the implementation and redeployment of the force, which will
put troops and assets in the right places in a timely manner to meet current and
future threats, as well as minimize inefficiencies. Three bases were closed in North
Kivu and Ituri and one opened in another location in North Kivu during that period
for an optimal concentration of the Mission’s forces against prevailing threats posed
by armed groups. Another area of the strategy involves reinforcing the capabilities
of FARDC in terms of command and control, planning, logistics and the conduct of
operations, with integration of more complex enabling functions such as intelligence
and aviation, with a view to supporting FARDC in gradually taking over additional
security responsibilities as the MONUSCO force withdraws. That support would be
based on a formal request from the Government tailored to each operation.
Multi-phase review
62. A comprehensive and collaborative multi-phase review of MONUSCO
commenced in February 2016 with the aim of achieving greater consistency and
efficiency in mandate delivery and the use of resources. A team comprising
representatives of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department
of Field Support visited MONUSCO from 3 to 9 February to discuss strategic
priorities and the overall approach to mandate implementation to be reflected in the
revised mission concept, which would be finalized following the adoption of the
mandate in March and would inform component-level planning and a Mission
structure and staffing review. Further to those consultations, it was agreed that
priority would be placed on the political role of MONUSCO to facilitate dialogue
among national stakeholders within the framework of the Congolese Constitution

16-03552

13/18

S/2016/233

and to support the creation of an environment conducive to the holding of peaceful
and credible elections taking into account that sustainable solutions to most of the
challenges in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would require addressing the
political dimensions of conflict and finding a negotiated political settlement.
Discussions with MONUSCO on the protection of civilians and the neutralization of
armed groups underscored the need to approach those matters as a mission -wide
priority, with an added focus on non-military initiatives, including strong political
advocacy, enhanced reporting and effective liaison with communities. MONUSCO
has begun developing tailored strategies, including military and non -military
initiatives, to address the threat posed by armed groups.
Preparations for elections
63. Preparations by MONUSCO for the electoral process advanced, with the
development of a joint mission plan for election security that is based on likely
scenarios. That plan includes 18 area-specific security plans and enhanced early
warning mechanisms and capacity, with a view to covering situation al awareness in
the western and central parts of the country, with a focus on preventive action, given
the limited deployment of MONUSCO in those areas. That would entail enhanced
deterrence and advocacy efforts, human rights monitoring and reporting, and
training of the national police to mitigate possible election -related violence. The
Mission will continue to keep the plan under review as the electoral process unfolds.
MONUSCO is also increasing its internal crisis management capacity in Kinshasa.
In addition, the deployment of an additional formed police unit to the capital will be
completed by the end of March, while plans to enhance mobility and responsiveness
are under development with the redeployment of aviation and armed personnel
carriers. The focus of the MONUSCO force will remain on operations in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, although contingency plans envisage a rapid response capacity. The review by MONUSCO of its configuration, in particular with
regard to the police component, in view of increasing law and order challenges in
the coming months, concluded that its current police strength was adequate, taking
into account the possibility of intermission cooperation arrangements, in particular
formed police units, in the event of large-scale violence in areas where MONUSCO
is not deployed.

IV. Safety and Security of United Nations personnel
64. MONUSCO determined that its support to FARDC-led operations against
armed groups, including FARDC-led operations against ADF in the Grand Nord
area of North Kivu, had not led to any discernible increase in threats to United
Nations personnel and installations. During the reporting period, there were
60 incidents reported involving United Nations personnel in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Thirty of those incidents were security-related, twenty-eight were
accident-related safety incidents and two were related to the detention of national
staff. The 30 security incidents included 12 burglaries, 8 thefts, 5 robberies,
3 non-violent public protests, 1 premises intrusion and 1 case of potential hostile
surveillance. Seventy-five per cent of the safety incidents were road traffic accidents,
while the remaining safety incidents comprised four fires and one flood.

14/18

16-03552

S/2016/233

V. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation
and abuse
65. MONUSCO continued its efforts to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse
through a robust prevention campaign and more coordinated assistance to victims.
My Special Representative promoted awareness of the United Nations standard of
conduct and discipline during his visits to MONUSCO offices throughout the
country, instructing all personnel on their obligations and calling on managers and
commanders to lead by example in enforcing my zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse.

VI. Financial aspects
66. My proposed budget for the maintenance of MONUSCO for the p eriod from
1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017 in the amount of $1,275,288,800 has been submitted to
the General Assembly for its consideration and approval during the second part of
its resumed seventieth session. Should the Security Council decide to extend the
mandate of MONUSCO beyond 31 March 2016, the cost of maintaining
MONUSCO would be limited to the amounts approved by the General Assembly for
the 2016-2017 financial period.

VII. Observations
67. I would like to thank the Congolese authorities and pe ople for their warm
hospitality during my recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was
pleased to see for myself how much progress had been achieved since my first visit
to the country over nine years ago. I was also encouraged by the tangib le progress
made towards strengthening the capacities of FARDC, in particular the commitment
of the Government to address the issue of child recruitment, while progressing in
the implementation of the FARDC sexual violence action plan, preparing for the
re-insertion of thousands of demobilized ex-combatants and advancing police
reforms. Those efforts are to be commended.
68. That progress notwithstanding, I am concerned about continuing political
tensions and the impasse in the electoral process. I encoura ge all political actors to
work together for a credible and inclusive process, in accordance with the
Constitution. The holding of credible elections within the framework of the
Constitution is crucially important to consolidate the progress made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the past decade. I urge Congolese political
actors to spare no effort to ensure the holding of credible and timely elections and to
preserve peace. Differences must be addressed through peaceful means. To that end,
I encourage all Congolese political stakeholders to engage constructively in a
meaningful political dialogue that places the national interest at the centre and urge
them to extend their full cooperation to the Special Envoy of the African Union,
Edem Kodjo. A constitutional crisis would undermine the significant political and
economic gains achieved thus far, creating a serious risk of a slide back into
conflict. I encourage regional and international partners to impress upon the
Congolese stakeholders the need to preserve the collective efforts and investments
made over the past years.

16-03552

15/18

S/2016/233

69. I am deeply concerned about the growing restrictions placed by the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on democratic space, particularly the
targeting of members of the opposition, media and civil society. I call upon them to
respect and protect the right to freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly, as provided for in the country’s Constitution. I urge all leaders to refrain
from inflammatory rhetoric that incites violence.
70. An up-to-date and credible voters’ registry is a political imperative and the
foundation of a credible electoral process. All efforts must be made to ensure that
electoral preparations proceed at an accelerated pace. Some , but not all, of the
conditions necessary for the National Independent Electoral Commission to conduct
a credible revision of the voters’ registry exist. In that context the Commission has
requested support from MONUSCO for the updating of the voters’ reg istry. Such
assistance could help the Commission to assume its primary role in the organization
of the elections, enhance the credibility of the revision of the voters’ registry, in
accordance with the requirements of paragraph 20 of resolution 2211 (2015) , and
remove that obstacle to timely elections. I therefore recommend that the Security
Council authorize the Mission to begin providing technical and logistical support to
the Commission for the revision of the voters’ registry. A number of risks must be
managed in providing such assistance. A complete revision of the electoral registry
may lead to a technical delay in the holding of elections beyond the constitutionally
mandated timeframe. The revision process will need to be continuously assessed in
order to minimize that risk. The Commission has agreed, in principle, to joint
monitoring of the process with MONUSCO, UNDP and other key partners to ensure
it is carried out as quickly as possible and in a credible manner. It will be important
for key political actors to agree on the time frame for and extent of the revision of
the voters’ registry. I therefore call upon all stakeholders to redouble their efforts to
reach a consensus on those questions as quickly as possible.
71. The situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is deeply
concerning. I am appalled by the continued attacks on defenceless civilians in Beni,
Lubero and Walikale territories in North Kivu and in Ituri. Armed groups continue
to commit serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law and
have created extremely precarious conditions for displaced persons and local
communities. The increasing fragmentation of armed groups not only poses a threat
to civilians, but is also an obstacle to the neutralization of those groups. We must do
more to protect civilians from the scourge of those armed groups.
72. There is no purely military solution to the problem of armed groups.
Addressing the problem posed by those groups more effectively requires tailored
approaches and a balanced combination of military and non-military actions.
MONUSCO troops must be ready and willing to use force against those who pose a
threat to the civilian population, and do so pre-emptively. Addressing the threat
posed by those armed groups also requires MONUSCO to exercise its
responsibilities effectively through improved performance of its military and police
components. The conduct of targeted offensive operations to neutralize armed
groups should remain the priority task of the force interve ntion brigade. However,
urgent measures are required to ensure a more active contribution by the Framework
brigades to the neutralization of armed groups and the protection of civilians. To
achieve sustainable outcomes, the protection of civilians and the neutralization of
armed groups should be approached as a Mission-wide responsibility, using military
and non-military means, with the coordinated and active contribution of all elements

16/18

16-03552

S/2016/233

of the force, the police and the Mission’s civilian components. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the extension of State authority and efforts to
disrupt the support base, networks and financing of armed groups, some of which
are criminal in nature, are critical to the neutralization of armed groups and require
additional focus.
73. The commitments made under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework remain relevant and their implementation is critical for sustainable
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. The
implementation of the Nairobi Declarations and the Framework is still fraught with
challenges. I call upon all signatories to the Framework to honour their
commitments under the Framework and to work together to ensure that the gains
achieved thus far are sustained.
74. I welcome the positive momentum generated thus far in deepening the
partnership between MONUSCO and the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including the signing of the technical arrangement on 28 January to
resume military cooperation against priority armed groups. Close cooperation
between the Government and MONUSCO, combining military and non -military
efforts, will render efforts to neutralize armed groups and protect civilians more
effective. The strategic dialogue between MONUSCO and the Government remains
an important forum for addressing issues of concern. I welcome the steps taken by
the Government and the Mission towards the development of an exit strategy for
MONUSCO and look forward to the swift completion of that process.
75. In my letter dated 16 December 2015 (S/2015/983), I proposed a further
reduction of the MONUSCO force by 1,700 troops, while taking into account the
increasingly complex situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
need for more effective mandate implementation in the coming months. That should
be viewed as a concrete step towards facilitating the resumption of the strategic
dialogue between the United Nations and the Government, with a view to achievi ng
a common goal: the gradual and progressive exit of MONUSCO that preserves the
gains and investment made thus far and averts a return to instability or conflict. The
transformation of the force, if implemented fully and with the necessary resources,
would ensure that the Mission continues to deliver effectively on its neutralization
and protection mandates, responds quickly and robustly to threats throughout the
eastern part of the country and covers conflict-affected areas, even as its static
footprint is gradually reduced.
76. The presence of MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
essential, particularly with regard to its political role and other core functions. I
therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of MONUS CO, as
established in resolution 2211 (2015), for a period of one year, until 31 March 2017.
77. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude to my Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Maman Sidikou, and to all staff members of
MONUSCO and the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system for their continued hard work to restore lasting peace and stability in
the country. I also wish to thank all troop- and police-contributing countries, the
African Union, the European Union, bilateral partners and other international and
regional stakeholders for their active engagement in support of peace and stability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

16-03552

17/18

S/2016/233

18/18

16-03552
