S/PV.7565

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7565th meeting

Friday, 20 November 2015, 5.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-38349 (E)
*1538349*

S/PV.7565

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 5.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/890, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2249 (2015).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On
13 November, Daesh committed an act of war against
France. In launching its deadly attacks in Paris and
Saint-Denis, Daesh sought to strike more than a
capital — it sought to strike at what defines our nation.
The toll was particularly heavy, as we all know — 130
people were killed, more than 600 were injured, and
193 are still hospitalized, many between life and death.
But that day Daesh did not attack only France and
the French. It sought to strike far more. It assailed the
entire world in the cosmopolitan city of Paris. Among
the dead, 24 nationalities have been identified to date.
And I recall that before Paris, Daesh attacked Lebanon,
Iraq, Turkey, Tunisia, Russia and many other countries.
It wanted to undermine the ideal of our freedom and our
shared humanity — an ideal that is the United Nations.
President Hollande spoke Monday before the
French Parliament, meeting in a joint session, to mark

2/9

20/11/2015

the absolute determination of France to fight Daesh
with all means necessary. And in its relentless fight
against the terrorism practiced by Daesh, France wants
to be true to its values. As a founding Member of the
United Nations, France is deeply committed to the
raison d’être of our Organization. The United Nations
represents the primacy of law and collective security. It
is therefore to the Security Council that the President
of the Republic has naturally turned to organize and
mobilize our international action.
In adopting resolution 2249 (2015), the members of
the Security Council have acted unanimously to live
up to their responsibilities. The resolution we have
just adopted recognizes the exceptional nature of the
threat posed by Daesh. It calls on all Member States to
take all necessary measures to eradicate the sanctuary
that Daesh has created in Syria and Iraq, and to thwart
its radical ideology. The resolution frames our action
within the framework of international law and in
respect for the Charter of the United Nations, which is
our common good — indeed, I would say our common
treasure. It also offers the guarantee of an effective
fight against transnational terrorism.
As I said, the events of 13 November were an armed
aggression against France. Our military action, of
which we informed the Security Council from the outset
and which was justified as legitimate collective selfdefence, can now also be characterized as individual
self-defence, in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. On the basis of this
historical resolution of the Security Council, France will
pursue and strengthen its efforts to mobilize the entire
international community to defeat our common enemy.
France will play its full part in this effort. Militarily, the
President of the Republic announced an intensification
of air strikes against strategic Daesh targets in Syria.
This intensification is under way. In the coming days,
France will increase its strike capability threefold with
the arrival of the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle.
Politically, the fight against Daesh will be effective
only if it is based on a political transition that will end
the Syrian conflict, which has served and continues to
serve as a nursery of terrorism.
The resolution creates the conditions for an
international mobilization. In that context, we appeal
to Europe. My country has sought and obtained this
week from the European Union the first activation
in its history of the mutual solidarity clause, because
France has paid a heavy price in its struggle against

15-38349

20/11/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the terrorism of Daesh in Syria and Iraq and that of
Al-Qaeda in the Sahel. We expect Europe to actively
engage with us on behalf of our shared security and that
of the neighboring countries of Syria.
We also call on all members of the Security Council
and beyond. It is in that spirit that the President of the
Republic will travel next week to Washington, D.C.,
and Moscow. We have contacted our many partners
and will continue to do so. Indeed, we are determined
to achieve the broadest possible mobilization. Against
Daesh, we have our common humanity. We, the peoples
of the United Nations, have a duty to defend it.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): For
several days now, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other terrorist organizations have launched
a series of deadly terrorist attacks at multiple locations
across the world, killing innocent civilians, including
a Chinese citizen. The Chinese Government strongly
condemns the heinous atrocities committed by terrorist
organizations. The perpetrators must be brought to
justice.
Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind.
All terrorist acts, regardless of their motivation,
timing, location or perpetrators, are grave criminal
acts that threaten international peace and security.
The international community must join hands to act
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and other basic norms
of international relations. It must give full play to the
leading role of the United Nations, further strengthen
coordination and cooperation in counter-terrorism, and
form a united front against terrorism.
Counter-terrorism efforts must address both the
symptoms and the root causes of the problem, and
refrain from adopting double standards. The full
implementation of Security Council counter-terrorism
resolutions must include combating terrorists’ use of
the Internet to instigate and plan terrorist activities and
to spread extremist ideas. Measures must also be taken
to cut the terrorists’ financing channels and halt their
cross-border movements.
The Chinese Government firmly opposes all forms
of terrorism and firmly combats all violent terrorist
crimes that challenge human civilization. The fight
against the East Turkestan terrorist forces, headed by
the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, is an important
component of the international counter-terrorism
struggle. We will further strengthen our cooperation

S/PV.7565

with the international community on counter-terrorism
in order to safeguard world peace and stability.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in French):
Today we are all French. We are all Malian.
(spoke in Russian)
And, dear colleagues, we are also Russian and
Arab.
(spoke in French)
It is time to react, and to do so with a French
heart — with a Russian, Malian and Arab heart.
Terrorists in Beirut, Ankara, Sinai, Paris and Bamako
have sworn their determination to terrify us, as they
did in New York, Casablanca and Madrid. But they will
not succeed. Today, we have reacted rapidly, with unity,
resolve and strength. The only way not to cede victory
to terrorism is to pursue our way of life and to keep our
principles and values whole, making no concessions on
human rights.
I would therefore like to underscore paragraph
5 of resolution 2249 (2015), which ensures legal
coverage, as the paragraph stresses, in full compliance
with international human rights, and refugee and
humanitarian law. Because, as the Roman emperor
Marcus Aurelius said, “The best revenge is to not be like
your enemy”. Those of us seated at this table have the
duty to guarantee those values and principles. We must
not allow our daily headlines to become a series of war
dispatches. No one can doubt that all of us — absolutely
all — must close ranks in order to combat and vanquish
terrorism.
I therefore thank France for its leadership on the
resolution adopted today and for blowing the whistle
that has brought us out of the trenches to intensify our
offensive. We have heard the Marseillaise sung often in
recent days. This is not the first time that this anthem
has symbolized resistance to the bloody flag of tyranny.
It is time once again for the citizens of the entire world
to mobilize our battalions against those who have come
to slit our throats. It is time for victory.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): In recent
weeks, barbaric terrorist attacks have startled the
world’s conscience. From Europe to Africa to the
Middle East, innocent men and women have been
slaughtered. Families have been destroyed in Beirut,
concert-goers slain in Paris, air passengers bombed in
the sky and tourists killed on the beach in Tunisia. The

15-383493/9

S/PV.7565

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

20/11/2015

United States stands with the victims of terrorism of all
faiths and nationalities.

of the United Nations Development Programme and of
the Iraqi Government.

Yet, even as we mourn those lost in the recent
attacks, we remember the wholesale violence that
continues in Iraq and Syria, where men, women and
children struggle every day to survive and to flee the
bloodshed. Behind those outrages lies a violent ideology
of hate. Groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front know what
they are doing. They perpetrate atrocities to advance
a hateful world view. We, the States Members of the
United Nations, must therefore intensify and accelerate
their efforts to degrade and defeat those groups once
and for all. We need a truly global initiative to counter
ISIL, prevent more attacks in our homelands and
stabilize the Middle East.

Today’s resolution recalls the Security Council‘s
well-established framework for responding to terrorist
threats generally, and in particular to ISIL, the Al-Nusra
Front and others associated with Al-Qaida. Multiple
resolutions — including resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015) — lay
out specific obligations and actions that States must
take to respond to those threats. In the Security Council,
we look forward to continuing cooperation, including
in the relevant sanctions committees and counterterrorism entities, to enhance our will and capacities
to implement those tools in order to counter ISIL and
related groups.

For that reason, we welcome and applaud resolution
2249 (2015) for its resolute call on States to take all
necessary measures in compliance with international
law to counter ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. We must
also choke off funding, arms, recruitment and other
kinds of support to ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. As
the resolution recognizes, Iraq has made clear that it
is facing a serious threat of continuing attacks from
ISIL, in particular coming from safe havens in Syria.
The Al-Assad regime in Syria has shown that it cannot
and will not suppress that threat, even as it undertakes
actions that benefit recruitment by extremists.
In that regard, working with Iraq, the United
States has been leading international efforts to provide
assistance to combat the threat that ISIL poses to
the security of that country’s people and territory. In
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and its recognition of the inherent right to individual
and collective self-defence, we are taking necessary
and proportionate military action to deny ISIL safe
haven. The United States, along with 64 other nations
and international organizations, has formed Global
Coalition to Counter ISIL whose central aim is to
degrade ISIL’s capabilities and achieve its lasting
defeat. Militarily, the Coalition is working to deny ISIL
safe havens and to disrupt its ability to project power
and build partner capacity. It is also actively working
to disrupt ISIL’s financing and economic sustainment
and the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to and from
territories it has seized, as well as to counter its message
of hatred and violence. To stabilize areas liberated from
ISIL’s control, the Coalition further supports the efforts

4/9

To vanquish those groups, we must also tackle
the violent extremism that drives them. Their violent
ideologies capture and motivate individuals worldwide,
including those likely responsible for today’s tragic
hotel attack in Bamako. We therefore look forward to
the Secretary-General’s plan for preventing violent
extremism.
Finally, we must urgently work together to support
a political transition process in Syria, in accordance
with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) and
the statement of the International Syria Support Group,
in order to reduce the operating space for those groups
and establish a political process leading to credible,
inclusive and non-sectarian governance, followed by a
new constitution and elections.
Our task is great, but we know what needs to be
done. We draw our strength from the resiliency of the
people affected by those tragedies. Their unity and
resolve show why ISIL will fail in its goal of creating
fear and polarizing communities. Through global
solidarity and cooperation, ISIL and its ideology will
be defeated.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council is meeting today
following a series of atrocious terrorist attacks that
resulted in hundreds of deaths. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates are now
threatening new attacks. We are all outraged by the
deaths of those killed in the Sinai Peninsula and in
Paris. Recent terrorist targets included Turkey, Tunisia,
Lebanon and, today, Mali. Boko Haram continues to
wreak havoc. ISIL has attempted to create a terrorist

15-38349

20/11/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

caliphate in Iraq and Syria as a stronghold to further
expand its actions.
We unequivocally condemn all terrorist attacks.
We once again express our heartfelt condolences to the
bereaved friends and families and wish speedy recovery
to those injured. The masterminds and perpetrators of
those bloody crimes shall be resolutely punished. They
must be sought out wherever they may hide. We stand
ready to engage in broad cooperation with other States
to that end.
Mercilessly combating terrorism has been the
absolute priority for our country over the past few
years, which has been targeted by terrorist attacks
many times. The international community must fully
mobilize and once again demonstrate political will,
unity and solidarity in combating the common terrorist
threat, bolstering the fight with specific steps and
actions. We must be guided not by ambition, but rather
by shared values and interests based on international
law, in order to create a broad, international counterterrorism coalition. That is percisely what was called
for by President Putin in his recent address before the
General Assembly (see A/70/PV.13).
We welcome the growing understanding that
the time has come to join ranks in the international
community in the face of terrorism. The active efforts
and initiatives on the part of our partners in the Security
Council aim to tackle the challenge. This is indeed a
central concern for all that requires priority attention
and, most important, action, without any preconditions
or attempts to exert control.
Of course, we had to support France’s draft
resolution. While resolution 2249 (2015) was prepared
in extraordinary circumstances and with a very tight
time frame, the French delegation did take on board
Russia’s important amendments. We are convinced that
the Charter of the United Nations should be an important
foundation in combating international terrorism as it
relates to the use of force. We felt it important that that
be reflected in the text, as in fact it now is.
As clarified by the Russian delegation, the
preambular section of the resolution now clearly
states that documents adopted by the International
Syria Support Group on 30 October and 14 November
constitute a packet on the basis of which, in addition
to the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex), there
must be a settlement to the Syrian crisis.

S/PV.7565

The Council has taken a number of important
decisions aimed at strengthening the international
community’s fight against terrorism and adapting it
to new threats and the changing tactics of terrorists.
Resolution 2199 (2015), on combating the financing
of terrorism by cutting off attempts to gain financing
through the illegal trade in oil, was adopted in February
at Russia’s initiative.
In our view, the French resolution is a political
appeal, rather than a change to the legal principles
underlying the fight against terrorism. We consider
it a step in creating a broad anti-terrorism front by
marshalling comprehensive cooperation among all
States to end all manifestations of terrorism and
eradicate its root causes.
That was also the aim of the Russian draft
resolution presented to the Council for its consideration
on 30 September, which contains a number of practical
provisions without which combating terrorism in Iraq
and Syria will be difficult. We consider the attempts
by some members of the Council to block work on our
draft resolution to be politically short-sighted. One
cannot, on the one hand, combat terrorists while, on the
other hand, essentially play into their hands by trying
to achieve one’s own aims. We aim to work actively for
the speedy adoption of our draft resolution.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The attacks carried out by the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in Paris and Beirut,
the attacks by Boko Haram in Nigeria and today’s
attacks by Al-Qaida-linked extremists in Bamako
serve to underscore the fact that terrorist groups are
a major threat to international peace and security.
Nigeria condemns those barbaric and cowardly attacks
in the strongest terms. There can be no justification for
terrorist attacks. The perpetrators must be relentlessly
purposed and brought to justice. We offer our deepest
condolences to the families, friends and loved ones of
those who have lost their lives in terrorist attacks and
wish the injured a quick recovery.
The situation calls for urgent action by the
international community to intensify the fight against
ISIS and other terrorist groups, including Boko Haram.
Resolution 2249 (2015), which the Council just adopted,
provides a framework for achieving that. All United
Nations States Members must now work together to
diligently implement the resolution.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): We welcome the
prompt and unanimous adoption of this resolution. “We

15-383495/9

S/PV.7565

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

shall not live in fear” was the proud and heart-rending
response of Parisians in the midst of tragedy last week.
And indeed, we cannot and we must not give in to fear,
but act with the full force of conviction against the evil
that Daesh represents.
As we stand together in solidarity with the people
of France we also share the sorrow and grief of all
those affected by the carnage and slaughter perpetrated
by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Boko
Haram and other terrorist mutations. Nothing can
ever, ever, justify terrorism. Earlier today, Lithuania’s
President, Dalia Grybauskaitė, reaffirmed my country’s
commitment to working together with our anti-ISIL
coalition partners in the fight against terrorism.
The evolving nature and intensity of the threat of
terrorism and violent extremism put existing counterterrorism measures to an unprecedented test. While
primitively barbaric and brutal, today’s terrorists are
outpacing us and our high-tech advances. We find
ourselves increasingly running against and behind
time. There can therefore be no room for complacency
or business as usual in our responses.
On the contrary, we need to take an honest look
at the impact our actions have on the ground and
rise up to the new urgency of the task. Inter alia,
that requires ensuring the full cohesiveness of the
counter-terrorism machinery by putting an end to the
oft-cited silo mentality and making all the parts of
the counter-terrorism system, within and outside the
United Nations, work truly as one, from assessment to
assistance and delivering advice, support and capacitybuilding exactly where and when it is needed, with
maximum impact.
As today’s resolution 2249 (2015) recalls, tackling
terrorism financing is a high priority. A breakthrough
is urgently needed in that regard as well — no more
piecemeal measures, but a comprehensive approach that
would take into account the increasing diversification
and complexity of the sources and channels of financing,
as well as the nefarious linkages between terrorism and
cross-border organized crime.
Furthermore, we have to find the right answers to
the difficult questions regarding modern technologies
and communications, which bring huge improvements
to our lives but can have deadly effect in the wrong
hands.

6/9

20/11/2015

We will have to deal with the uneasy questions of
how much of our liberties and freedoms we are ready to
sacrifice to ensure our safety and security in a way that
does not support repression and oppressive regimes and
does not give the satisfaction to the terrorists of having
disrupted our lives.
We have to critically review our battle for the hearts
and minds of potential terrorist recruits by stepping
up the efforts to tackle the many root causes that
push individuals into the hands of Daesh butchers, as
well our counter-messaging efforts. For that, new and
reinforced partnerships are required internationally,
regionally and locally, where the voices of women,
youth and vulnerable groups are well heard and heeded.
Finally, the importance of resolving the Syria crisis
could not be more urgent. We must restore hope to the
Syrian people. While we cannot see, by any measure,
the regime at the core of this crisis as a partner in the
fight against Daesh, we are encouraged by the Vienna
talks and the new momentum they seem to produce,
with a hope that this will lead to the desperately needed
transition and the full implementation of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) of 2012.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to reiterate our condolences to the
Government and the people of France over the atrocious,
cowardly terrorist acts that struck Paris last week. We
also pay homage to the victims of the bloody, criminal
terrorist acts committed recently in the Sinai, Beirut,
Susa, Ankara, Baghdad, Libya and, just today, in Mali.
Those reprehensible acts demonstrate beyond a shadow
of a doubt that terrorists are seeking to destroy our
common values of coexistence and that the war against
terrorism has indeed become a global one. That makes
it imperative that all of us be united in both word and
deed.
Jordan welcomes the adoption of resolution 2249
(2015), which we voted in favour of because it reflects
our belief in the need to strengthen and coordinate
international efforts to combat the terrorist organization
known as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) — perverts who wreak havoc and evil across
the globe and who are undeterred in demonstrating
their odious intentions towards humankind in targeting
civilians. Targeting and defeating ISIS and other
terrorist groups requires action from all of us and a
response commensurate with the magnitude of the
challenge. It also requires international action and

15-38349

20/11/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

serious collective effort at all levels and on all fronts,
including military, security and intellectual. There is
also a need to suppress the financing of terrorism.
We are very pleased that the Council has adopted
this resolution by unanimity, demonstrating the unity
of the Security Council in combating ISIS and sending
a powerful message to that terrorist organization and
other terrorist groups. Jordan reiterates its ongoing
resolve to combat terrorism in every possible way and
to work to coordinate and bolster international efforts
to confront terrorism and violent extremism.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
stands in solidarity with the victims, families, fellow
citizens and Governments who have suffered from the
recent horrendous attacks perpetrated by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We are today one
week from the terrible events in Paris, and less than a
day from those in Bamako. As others have noted, those
are but two episodes in a bloody, continuing story.
The Security Council must speak out in times of
crisis. We are pleased that today the Council has sent a
strong, unified message of its shared result to prevent
and suppress the terroist threat posed by ISIL and
other terrorists in Syria and Iraq. In the face of ISIL’s
barbarity and senseless killing, we are reminded of the
important role of the Council in uniting the international
community around our shared commitment to peace
and collective security.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the forceful message sent by the Security
Council via its unanimous adoption of resolution
2249 (2015). All acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable. Those who provide material, intellectual
or financial support for terrorism must be prosecuted
and brought to justice. In addition to the resolution we
have just adopted, there is an urgent need to implement
all of the Council’s relevant resolutions, especially
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015).
Combating terrorism must take place in line
with the obligations flowing from international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. Similarly, the
international community must contribute to identifying
and overcoming the causes and conditions that give rise
to terrorism and violent extremism, which cannot be
defeated solely via military means.
Lastly, I would like to categorically state that
Chile will continue to support global efforts against

S/PV.7565

terrorism, in the Security Council and all the other
competent forums and organizations.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Angola voted in
favour of resolution 2249 (2015) — submitted by France
in connection with the terrorist attacks perpetrated by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also
known as Daesh — in the expectation that it is an
important step in the fight against terrorism and for the
building for the indispensible global coalition needed if
we are to win the war against terrorism.
We join the other members of the Security Council
in condemning this terrorist movement, which, as
the resolution states, constitutes an unprecedented
to international peace and security. We express our
deep sympathy and condolences to the victims and the
families of the heinous crimes recently committed by
terrorists.
The complete eradication of ISIL/Daesh, as well
as Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council, is a top priority for
the international community. International terrorism has
been showing a highly dangerous capacity to spread its
violent extremist ideology through terrorist acts, gross
systematic attacks against innocent civilians, violations
of human rights and intolerance and hatred of the other
for being different on cultural, religious or ethnic
grounds. In addition to recruiting terrorist fighters, the
heinous crimes committed by ISIL/Daesh also include
the destruction of cultural heritage and trafficking in
natural resources and cultural artefacts — including
crimes at a scale rarely seen since the Second World
War.
As things stand now, with the deadly danger of
terrorism as a real menace to international peace and
security and to the very survival of some of the most
affected countries, it is high time for the international
community and the main international players to put
aside our differences, national egoism and arrogance and
work decidedly to build a global coalition to fight and
eradicate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
as called for by international public opinion. It is our
hope that the adoption of resolution 2249 (2015), in the
wake of this deadly concerted terrorist act, will serve
as a wake-up call for a radical change in attitude by the
world’s main players.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate our condolences to the

15-383497/9

S/PV.7565

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Government and the people of France, as well as to the
peoples and the Governments of the other countries
that have suffered the latest terrorist assaults, including
the downing of the Russian airliner and the attack early
this morning in Mali. We would also like to pay homage
to the thousands upon thousands of children who die in
Syria every day — especially in connection with the
reprehensible murder of more than 200 children at the
hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) for
not wanting to join that group.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted
in favour of resolution 2249 (2015) in line with our
categorical rejection of the commission of terrorist acts
in all forms and manifestations and regardless of the
motivation, who commits them or where. Such acts are
deliberate attacks on international peace and security.
Terrorism is a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law, all the while being and affront to the right
to life. We therefore believe that addressing terrorism
should be done without double standards: there are no
good or bad terrorists. It is time to be consistent in our
efforts — to take joint, coordinated and consensual
actions and to meet our responsibilities as members
of the Security Council under the mandate conferred
upon us in line with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
The world has watched in bewilderment as the
violence and terrorism practiced to subjugate societies,
civilizations, religions and creeds has assumed multiple
manifestations. Ultimately, however, they remain the
outcome of practices related to intolerance, violent
extremism and sectarianism, while they often follow
geopolitical interests imposed to undermine legitimate
Governments and destabilize the Middle East and
Africa.
We reiterate that terrorist acts threaten not just the
territorial integrity but also the political unity of States,
as well as the security and stability of States, regions and
the international community. We are deeply alarmed at
the extraordinary military and logistical support enjoyed
by such terrorist organizations as ISIS and the Al-Nusra
Front, giving them tremendous military capacities to
develop and deploy indiscriminate violence, destabilize
legitimate Governments, overthrow their constitutional
order, halt the social and economic development of their
people, and destroy their infrastructure, institutions
and response capacities.

8/9

20/11/2015

My delegation reiterates the need, today more than
ever, to address the root causes that fuel these phenomena
and to develop effective and innovative strategies to
interrupt terrorist and extremist narratives with the
aim of preventing radicalization and achieving tangible
short-term and long-term results. The Council must act
in a more preventive manner to resolve and anticipate
conflicts that could be unleashed by terrorism. Recent
events have shown that vulnerability to terrorism and
foreign terrorist fighters is now global. That is why
the role of the Security Council will be decisive in the
fight against an extraordinary and unprecedent threat
that is undermining the future of humankind. We
must therefore fully adhere in particular to resolutions
banning the financing and training of and illicit transfer
of arms to terrorist groups.
Finally, my country is convinced that the fight
against terrorism must be waged in the context of
international cooperation under the binding international
and regional instruments in this sphere, including
relevant Security Council resolutions and the norms
of international law, in full respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, and taking
into account that if we do otherwise, we will contribute
to the further radicalization of these individuals. We
hope that the action taken pursuant to resolution 2249
(2015) and the fight against terrorism will always be
coordinated with the countries concerned and that no
participating actor will have a political agenda other
than the defeat of terrorism and, in the case of Syria,
support for the negotiating process among its people,
Government, the countries of the region and the
international community, which are backing an effort
that we all hope will be fruitful and successful.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2249 (2015). Today,
we sent a clear, unambiguous message that there will be
no respite in our collective efforts to stop, suppress and
destroy the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Whether in the streets of Paris or Beirut or in the skies
above the Sinai, ISIL’s brutality knows no bounds and
respects no borders. ISIL’s determination to carry out
attacks around the world must be met by our greater
resolve to defeat them wherever we find them.
Too many Security Council members here today,
and too many other United Nations Member States,

15-38349

20/11/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

have experienced ISIL’s callous disregard for life. Our
welcome unity today shows that we shall not be deterred
in our efforts to prevent such attacks from happening
again. As my Security Council colleagues have said,
this resolution is a powerful international recognition
of the threat ISIL poses. It calls for lawful action and
all necessary measures to counter ISIL.
Like others, the United Kingdom has already
taken action against ISIL on the basis of individual and
collective self-defence, as we have set out to the Council.
The Council has put in place extensive obligations for
States to take action against ISIL, to stop the travel of
foreign terrorist fighters and to choke off their funding.

S/PV.7565

The recent attacks and resolution 2249 (2015) remind
us that these measures must be implemented if the
international response to ISIL is to succeed.
In conclusion, we stand in solidarity with the
people of France and we commend France for its
leadership on this resolution. As the Security Council
presidency, we are proud that the Security Council has
acted with speed, unity and clarity of purpose to agree
this powerful call to action.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

15-383499/9
