United Nations

S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5282

nd meeting
Monday, 17 October 2005, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ungureanu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Romania)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Katti
Mr. D’Alotto
Mr. Djakpo
Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura
Mr. Cheng Jingye
Ms. Kardel
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Matsuura
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Thomson
Mrs. Taj
Mrs. Patterson

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security
Letter dated 10 October 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Romania
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2005/638)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-55653 (E)

*0555653*

S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and
resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece, who will also speak on behalf
of the Chairman-in-Office of the South-East European
Cooperation Process.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Mr. President, thank
you for taking the time to come to New York to preside
over this important debate on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. I would
also like to welcome the representatives of regional
and subregional organizations.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Today, it is a particular honour for me to speak on
behalf of the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the chairmanship of which is currently held by
Greece. It is a genuine mechanism of regional
cooperation that springs from the countries of the
region themselves — Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia and
Montenegro, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Greece, as well as Croatia as
an observer.
This timely debate is taking place in a year that is
crucial for the United Nations, just a few weeks after
the High-level Plenary Meeting of world leaders in
September 2005, where important decisions were taken
to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations so as
more effectively to meet the security challenges of our
time.
The heads of State and Government recognized
the importance of multilateralism in addressing those
challenges. They also recognized the important
contribution to peace and security by regional
organizations, as provided for under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. At the same time, they
expressed their resolve to strengthen and expand
cooperation between our global and regional
organizations and to ensure that regional organizations
that have the capacity for preventing armed conflict
and for peacebuilding consider the option of placing
such capacity in the framework of the United Nations.
Allow me to remind Security Council members
that the need for a closer and more structured

2

relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations was also recognized by
the sixth high-level meeting between the United
Nations and regional and other intergovernmental
organizations that was held on 25 and 26 July 2005 at
United Nations Headquarters in New York, with the
participation of 20 organizations.
In his opening statement, the Secretary-General
called for, among other things, a common vision of a
global architecture of peace and security, with
interlocking capacities, based on comparative
advantages of the global and regional institutions.
Participants at the meeting endorsed proposals and
agreed on measures aiming at a more structured
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
In our view, the decision of the high-level
meeting to convene on an annual basis to monitor
developments in international security, to promote the
goals of the United Nations and to have these meetings
coincide with those held by the Security Council with
regional organizations is a most important decision in
terms of achieving better coordination and
complementarity of agendas.
While stressing the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security, I wish to emphasize the
complementarity of regional and subregional
organizations in facing new threats and challenges and
in promoting peace and stability, as I said in my
statement at the aforementioned high-level meeting,
speaking on behalf of the Security Council during the
Greek presidency last July.
Today, more than ever, regional organizations
have a vital role to play in conflict prevention and
management, as well as in post-conflict peacebuilding.
Geographic proximity and close historical and cultural
ties among their members give regional organizations
comparative advantages to better understand the root
causes of regional conflicts and to find peaceful
solutions to these problems.
Recent peace-support operations of the United
Nations have been carried out in close cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. Successful and sustainable
peacebuilding also requires the active involvement of
regional and subregional organizations, in particular as

S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)

regards implementation of post-conflict reconstruction
policies.

respect, we support the development of the 10-year
capacity plan of the African Union.

As a member of the European Union, Greece
strongly
supports
cooperative
and
effective
multilateralism and fully subscribes to the EU security
strategy adopted in December 2003, which
incorporates, among other things, the objectives of
enhancing stability, promoting the rule of law, good
governance and international justice and tackling
global challenges and threats.

In closing, we are convinced that the
recommendations agreed by the high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional and other
intergovernmental organizations concerning the
institutionalization of this relationship are crucial for
forging an effective partnership able to face the new
challenges and threats of our time.

Regional cooperation is a key priority to an
agenda for peace, stability and development. In SouthEastern Europe, it is also a key element for the
fulfilment of our common strategic goal, which is
integration into the larger European family — itself the
most successful example of regional cooperation — in
close synergy with the United Nations, as well as with
other regional organizations, for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts.
Following a succession of painful conflicts and
crises on a long and bumpy road, our region today
stands at a turning point. We are moving away from the
syndrome that the Balkans were doomed to endemic
and endless crises, and we are moving closer to
political and social stabilization and economic
development. We have a common responsibility to rise
to the challenge and turn our region into a beacon of
peace, stability and cooperation, acting in solidarity for
the fulfilment of the aspirations of our peoples.
In this context, the South-East European
Cooperation Process is gradually showing itself to be
the organized voice of the region, an efficient and
results-oriented mechanism aspiring to effectively
contribute to peace and stability and committed to
building and sustaining mutually reinforcing and
effective relationships throughout our region.
This meeting offers a good opportunity to
identify methods of enhancing cooperation and
interaction between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We believe that a closer and more
effective partnership between them and a greater
coordination in both policy and action is needed if we
are to establish genuine complementarity.
Likewise, regional organizations should further
develop their organizational capacities in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding. In this

Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation feels highly honoured by your
presence, and we should like to thank you for the
initiative of the delegation of Romania to hold this
public meeting on the subject of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. We
should also like to express our pleasure at the presence
of the representatives of regional and subregional
organizations, as well as that of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
The future creation of the Peacebuilding
Commission, together with the commitment of world
leaders regarding the necessity to strengthen the United
Nations with a view towards making it more efficient
and effective, mean that cooperation with regional
organizations has become a priority subject on the
agenda of the United Nations. Regional organizations
have the relative advantage of proximity to the conflict
zone, which allows for a timely detection of symptoms
of conflict in the region and the possibility of acting
quickly to offer effective solutions for the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. A recent example of this has
involved the African Union and the Economic
Community of West Africa in regard to events in
certain African regions.
The added value of the regional organization in
this sense is that it belongs to a geographic, economic
and social environment that, in a special way, brings it
closer and makes it more sensitive to the local conflict.
The tasks of prevention and warning may, in many
cases, require this proximity as an essential condition,
as does the important function of stabilization in the
construction of a stable environment. Consultation
mechanisms, both formal and informal, must be
promoted because they allow the United Nations to
take advantage of the perspectives they offer and vice
versa.

3

S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)

When our universal Organization examines a
specific conflict, before it takes action in the field, it
should, under ideal circumstances, receive the opinion
and advice of the relevant regional organization and
give it due consideration. Institutional experience and
operational capacity must be the bases for defining the
areas in which regional organizations can cooperate
with the United Nations. In this sense, the experience
and cooperation in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti seems an eloquent example. The
Organization of American States (OAS) has provided
its specific technical knowledge and has collaborated
actively in the political area, specifically in voter
registration, in a very satisfactory manner. In this way,
the regional organization, the OAS in this case, has
given fundamental support to the final goal of peace
and stability in Haiti.
The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
arrangement could now include the Peacebuilding
Commission, which would act as a liaison body
between the Security Council, other bodies of the
United Nations and regional organizations and create
new synergies in a post-conflict situation. By taking
advantage of existing elements we avoid an
unnecessary duplication of effort. Since there is a
connection between security, peace and development,
the specialized knowledge of regional organizations,
whose original mandate used to focus on the
stimulation of economic integration and commerce,
may be valuable to guarantee success of the strategies
for economic growth and stability in the long run.
We have referred to the important role of regional
organizations in the early detection of symptoms of
conflict, the offering of solutions for peaceful
resolution of conflicts and the elaboration of strategies
in peace consolidation in the post-conflict phase.
However, we must not forget the importance of
establishing official cooperation agreements between
the secretariats of regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations, incorporating, if
possible, armed conflict prevention and peacekeeping
capacities within the forces, services and back-up
equipment system of the United Nations.
Systematic cooperation of the United Nations
with regional organizations would increase the capacity
of the United Nations to prevent conflicts, respond
quickly in the event of a conflict and provide solutions

4

for the construction of lasting peace. The draft
resolution that will soon be adopted urges us to make
progress in the right direction and Argentina fully
agrees with these commitments.
Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): My
delegation welcomes your presence here. Your decision
to preside personally over the Council’s debates
highlights the importance that your country places on
improving the coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations. My delegation
shares your interest in exploring ways to enhance that
coordination as part of our continuing joint efforts to
identify efficient and effective methods to help ensure
international peace and security.
We welcome in particular the opportunity that
today’s debate represents to review cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations as well as ways to increase
the impact of such cooperation in advancing Security
Council objectives. The activities of regional and
subregional organizations, when properly planned and
capably implemented, can strengthen and reinforce a
variety of critically important United Nations
objectives, such as promoting democracy and human
rights, strengthening international security cooperation,
countering terrorism and transnational crime and
supporting economic development.
Regional and subregional organizations bring
unique and important connections, knowledge and
experience to any effort to address a given regional
issue. A cooperative, multilateral approach between the
appropriate United Nations organ and the appropriate
regional organization has the potential to create
valuable synergies and to increase the probability of
successful interventions.
Allow me to highlight a few of the relevant
initiatives that the United States is undertaking in this
regard. The Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI)
is global in scope, as its name implies, but has a
particular regional emphasis on Africa. The Initiative is
designed to increase the capacity of participating
African countries to deploy highly trained personnel in
international peace-support operations. Cooperation
between GPOI and the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations will enhance interoperability
among peace-support units from different countries.
Increased interoperability translates into greater shared
abilities to address some of the issues raised in the

S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)

draft resolution that we will adopt at the conclusion of
today’s debate.

per se — the long-held and widely shared view among
Member States.

The African Contingency Operations, Training
and Assistance programme (ACOTA) is a specialized
African peacekeeping training component of GPOI and
will train selected African military contingents to carry
out peace-support and humanitarian relief operations.
ACOTA works with African partner armed forces and
with regional and subregional organizations to
coordinate crisis-response training. It is our hope and
belief that ACOTA-trained units will be among the
most capable available anywhere for these challenging
assignments.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Paulin
Djakpo, Director of Cabinet of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Benin.

Partnerships with ACOTA have been developed
after extensive collaboration with African countries
and other stakeholders. The programme enables
African military contingents from different countries to
execute multinational peacekeeping operations by
providing them with interoperable peace-support
operations skills, including the requisite training and
equipment. The programme’s comprehensive approach
integrates
humanitarian,
non-governmental
and
international relief organization participation into its
training in order to improve critical coordination when
ACOTA-trained personnel are deployed in real-world
operations. The programme’s support to African
regional security organizations will assist the
development of strong planning and organizational
units capable of responding to humanitarian and
peacekeeping crises in the region. Moreover, greater
regional stability, created by an enhanced African
peace-support capacity, will be instrumental in
promoting African democracy and economic growth.
In other regions, similar efforts to enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations can yield similar benefits.
My delegation is encouraged by today’s debate
and will study carefully the report that the Council has
invited the Secretary-General to prepare on the
challenges presented and the opportunities offered, as
we seek to maximize the effectiveness of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The United States will be an active participant in that
ongoing and collective effort. Today’s debate has been
a useful way-station along that road.
Finally, my delegation concurs fully with the
statement made by Assistant Secretary General
Erdmann, that NATO is not a regional organization

Mr. Djakpo (Benin) (spoke in French): The
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of
Benin very much appreciates the invitation addressed
to him to participate in this meeting. As it was
impossible for him to come to New York personally, he
has asked me to represent him today in this public
debate in the Security Council and to make the
following statement on his behalf.
My country, Benin, is very grateful to the
President for having organized this public meeting on a
subject whose importance is undeniable in the context
of the debate under way regarding the reform of the
United Nations. As in other areas, it is not a question
of reinventing the United Nations but of creating the
conditions for the judicious application of the Charter
in the spirit of the fundamental principles enshrined
therein.
The Charter of the United Nations has established
a system of collective security based on two pillars,
namely, the primary responsibility vested in the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security and cooperation with regional
organizations working in that field on the basis of
subsidiarity and the obligation to be accountable. The
relevant provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter are
unequivocal on that point and there is no need to cite
them here.
The international environment has not always
been favourable to the effective implementation of
those Charter provisions. However, since the fall of the
Berlin Wall and the end of ideological confrontation
between East and West, we have seen the emergence of
a new community of values and an increase in
cooperation between the great Powers in the area of
promoting international peace and security. That has
enabled the Security Council to play a greater role, as
conferred upon it by the Charter. At the same time, we
have seen a renewed interest on the part of States
towards regional integration aiming at the promotion of
peace and stability.

5

S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)

Among other things, that has been manifested in
Africa the praiseworthy initiatives of regional
economic commissions — such as the Economic
Community of West African States — to find solutions
to domestic armed conflicts. Both the African Union
and its Peace and Security Council were established for
that very reason.
Those positive developments have created the
conditions for more active cooperation with the
Security Council. They have also served to promote the
revitalization of the collective security system
instituted by the Charter, which is in line with the
humanistic ideal that presided over the establishment
of the United Nations itself, namely, to save future
generations from the scourge of war and to promote the
dignity and worth of human beings.
In that connection, we would like to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General, who very early on understood
the importance of both those virtuous endeavours and
favoured consultations between the United Nations and
representatives of regional organizations. Important
results were achieved at the sixth high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
which was held in New York on 25 and 26 July 2005
and organized around the telling theme of “Partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
for a safer world”.
In that regard, Benin in particular welcomes the
decision to establish a standing committee charged
with mobilizing political will, promoting the adoption
of a long-term perspective and monitoring the
decisions taken. This is an act of great importance that
augurs well for the deepening of concrete institutional
relations.
Similarly, we welcome the participation in
today’s debate of eminent representatives of major
regional organizations. This is a key opportunity to
define the parameters of partnership in the area of
promoting international peace and security. That
partnership requires the establishment of consultative
mechanisms for more effective interaction between the
Security Council, regional organizations and Member
States, with a view to facilitating sound management of
situations that could pose a threat to international
peace and security. The Security Council could thereby
meet its primary purpose, to prevent the breakdown of
peace and, where necessary, act collectively with
Member States.

6

However, regional organizations cannot fulfil
their commitments in that partnership unless their
early-warning and response capacities are strengthened
to deal with situations posing a threat to international
peace and security. The constraints that have surfaced
as part of the efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union to bring stability to the African
continent demonstrate concretely the scope of the
challenges that must be overcome to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the area of conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as in the area of peacebuilding
throughout the world. The international community as
a whole stands to gain much, and must therefore act
with clear-sightedness and determination.
It is in that spirit that my country fully supports
the draft resolution we are to adopt at the end of our
debate.
Benin would like to pay tribute to Romania not
only for having undertaking this initiative, but
especially for having strengthened relations between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
having made that a priority of its mandate in the
Security Council. History will record and take the true
measure of the substantial contribution that Romania
has made to structure relations between the United
Nations and regional organizations to further integrate
the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Benin for his kind words addressed to
my country.
(spoke in English)
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it,
which is contained in document S/2005/649. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America

S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1631 (2005).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

May I take this opportunity to extend my
gratitude to all the participants in this joint and fruitful
exercise to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. I thank you all for
your resilience, help, patience and good work.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

7
