TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 15 AUGUST 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1439/Rev.2)

.....,. ... .......,.......

Puge

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8616);
(b) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8617);
(c) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8721);
td,l Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8724) , , , . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1439
I,

4I

‘. II

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of ;the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

I

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY-NINTH

I

Held in New York on Thursday, 15 August 1968, at 3 p.m.
fiesidenl: Mr. Jo”ao Augusta DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).

MEETING

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Security Council, I propose to
invite the representatives of Jordan, Israel, the United Arab
Republic, Iraq, Syria and Saudi Arabia to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

At the invitation bf the President, Mr. M. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table, and Mr. M. El Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr, G. Tomeh (Syria)
and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 439/Rev.2)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressedto the President
of the Security Council (S/861 6);
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/861 7);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressedto the President
of the Security Council (S/8721);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8724).

3. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, I wish first of all to express to you my congratulations and best wisheson your assumption of the high office
of President of the Security Council.
4. Your distinguished career in your country’s national
and international service is too well known to require
further repetition. Suffice it for me to join my other
colleagues in expressing admiration and gratitude for the
manner in which you have so ably conducted our business,
so soon after you joined our ranks. This is indeed an
accomplishment which bears clear testimony to your
personal ability and experience and is also proof of the
human and intellectual resourcefulness of your great
country and of the great Latin American continent of
which your country forms so vital a part.

Statement by the President

1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to apologize for the delay in
opening the present meeting. I am sure, however, that we
all understand that this delay was due to the fact that the
members of the Council felt it necessary to engage in
consultations on this very question.

5. To your predecessor in office, my good friend and
colleague Ambassador Bouattoura, I can only express my
heartfelt apology that the call of duty coupled perhaps with
the irresistible pressure of homesicknesscausedmy absence
from New York during a month when I would have wished
to stand by his side, as ever. There were many who
predicted that July would be a long and hot month for the
Security Council. Those who had such expectations must
have surely been disappointed; for I understand from those
of my colleagues who remained behind that Ambassador
Bouattoura kept everything cool and quiet during the
month of July. I do not consider this to have been solely
coincidental. I know Ambassador Bouattoura well enough
and closely enough to testify that essentially he is a man of
peace and tranquillity and only becomes lion-hearted when
he feels that his beliefs and principles are being threatened
or tampered with. I want to seize this opportunity to renew
to him the assurancesof my ever faithful friendship and my
very best wishes for his continued successin his United
Nations post.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8616);
(b) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8617);
fc) letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/6721 1;
(d) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8724)

6. Since ais is the first time that I speak in fhe COUnd

after the appointment of our new colleague, Ambassador
1

13. I do not, of course, underestimate the difficulties of
the problems with which we are faced. We are dealing with
deep-rooted problems with a long history and background
of conflict and bloodshed. The stain of blood is always the
most difficult to erase.

George Ball, I want to extend to him the hand of welcome
and friendship, looking forward to the continuation df the
same happy and fruitful co-operation that I have always
had the honour to maintain with his delegation, more
particularly with his distinguished predecessor, Ambassador
Arthur Goldberg.

14. But I am convinced, as is my Government, that the
answer does not lie in more conflict and more bloodshed,
The answer, and the historic challenge, lies in working for a
just and lasting settlement which will ensure mutual
tolerance leading in time to honourable coexistence and
co-operation between all of the peoples of the Middle
Eastern region.

7. I likewise extend a warm welcome to the new Under*
Secretary-General for Political and Security Council Affairs,
assuring him of my delegation’s full co-operation in his new
and responsible task.
8. When I turn to the specific subject of our present
agenda, I have very little to add to what has already been
eloquently expressed by my colleagues, except perhaps to
reiterate the grave anxiety and disquietude of my Government over the fact that on the problem of the Middle East,
of which the incidents that we are debating today are only
one part, the Council and indeed the United Nations itself
seems to be bogged down in a dangerous exercise of
marking time on a decision made already ten months ago.

15. Needless to say, we do not have to seek new initiatives
in this regard. The unanimous dtcision of November last is
a good beginning and a good basis for such a lasting and just
settlement. What we seem to lack is the unanimous will to
see this decision through. We should, each and every one of
us, make it our urgent duty fully to support the effort of
the Secretary-General and of his Special Representative in
the area. We should encourage and help them follow up
every sign of hope and every gesture of conciliation that
may appear on the horizon. We should exert our influence
on the parties concerned faithfully to co-operate in the
peaceful settlement of all disputes in accordance with the
principles and provisions of resolution 242 (1967). The
special role and responsibility of the Permanent Members in
this peace-making effort is too obvious to require detailed
elaboration on my part.

9. It is sad to contemplate that since ,we adopted our
unarsimous resolution of last November [242 (1967)], no
appreciable progress has in fact been made, and that the
situation remains as dangerously deadlocked as-if not
evermore dangerously stalemated than-we left it in November, with every glimmer of hope for peaceful settlement
being suddenly dashed by repeated hostility and conflict in
one or another sector of the cease-fire.

16. In the meantime it is, of course, our clear duty to call
for the strictest observance of the cease-fire on the part of
all concernedand to censureall violations of the cease-fire,
The cease-firemust be maintained and respectedif an
atmosphereis to be created that will be conducive to a
peaceful settlement. We should, therefore, insist on full
respectfor the cease-fireprovisions and shouldprevent all
actions that violate these provisions, making it very clear
that continued violation of the cease-firewill unavoidably
call for Council action under the relevant chapter of the
[Jnited NationsCharter.

10. To say that no appreciable progress has been made
since November is certainly not to critize those who have
been engaged in a peace-keeping effort on our behalf. The
dedication of the Secretary-General to the cause of peace in
that region is only too well known .and, likewise, the
unt.iring and skilful effort of Ambassador Jarring is universally admired and recognized. And yet, despite these
efforts, and in spite of a unanimous decision taken ten
months ago by the Security Council, the situation remains
as dangerous as ever with the prospect of another conflict
beginning to loom large in the background.

17. It is with these considerations in mind that my
delegationvoted for resolution 248 (1968) of 24 March
1968. It will be recalled that in that resolutionwe deplored
the loss of life and heavy damage to property. We
condemned the military action of reprisal launched by
Israel in violation of the cease-fire; and, likewise, WC
deplored all other violations of the cease-fireand declared
that such actions of military reprisal and other grave
violations of the cease-firecould not be tolerated.

Il. This, I submit, is a very serious prospect to which we
should give our full and undivided attention. Otherwise we
run the risk of making the same historical error made
during the time preceding the conflict of June 1967.-the
error of leaving things to drift towards tension, confront:!tion and final conflict.
12. The deplorable and repeated incidents that we have
debated here in the Council for the last ten months are the
obvious and inevitable consequences of the present confrontation and deadlock, which will continue to cause the
same violent actions and counter-actions leading to more
tension, more bitterness, more conflict and eventual co&lagration. The only way whereby we can hope to,get out of
this vicious circle of violence and conflict is to see to it fhat
our decision of November, containing as it does a balanced
provision of mutual requirements and obligations, is faithfully and effectively acted upon, so that through the
perhaps slow but sure process of peace-making the wounds
of the last two decades will begin to heal, and we will, we
hope, see the turning of the tide from the present one of
hatred and bitterness.

18. My delegation, of course, stands by the position it
took with regard to the situation in March, which appears
to us to be identical with the situation that the Councilis
faced with today. We continue to maintain the same
position with regard to the recent actions of military
reprisalundertaken by the armed forces of Israel, and are
prepared to join the membership of the Council in
censuringthose actions, just as we have been prepared
strongly to censure any and all such violations of the
cease-firein the past.
19. While thus willing and ready to join other membersof
the Council in providing these stop-gap measuresfor
2

maintaining the cease-fire as a necessary interim arrangement, we cannot help repeating again and again that the
final and effective solution of the grave problem that
plagues the Middle East today lies in the November
resolution of this Council. I submit that it is for the
November resolution and for the peace effort based on it
that the Security Council should urgently reserve the major
part of its attention and effort so that the cause of peace in
the Middle East may be saved in time and the area be thus
spared from yet another tragedy of war and destruction.

defence actions and provide immunity for Arab acts of
aggression. It is undoubtedly evident to all that the world
will not accept such a miscarriage of justice. Israel, in the
exercise of its sovereign rights under the Charter of the
United Nations, will not accept it.
30. At our last meeting, the representative of Jordan tried
to question the generally-known direct involvement of his
Government, as well as of other Arab Governments, in the
attacks carried out against Israel from Jordanian territory.

20. If we continue to fail to do this at this already late
hour, we shall stand accused before history of having
neglected our duty as Council members and of having
chosen instead to be the helpless spectators of a serious
situation which on all evidence must be described as one of
a war in the making.

31. After months of public discussion on terror warfare,
with Jordanian statesmen commenting time and again on
the fedaveen operations from Jordan, with Arab Governments proclaiming their support for this method of war
against Israel, with conferences of terror organizations held
in the open in Amman and Cairo, under governmental
auspices, with world-wide publicity being given to the
commandos, including eye-witness accounts, personal interviews, television films showing the training of the raiders,
the location of their bases, the co-operation between them
and the Jordanian army, with Arab governmental radio
stations broadcasting communiques of the terror organizations-after all this, the Jordanian representative finds it
possible to veil himself in innocence and declare that his
Government has no knowledge of these activities and their
true character.

21. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank the representative
of Ethiopia for his kind and generous words in my regard.
22. The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed to
speak, and I now call upon him.
23. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Security Council has been
discussing for ten days the situation resulting from Jordanian acts of aggression and Israel’s defence action. For
ten days we have heard in the Council Jordan and other
Arab States proclaim that Israel’s defence measures were
unjustified but that Arab warfare against Israel will continue unabated.

32. In addition to the ample information already before
the Council, I should like to draw attention to the
following facts which throw additional light on the nature
of terror warfare and direct governmental responsibility
for it.

24. In fact, attacks from Jordanian territory have continued; they are contributing to a further deterioration of
the situation; they are endangering peace and obstructing
efforts towards peaceful agreement.

33. Despite the Jordanian representative’s protestations
that “the Iraqi army units are in Jordan for defensive
purposes” [143&h meeting, para. 1.51, Iraqi participation
in terror warfare has at no time been a matter of mere
hearsay.

25. On 5 August, mortar and small arms fire was opened
from Jordanian military positions on the Israeli villages of
Yardena and Beit Yosef in the Beit She’an valley. Later that
day, the area of tl re Neve Ur village was shelled.

34. A report from Beirut published in the Rai@ Telegraph
of 8 August 1968 states: “An Iraqi brigade of about 8,000
men has been maintained in Jordan since the eve of last
year’s June war with Israel. . . it provides Arab commando
groups with supplies, weapons, transport and training
facilities.”

26. Attacks from Jordanian military positions occurred
again on 6, 7, 8, 12, 13 August, and yesterday, 14 August.
In these almost daily attacks the main targets were, as in
the past, Israeli villages in the Beit She’an valley. The
Jordanian military positions fired on them with artillery,
mortars, machine-guns and small arms. These military
attacks were directed also against Israeli vehicles travelling
along the border.

35, The Cfvistian Science Monitor writes, on 7 June 1968:

27. Yesterday raiders from Jordan opened bazooka fire on
a hut near the Israeli village of Ein-Yahav in the Arava area.
A few hours later a tractor was blown up by a mine laid on
a track north-east of the village.

“Arab guerrilla groups are training extensively to mount
new attacks against the Israelis. Monitor correspondent
John K. Cooley recently witnessed this training at camps
in Jordan . . . The patrol leader said he v?as formerly a
lieutenant in the Iraqi army.”

28. Our deliberations are continuing. In the meantime,
however, the intransigent attitudes of the Arab Governments and their refusal, thus far, to terminate attacks from
their territory against Israel confront the area with the
alternatives of an immediate cessation of Arab warfare and
faithful observance of the cease-fire, and of a most
dangerous aggravation of the situation.

36. In addition to the Iraqi officer killed on 4 August in
the terror commando camp at Salt, Lieutenant-Colonel Abd
el-Majid of the Iraqi battalion No. 421 was killed in the
commando c‘amp of Karameh. A number of soldiers from
this Iraqi battalion were captured on raids against Israel.
‘They are Second Lieutenant Adnan Mansur, Corporal
Rubhi Mohamad Abdallah Burkaz and Abd al-Aziz
Mahmud Abu Shama. Among members of other regular
Arab armies captured in the course of terror attacks on

29. The Arab representatives and their supporters have
suggested that the Council address itself to the Israel
3

who participate
and 7.1

Israel are the following: from Egyptian battalion NO. 322:
Lieutenant Khaled al-Deeb Abdu Mahmud and Lieutenant
Mohamad Ashur Amer Ahmad Hasan, who are now
prisoners in Israel; from Syrian battalion NO. 413: Second
Lieutenant Mohamed Abel al-Huseiz abd al-Hari, who is in
Israeli hands.

in these actions.”

(S/7896,

paras. 6

43. The situation in the Middle East is grave. It is
recognized by all that it is likely to become even graver
unless warfare against Israel from Jordanian territory ceases
and Jordan ensures the strict observance of the cease-fire.
This is the crux of the problem. The prospects of peace in
the area depend on this situation being dealt with timedi.
ately, effectively and equitably.

37. The Jordanian representative also disclaimed any
knowledge of the existence in Amman of terror commando
recruitment offices. I think the following information may
be of assistance. The recruitment office of El-Fatah is
situated in Amman in the refugee camp Husein, in Jabel
Husein, near the mosque. The P.L.O. recruitment office in
Amman is on Salt Street. The office contains nine rooms.
The recruitment office of the el-Jabha terror organization is
located in Wadi-Seri Street, near the Central Post Office.
Finally, the recruitment offices of the Egyptian terror
commando battalion are at Jabel,Amman, not far from the
Intercontinental Hotel. The officer-in-charge is Major Sami
Dahana.

44. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
Jordan, who wishes to exercise the right of reply.

of

45. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): It was not my intention ta
take the floor this afternoon, but when I hear distortions at
every single meeting I find myself compelled td answer.
Mr. Tekoah deemed it fitting for about the tenth time
during the deliberations on this item to revert to the very
same arguments, allegations and distortions. I have repeat.
edly answered them, but, if his intention is to mislead
world public opinion through this Council, if he is misusiag
his right or privilege in order to carry out a campaign of
distortion to the world, I think I should keep the record
straight.

38. Iraqi Colonel Mohamad Sarsuf serves as liaison officer
between the Government of Iraq and the terror organizations.
39. The Egyptian newspaper Aakhar Saa published on
6 June 1968 the following report from Amman by Wajid
Kandil:

46. Mr. Tekoah once again referred to resistance and he
continued to call it acts of organized terrorism. I have said
in the past and I say again that this organiied resistance is
not terrorism; it is nothing but a popular uprising agains
Israeli occupation, against continued Israeli aggression,
against the presence of Israeli forces in Sinai, in Gaza, on
the west bank, in the Syrian Golan. I have said before and 1
say again that it is only legitimate, only natural, only a
God-given right for the people to resist foreign occupation.
It was not invented by the Palestinians. Almost every single
member of this Council has resisted one form of occupation
or another. I cited the great country of Mr. Malik: the
Soviet Union. I said that it lost twenty million people
resisting nazism. I referred to France, I referred to other
members in Europe and I said, “Resistance is the answer to
foreign occupation.” When I said it was a legitimate war of
liberation, I quoted Mr. Dayan, Mr, Tekoah’s Minister of
Defence. He also called it a war of liberation, Again he
could not resist admitting that the people were resisting,
from within, a foreign invader coming from outside.
Mr. Tekoah cannot come before the Council and speak
about resistance before they get out of what they occupied
in our area through aggression. I do not think that
Mr. Tekoah, who represents a country which continues
bulldozing homes and shrines of worship in Jerusalem, is
coming to the Council with clean hands. I do not think that
Mr.Tekoah, who represents a country which continues
arbitrarily to arrest people, put them in gaol and subject
them to torture, is in a position to come here and preach
about values.

“From the moment I entered Amman I had the feeling
that something unusual was going on among the seven
hills on which the capital of Jordan is situated. After a
few hours I noticed a certain activity between the
residence of the Iraqi Ambassador and the P.L.O. bureau
and the headquarters of El-Fatah. Cars went time and
again between Amman and the positions of the fedayeen.
Meetings were held between Hamudah and other members of the organization and between Yasser Arafat and
the commandos of El-Fatah.”
40. Some sensitivity has been displayed at the Council
table by Arab representatives and certain other representatives with regard to the terms “terrorism” and “terrorists”.
Some prefer to regard those who go out on missions to
murder innocent villagers and blow up tractors in the field
as thugs and killers and cowards who shame those that
glorify them and disgrace the military unifoml they
frequently wear.
41. However, the term “terrorism”
is a generally
recognized description of this type of activity. It is a term
of long standing in the United Nations,
42. In the Secretary-General’s report to the Security
Council on 19 May 1967 we read:
“A number of factors serve to aggravate the situation to
an unusual degree, increasing tension and danger.

47. Mr. Tekoah referred to certain evidence he received.
This time he did not say that it was confidential information. Last time he quoted something from the press and
called it confidential information. He injected many pieces
of information created by his wide imagination and called it
confidential information. This time he did not do SO. He
referred to certain information received, according to him,

“El-Fatah activities, consisting of terrorism and sabo.
tage, are a major factor in that they provoke strong
reactions in Israel by the Government and population
alike. Some recent incidents of this type have seemed to
indicate a new level of organization and training of those
4

.
by Israel from certain individuals. We deny the statements
which the Israelis have fabricated. The real way to find out
he truth is very simple. In accordance with Security
Council resolution 237 (1967) we asked our most able and
dedicated Secretary-General to send his representative to
the areato find out, to meet the people, to visit the prisons,
to visit the Gaza Strip, to see the west bank, to see
Jerusalem,
to see the Holy Places which were facing all
kinds of Israeli aggression and to come and report to the
Council, The Secretary-General’s report is now before the
Council, It states that Mr. Tekoah’s Government is not
permitting the representative to go to Israel. It says that
they are injecting a foreign substance not related to
resolution 237 (1967), in order to avoid receiving that
representative, in order to be able to come here and
continue fabricating and distorting. If you want the truth,
the Special Representative is the man to go and seek the
truth, bring it to the Council and face Mr. Tekoah and his
fabrications with a, clear statement about what is going on
in the area. I think there is something called an estoppel. He
is estopped from raising any question of this kind when
they are refusing to permit the representative of the
Secretary-General to go there on a fact-finding mission.

an effective measure and not simply adopt a routine
resolution.
51. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative

of

52. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I do not believe that the
Jordanian representative’s attempt to ignore simple facts
deserves a reply. I should like to make only a brief
comment, a clarification on one point.
53. Not only the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral but even the Jordanian representative himself are
most welcome to come to Israel. It is the Arab Governments which at present bar the Special Representative from
investigating, in accordance with Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, the oppression, discrimination and torture to which Jews in Arab States are being
subjected. We hope that they will modify their attitude and
permit the representative of the Secretary-General to come
to the Middle East.
54. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): We have listened very attentively
to the statement made by the representative of Ethiopia.
This is the fifteenth member of the Security Council to
condemn the new acts of aggression committed by Israel
under the pretext of so-called retaliatory measures. This is
but one more confirmation of the conclusion drawn by the
Soviet delegation at one of the preceding meetings to the
effect that none of the Security Council members, even
among Israel’s sympathizers, has dared to justify these new
acts of Israeli aggression.

48. Mr. Tekoah referred to Iraqi officers with the resistance movement. I categorically deny the presence of any
Iraqi officer working with the people who are in Jordan and
who are in the west bank. I deny this because we have no
information whatsoever
about these allegations. If
Mr. Tekoah is trying to divert the attention of the Council
from the real issues to some pieces of information not
related at all to the crime committed against Salt, not
related at all to the crime committed against Irbid, I hope
that the Council will not take him seriously.

55. The representative of Israel, endlessly citing quotations from newspapers all over the world, from Norway to
Brazil, from the United Kingdom to Lebanon and Syria, is
trying to persuade the Security Council of one thing: that
the Security Council should forbid the population of the
territories occupied by the Israeli soldiers to hate the
occupiers. Yet it is perfectly obvious that, no matter what
efforts the representative of Israel may make here, no
matter how eloquently he may speak here, or how much he
may present quotations frrom foreign newspapers, it is
impossible to persuade anyone that the Security Council is
able and has a right to forbid the population of the
occupied Arab territories to hate the aggressor and
occupier. This is a waste of time. There is an excellent
Japanese proverb that says: it’s like catching a fish on a
tree, that is, engaging in a futile task. The representative of
Israel is engaging here in precisely such a futile task as
catching fish on trees in trying to convince the members of
the Council, and the Council as a whole, that the
population of the occupied Arab territories should be
deprived of the right to hate the aggressor, to hate the
occupiers. Therefore, the best way to convince the Israeli
aggressor of the futility of this activity would be to
continue to remind him (as many menibers of the Security
Council have done) that the best course would be the
implementation of the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967 and the complete withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the Arab territories seized by Israel. That is the
solution of the problem. There will then be no need for any
complaints on Israel’s part that the population of the
occupied territories hates the occupier and aggressor.

49. We are now reaching the end of our deliberations. We
have been listening to the statements. You have heard the
parties time and again. You have been kind and patient, and
I think we have reached the stage where a decision is
needed. We expect from the Security Council not a routine
resolution, not a decision to be added to the others, not
only condemnation of Iirael. We expect the Security
Council to go a step further. We expect the Council to give
us an adequate remedy which would put an end to Israeli
acts of aggression, to Israeli challenges of the Council and
to grave Israeli violations. Otherwise
there will be more
complications and further deterioration in the area. I hope
the Council will ponder these very important points.
50. We have heard a great’ deal of the word “balance”.
There is no balance when it comes to a crime committed
against Jordan by a Member State of the United Nations,
created by the United Nations. There is no equity in any
attempt to find what used to be called an even-handed
approach or a balance between the victim and the aggressor.
There should be no balance when it comes to naked
aggression. On the question of Karameh we heard something about an even-handed approach. Earlier, when Israel
was created, we heard a great deal about a balance in arms
between the whole of the Arab States and Israel. What
happened on 5 June is an answer to the question of the
so-called balance of armaments. I hope that in this clear-cut
case, 011 this glaring act of aggression, the Council will take

5

65. Iask the representative of Israel to proceed.
/

56. The PRESIDENT: I now recognize the representative
of Jordan who has asked for the floor in exercise of his
right of reply.

.ed . Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should only like to say this:
the Soviet Union bears in the Middle East heavy responsibility for Arab aggression which led to the June 1967
hostilities. The Soviet Government, by supporting now the
terror warfare against Israel, takes upon itself. . ,

57. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Going back again to the
reference to the representative of the Secretary-General,
who was refused admission by Israel, Mr. Tekoah referred
to the Jews in the Arab States..1 think that they are citizens
of the Arab States in the same way as they are here in the
United States, the host country, or in the Soviet Union or
in France. I do not think that in its resolution 237 (1967)
the Security Council made any reference whatever to Jews
other than to the inhabitants who were subjected to the
Israeli aggression. The Security Council has said in resolution 237 (1967) that it

67. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Point of order.
68. The PRESIDENT: I caU on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
69. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist RepubIics)
(translated from Russian): I request that the representative
of Israel be called to order and be asked not to concern
himself with matters which are not under discussion here.

“Culls upon the Government of Israel to ensure the
safety, welfare and security of the inhabitants of the areas
where military operations have taken place . . ,“.

70. The PRESIDENT: I again appeal to the representative
of Israel to confine his remarks, to the extent possible, to
the actual consideration of the item we are seized of, This js
a point on which I think the President should ask the
co-operation and understanding of all members and all
representatives.

58. There is no reference whatsoever to any other people.
But this was injected by Mr. Tekoah and his Government,
not only to find justification for covering up their crimes in
the occupied areas, but also to find a way to mislead world
public opinion and the Security Council.

59. We shall have an opportunity in this Council, I hope,
71. .#’I ask the representative of Israel to proceed.
to examine this report and this resolution, and take action
on the implementation of this resolution, guided by the
2. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): By supporting now the terror
I/r
valuable material in this report.
warfare waged against Israel, his Government takes upon
itself the responsibility for encouraging murder of Israeli
60. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
people. It is a responsibility which will remain as a grim
Israel who has asked to speak in exercise of his right of
blot on Soviet history. We still wait for the Soviet
reply.
Government to come to the Security Council . . .
61. Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): I regret very much, that the
Soviet representative found it necessary to intervene again
in our debate, Yet, what would a Security Council meeting
be without a harangue from him against Israel? I should
only like to say this. The Soviet Union bears a heavy
responsibility for Arab aggression.

73. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Point of order.
74. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
75. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated jkom Russian): The Israeli representative is
treating your request and your ruling with disrespect. I
request that this be noted, and that it be explained to the
Israeli representative that he is not to refer to questions not
pertaining to the matter at hand. The subject of the
discussion is Israel’s aggressive acts, and what he is saying
here constitutes a complete falsehood and slander regarding
the Soviet Union. I object to such behaviour by the Israeli
representative at the Security Council meeting.

62. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
63. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The meeting of the Security
Council is discussing the question of Israel’s acts of
aggression against Jordan, not the Soviet Union and its
activities. I therefore ask the President to be guided by the
decision taken by one of his predecessors, to the effect that
the representative of Israel should concern himself with the
concrete problems before us and should not discuss the
action and activities of members of the Security Council.

76. The PRESIDENT: Regarding the new point of order
raised by the representative of the Soviet Union, I wisli
once more to ask for the full co-operation and understanding of all members and all representatives here. As I made
explicit before, the President does not wish either to curtail
discussion or to permit unduly extended remarks on items
or subjects not under consideration. I find it difficult te
state a ruling on that. I would prefer to know that I csa
count on the co-operation of all members and representatives so that a certain understanding might be reached here
on the remarks. So I appeal again to the representative of
Israel to confine his remarks to the item under consideration so that we can proceed with our business.

64. The PRESIDENT: Regarding the point of order raised
by the representative of the Soviet Union, I should like to
recall my previous remarks on the question of the extent to
which we should interpret the present rules as to whether
they would or would not permit certain remarks to be
made about the point under consideration. Anyhow, I
would appeal to the representative, of Israel to confine his
remarks, to the extent possible, to the point under
consideration, without prejudice, of course, to his right of
reply.
6

77. I,ask the representative of Israel to proceed.
/
Tp78. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing me to conclude my brief exercise of my right of
reply to a calumny expressed here by the Soviet representative.

Israel, some with captions reading as follows: “Visit Israel
and see the Pyramids”. And yet the representative of Israel
comes here in order to give us lectures about law and
respect for law.
86. I have h&e also the latest issue of Le Monde, dated 14
August. The following news item might be of interest to
members of the Council in order to show the real
intentions, the ugly reality of Israel. Here is what .Le llrfonde
reported under the title

79. The world still waits for the Soviet Government to
come to the Security Council and urge peace-a peaceful
agreement between Israel and the Arab States, not the
continuation of warfare and murder.
80. The’ PRESIDENT:
The representative
asked to be allowed to speak.

“Israelis said to seek control of American-Saudi pipeline:” C‘13 August (AFP). Israel is reportedly demanding
right of passage for Saudi oil through the pipeline which
crosses the area of Syria occupied by Israeli forces. The
Lebanese newspaper &Mztnn regards the recent statements made by the Vice-Premier of Israel concerning
Israel’s determination never to return the Golan Heights
to Syria as concealing its intention to control the
American-Saudi pipeline of the Tapline”.l

of Syria has
i

8 1. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): During one of the meetings of
the Council, the representative of Jordan requested that
side issues should not be raised so as not to divert our
attention from the main issue of which the Council is
seized-namely, the complaint of Jordan against the Israeli
attacks upon the two cities of es-Salt and Irbid, as a result
of which a great number of innocent civilians were killed,
hospitals destroyed, and ambulances carrying wounded
peopIe to the hospitals strafed by Israe’li planes.

87. If this is not sheer, unadulterated international piracy,
what other name could be given to it? Yet the Israeli
representative also spoke of the humanitarian resolutions,
but he was told by a letter from the Secretary-General on
31 Jury 1968 that

82. I apologize to the representative of Jordan for having
asked to intervene at this time; but, listening time and again
to the distortions of the representative of Israel and to his
hypocritical
intentions of peace, to the claims of his
Government about peace, and in view of all that is taking
place in the area, it really takes a great deal of patience,
endurance and self-control to be able not to answer those
allegations.

“Under a strictly legal interpretation of Security
Council resolution 237(1967) of 14 June 1967 and
General Assembly resolution 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July of
1967 it is clear that (the humanitarian resolutions] do
not apply to minorities in the territories of even those
States most directly concerned. Operative paragraph 1 of
Security Council resolution 237 (1967) calls upon Israel
to ensure the safety, welfare and security of the inhabitants of the area where military operations have taken
place. This paragraph applies without question to the area
occupied by Israel since June 1967. Strictly interpreted it
would not, however, apply to Arabs in, for example,
Nazareth or Haifa, and of course could not apply to
Jewish persons in Arab States since paragraph 1 is
addressed solely to Israel” (see S/8699].

83. Time and again the representative of Israel has spoken
of Arab terror and Arab sabotage. But there are recent
things that I am sure everybody has witnessed and seen.
Take this issue of The New York Times of 14 August 1968,
which I have here in my hand. On page 45 there is an article
entitled “Israel firmly settled on Syrian heights”, and from
El Kuneitra the correspondent writes:
“If anyone harbours doubts about Israel’s plans for the
Golan heights, those doubts can be dispelled by a drive
through the rolling hills and prairie of the Syrian territory
she occupies.

This is the legal interpretation of the Legal Department of
the United Nations concerning the humanitarian resolutions.

“Eight Israeli settlements have been established in the
area in the 14 months since it was captured in the final
offensive of the six-day war in June, 1967. Two more are
under construction.”

88. I shall go no further except to say that despite all
these clear-cut statements, Israel still continues to prevent
the civilian population from returning to the occupied
territories in Jordan, in the United Arab Republic and in
Syria. Not only is this so, but the barbaric, inhuman torture
of the civilian population remaining there continues up to
the present time; the International Red Cross has been
prevented from investigating the situation and, of course,
Israel has also prevented the representative of the Secretary-General from going to the area, in implementation of
the two humanitarian resolutions, to report on the situation
there.

84. Then the article shows how tourists are taken over the
Golan heights and shown how restaurants have been built
there, in order to show them Israel’s final establishment in a
conquered, occupied territory. Supposing such a thing had
happened during the Nazi occupation of any part of Europe
and a newspaper published a similar article showing tourists
in the occupied territory, what would the reaction have
been then? Certainly one of disgust. And yet we have to
come here and listen to the representative of Israel speaking
about law but practising lawlessness.

89. Yet the representative of Israel, whose authorities are
torturing and killing prisoners and taking their blood to

85. Certainly, many representatives here have seen announcements in various magazines asking tourists to visit

1 Quoted in French by the speaker.
7

“The Bank pointed out that this increase waspartly due
to substantial purchases of Israeli Treasury bonds abroad.

hospitals, and committing all sorts of atrocities, comes here
to lecture the Council about Arab terrorism and Arab
sabotage, and about Israel’s respect for law-as though at its
very birth the State of Israel wasnot baptized in the blood
and the property of the Arabs. There is hardly any Israeli
village that does not up to this very time contain property
legally owned by Arabs. And yet ,this man comes here to
speak about law and preach about law.

“Following its conquests, Israel has also been able ta
reduce its petroleum imports by about a third, with a
saving of $5 million since June, thanks to exploitation of
the petroleum from Egyptian Sinai” ! 3
93. Those are not my words. They are the words of great
writers, of well-known authorities, about acknowledgements by the representatives and leaders of the State of
Israel of the benefits they received from the war. Up to this
time the representative of Israel, a country born in terror
and thirsty for Arab blood, has no right to come to the
Council and speak about law or respect for law.

90. I will not tax the patience of the Council any further.
However, the representative of Israel always comes richly
armed with quotations. This small book in my hand,
published recently in France, is called Contre Israel, and the
author is Pierre DBmeron.2 The dedication of the book is
very significant, and I might add before quoting it that the
author is a French citizen of the Jewish faith, a fact which
explains the book’s dedication. He says:

94. The PRESIDENT:

I give the floor to the representa-

tive of Israel.

“To the Palestinians whom the West has for the past
twenty years obliged to pay for its crimes against the
‘Jewsand its debts to them.

95. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): With every meeting my admira.
tion grows more and more for the wondrous achievements
of the Arab delegations in this Council in keeping their
statements strictly to the matters on the agenda. How the
Syrian representative succeeded in concluding his statement, which never ventured beyond the complaints before
the Council, without a single interruption from any quarter
is a mystery to me. Yet I admire him very much for his
success.

‘LT~ all the Arabs humilated and injured through them
and with them.
‘To Frenchmen bf Jewish orgin who refuse to be
accomplices to this ignominy”.3
91. A few pagesfurther on, the author of this book quotes
another great Jewish author and writer, a well.known
professor in political and international affairs, Isaac
Deutscher, also of the Jewish faith, who was once a
supporter of Israel but who revolted against the atrocities
of Israel after the war of 5 June. This is what Isaac
Deutscher says in his recent interview with the New Left
Review in the summer of 1967:

96. The Syrian representative expressed dislike for quotations when they are made by me, but, with his permission, I
should like to say that as I listened to him I wasreminded
of the words of Voltaire, who said: “My prayer to God is a
very simple one: ‘0 Lord, make my opponents ridiculous.’
God has granted it.” Indeed is it not ridiculous for a
country, adamant and persistent more than any other in its
belligerency against Israel, in flagrant violation of United
Nations precepts, to speak of obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations? Is it not absurd for a State that
rejected the November Security Council resolution and
refusesto admit the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Jarring, to preach international behaviour? Is it
not grotesque for a Government to speak of human
suffering when it persecutes Jews, exiles Christians, burns
Christian schools and oppresses Kurds?

“Even the memory of Auschwitz must not exert
pressure on us to induce us to support this evil cause. I
speak as a Marxist of Jewish origin who has seen part of
his family die in Auschwitz and who has relatives in
Israel.“3
92. However, the greatest and perhaps the most telling
story is that this aggressivewar, this continuing piracy by
Israel, is assessedin the following terms on pages 135 and
136 of this book:

97. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Syria has
asked for the floor in exercise-of the right of reply.

‘What is certain is that we have seldom seen a country,
attacked as Israel claims to have been, quicker to take
advantage of the aggression of which it has been the
victim. Never has ‘aggression’ been so profitable or more
rewarding. The six-day war cost Israel $600 million. The
fund-raising organized abroad brought it $1 milliard. The
country’s economy, which had slowed down on the eve
of the war, has been given a new impetus. The Israeli
State Bank has confirmed this in a communique stating:
‘The balance-of-payments deficit, which was$217 million
at the end of 1966, has been cut to $118 million and
foreign currency reservesshow an increase of $80 million
compared to 1966, reaching a total of $700 million at the
end of 1967’.

98. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, again I thank you
for allowing me to reply. I will do my very best to be
brief-for it really requires a great deal of effort to be brief.
99. Mr. Tekoah quoted Voltaire, but I remember two lines
by the great French poet, Alfred de Musset:
“Quelle m&e gaietk si triste et si profonde
“‘Que lorsqu ‘on vien t d ‘en rire on devrait en pleurer. ”

There is an equivalent Arab saying which could be
translated as follows: “The most bitter of tragedies is one
that makes you laugh.” He referred to the persecution of
Jews and Christians in Syria. It is really a matter to laugh
at, because it so happens that I am a Christian from Syria.

2 Paris,Pauvert,1968.
3 Quoted in French by the speaker.
8

Education has again stressed that Syrian Jews are not
enemies, but citizens like all others. I am even in a
position to state that the businesses of Jewish citizens are
still operating. All these facts are a tribute to you, and I
feel bound to emphasize them.“4

Not only that but, in all humility, I must say that I carry
the Order of Commander of St. Paul and St. Peter and I
belong to the Orthodox Church. That is enough to answer
him, but perhaps it would be appropriate to remind him
that of the martyrs who were hanged during the time when
Syria was fighting for its freedom against occupiers a great
many were Christian leaders from the Arab Christian
community in Syria.

That is from a letter dated 1 June 1968 from the
representative of the International Red Cross, operating
freely in Syria.

100. As for the Jews in Syria, I have already quoted the
text of a letter addressed by the representative of the
International Red Cross who came to Damascus and
investigated very freely the situation of the Jews in Syria.
This is what he said in a letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the Ministry of the Interior of Syria:

101. I said that I would be very brief, and I shall not
answer all the ridiculous allegations which only display a
very inherent cynicism and sadism in the Zionist mentality
of the speaker. He spoke about God. He should refrain
from mentioning God, because for him to mention the
word “God” is to desecrate that sacred word.

“I know that the Syrian Government provided protection for the Jewish quarter during the events of June
1967; I know that recently a Syrian citizen of the Mosaic
religion suffering from cancer was transferred through the
Government’s good offices to a Beirut hospital. Further=
more, a statement broadcast by the Ministry of National

The meeting rose at 6 pm.
4 See Official Records of the Security Council, lluenty-third
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1968, document
S/8689.

9

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

LES PUt3LlCATlONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

UNIES

Ler publications
der Notions
Unier
sent en vente
dons
tes librairier
et les agencer
dbporitoires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vow
oupr.3
de votre
libroirie
ou adrersez-vou.s
A:
Nations
Unier,
Section
des venter, New York ov Genive.

COMO

C~NSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

La% publfcociones
de Ios Nacioner
Unidar
est6n
en todor porter
del mundo.
Consulte
o IV librero
Yentas, Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

UNIDAS

en vcnto en libreriar
o dirijasc
o: Nocioner

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

y cosos distribuidoror
Unidos,
Seccidn

currencies)

de

3Sfj60-October

1972--?,Os@
