S/PV.8443

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8443rd meeting

Friday, 11 January 2019, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/6)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-00738 (E)
*1900738*

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.

have just joined the Security Council, including your
own, Mr. President.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2019/6)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Zambia to participate in
today’s meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Malanji, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia, who is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Johannesburg.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo, President of the
Commission électorale nationale indépendante; Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, President of the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo.
Ms. Zerrougui, Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo and
Monseigneur Utembi are joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/6, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I would like to
welcome the representatives of the five countries that
2/27

11/01/2019

While in principle our discussions were supposed
to focus on the latest quarterly report on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/6), I will
limit my remarks to the most recent facts.
The implementation of the electoral process
is entering its final stages. The elections initially
announced for 23 December were finally held on
30 December throughout the national territory, with the
exception of the cities of Beni and Butembo in North
Kivu and Yumbi in Mai-Ndombe province, where
the Commission électorale nationale indépendante
decided to postpone them to next March for health and
security reasons.
Millions of Congolese went to the polls, often
with fervour and, in the vast majority of cases, voting
took place peacefully as voters went to choose their
future President and their national and provincial
representatives. I would like to congratulate them on
the impressive maturity they showed on that longawaited election day and since then. I also commend
the work done by the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante, as well as the election observers.
All national and international observation missions,
as well as the teams of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) that are deployed in the
field, reported in their preliminary reports that the
elections were conducted correctly despite technical,
logistical and security problems. All agreed that those
difficulties had not, however, hindered the freedom
of movement of citizens or the exercise of their right
to vote. The waiting period for the publication of the
provisional results, which was extended by three days,
was also calm. Once again, I was greatly impressed by
the patience shown by Congolese men and women, who
were anxious to preserve and protect the expression of
their votes, but above all fully aware of the importance
of those elections for the future of their country.
I used that time to meet with the country’s President
and the main stakeholders in the electoral process to
convey the importance of ensuring calm in anticipation
of the publication of the provisional results, which
were announced overnight on Wednesday to Thursday
and which, for the presidential election, Mr. Félix
Tshisekedi is in first place, followed by Mr. Martin
Fayulu and Mr. Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary. That
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

message was preceded by the announcement of the
provisional results of the provincial elections.
(spoke in English)
Reactions to the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante’s announcement were swift and varied.
Mr. Tshisekedi welcomed his victory and vowed to
be a President for all Congolese. Although the Front
commun pour le Congo stated that it would respect the
Commission’s results, the Lamuka coalition denounced
what it called electoral fraud, with the potential to
provoke disorder throughout the country. While the
results were greeted by scenes of joy in some strongholds
of the Union pour la nation congolaise and the Union
pour la démocratie et le progrès social, many Lamuka
supporters received the news with a sense of disbelief.
Regrettably, serious security incidents were
noted in several locations. Most concerning, in Kwilu
province, violent protests reportedly left at least
12 dead, including two national police lynched and
10 civilians killed by live ammunition, as well as
significant damage to public property. Our teams are in
the process of deploying to Kikwit, where MONUSCO
has no presence, to ascertain further details and engage
with a view to de-escalating tensions. In Kisangani and
several locations in Kasai province, incidents of clashes
and destruction have been reported, with injuries,
arrests and possible deaths still being verified.
The situation has also been tense in several
communes in Kinshasa, following clashes between
supporters of Lamuka and Cap pour le changement
supporters, and in some cases also with the police. I
deplore all such acts of violence and appeal to the
Congolese people and security forces alike to exercise
calm and restraint in this critical period.
The week ahead may be characterized by a period
of contestation and a judicial review of provisional
presidential results, with the final results expected
to be announced by the Constitutional Court within
a week. The coming days are therefore critical to the
conclusion of this historic electoral process. I continue
to discharge my good offices by engaging with all
Congolese stakeholders to reinforce the need for calm
and recourse to established judicial procedures, as well
as to emphasize that a supreme sense of responsibility
must prevail in the days ahead.
Millions of Congolese women and men have
demonstrated their commitment to the political process

S/PV. 8443

in their country and their determination to exercise
their democratic right to vote. We must therefore show
our collective solidarity with them as the electoral
process is finalized and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo prepares to undertake the first peaceful transfer
of power in the country’s history.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo.
Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo (spoke in French): The
Democratic Republic of the Congo just held its
presidential, legislative and provincial elections on
Sunday, 30 December 2018, in accordance with national
legislation, specifically the country’s Constitution and
the organic law on the organization of the operations of
the Commission électorale nationale indépendante, as
well as the general law. Of course, that architecture is
complemented by other laws and regulations pertaining
to the organization of elections.
Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to inform the Security Council that, three years after I
was appointed President of the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante, we have now reached what
could be considered the culmination of our work. I
would note that the process was fraught with numerous
difficulties. As such, some would have thought it
not humanly possible for me to now be able to share
positive results.
The reason for that is that the process is rife with
constraints and, above all, mistrust. There is total
mistrust among the actors themselves, among the
politicians and with regard to the electoral process
itself, as well as between the Government and other
actors, such as the international community, and
even sometimes towards me, the President of the
Commission électorale nationale indépendante.
Since I became President, not a day goes by without
someone demanding that President Nangaa resign. This
environment made it very difficult for us to carry out
our work. Nevertheless, some of the obstacles could
have been avoided because they were rooted in mistrust,
innuendo, suspicions and other factors.
With regard to the registration of voters on the
electoral rolls, everything was called into question. Of
all the decisions taken by Electoral Commission, there
is not one that is not challenged by this or that group
or stakeholder, including the international community,

19-007383/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

which, at times, surprises us with positions entirely
divorced from reality, when in fact they are partners
with whom we work day and night.
As for voter registration, we conducted seven
rounds and, thank God, have ended up with 40 million
registered voters. Since then, even the 40 million voters
have been challenged because some believe that we are
overstating or understating the number of voters, or
that we have somehow made a mistake.
The electoral register was audited by the
International Organization of la Francophonie.
The Electoral Commission believed that the audit
conducted at its request would help to build confidence.
Unfortunately, the audit cast more doubt than expected.
Thereafter, we were able to adopt all the laws required
to conduct the process. Unfortunately, all the laws that
were adopted have been challenged.
We have assembled the electorate and even the
candidates, and we carry out our functions in accordance
with the mission entrusted to us by the Constitution.
Some of the Electoral Commission’s decisions have
been challenged, and some consider themselves to be
the experts instead of the Commission for one reason or
another. We registered 21 candidates for the presidential
election. We also registered approximately 15,358
candidates for national elections and 19,640 candidates
for provincial elections.
In order to facilitate successful elections, the
Commission
électorale
nationale
indépendante
introduced technology in the form of what are known
as voting machines. Even those machines have been
the object of a year of bickering — saying no to the
voting machine, we do not want it, it is for cheating, it is
for this or that purpose. Regrettably, some candidates,
even a week before the elections, were still telling their
supporters not to use the voting machines. The elections
nevertheless took place, and that is what is important. It
was held on 30 December, and even the critics who did
not want voting machines now welcome the holding of
the elections.
I hold the Security Council somewhat accountable
because, from the perspective of the Electoral
Commission, these unhelpful discussions have been
supported, and even created, by the international
community. For obvious reasons, the voting machines
had no problems and events proved us right, but the
fact that this matter was escalated to the international
4/27

11/01/2019

level is a little embarrassing and creates a very
complicated situation.
The election took place, and before giving the
Commission’s analysis, it is very clear that on Sunday,
30 December, when many were predicting chaos,
saying that we would not be able to vote with the voting
machines and that elections would not be possible,
the elections were held. Everyone was able to vote
and today, unlike in 2006 and 2011, the election took
place on 30 December in an atmosphere of peace.
Whereas in the past there were casualties, the election
on 30 December went well and everything proceeded
rather smoothly.
After the elections it was necessary to move on to the
post-electoral phase, which consists of two important
elements. The first is, of course, the collection and
processing of data for the announcement of provisional
results, in accordance with the law. That is what the
Electoral Commission has been working on, and two
days ago it was able to announce the provisional results
of the elections. Of course, we must not be under any
illusions — something that was also said even before
the elections. We were indeed anticipating reactions,
starting with the Catholic Church. It should be noted
that the Catholic Church challenged the results in 2006
and 2011, and it is now challenging the result of the 2018
election. That is no surprise. It is what we expected for
well-known reasons.
Of course, when elections are held, there are many
stakeholders and everything must be done in accordance
with the law. Far be it from us to announce from this
forum that the election was organized flawlessly. It is
a human undertaking that was organized against the
backdrop of well-known challenges, but the key point
is that what is important has been safeguarded. We
are in our third election cycle and the elections have
taken place.
In a letter dated 4 January, we protested against the
unlawful announcement of election results by persons
and bodies legally incompetent to do so. We addressed
that correspondence to the President of the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO) by clearly
identifying the articles of the Constitution, the various
laws and other texts that were systematically violated
by the early announcements of the trends in the results.
What is worse is that we went so far as to say that they
knew the name of the person who would have won,
which was surprising. We drew CENCO’s attention to
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the fact that this trend and this issue being managed
in this way obliged the stakeholders to refrain from
commenting on publications and trends in election
results and that they would be responsible for what
would happen in that regard.
Why are we saying that? There are many elements
that we would like to make available to the Security
Council. We have here a list of all the organizations and
the witnesses of the political parties who participated in
the monitoring of the elections. We tend to think that it
was just the Catholic Church that observed. No, dozens
of organizations did so as well. I have heard that 40,000
CENCO observers were deployed. That is very serious.
The observation was deployed on the basis of the
accreditation of the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante.
Accreditation statistics for CENCO have never
reached the figures that are put forward. We have 17,000
observers accredited by the Commission. We are told
that, apart from the accredited observers, there were
others who were not accredited by the Commission.
Of course, in addition, there are more than 6,000 other
observers who are considered permanent or longterm observers, and therefore we have approximately
20,000 to 23,000 observers. I do not know where the
40,000 observers come from. On that issue, there is a
fundamental question.
Observation missions are organized and managed
by the law. The observers are not tasked with compiling
data. I do not know where the CENCO results are from.
The observers are not qualified to obtain, at the polling
station level, the various reports and cards, which
are rather issued to witnesses of the political parties.
Should I take that to mean that the CENCO observation
mission conducted itself as a witness of the political
parties? I would be interested to know which party it
favoured. Those are serious issues, and I challenge
anybody who may claim that they have collected all of
the records. For the Commission itself to do so, it would
have taken nearly a week. These are serious issues.
Having said that, we announced the results in
accordance with the law. I believe that the Commission
is of the view that it has done its job. If there is a dispute,
the law provides for verification mechanisms and other
mechanisms, and I think that there are competent courts
to do that. Nevertheless, we would like to make it clear
to the Security Council that we seem to be losing sight

S/PV. 8443

of the objectives that were the reason for this process. I
believe that there are three main objectives.
The first objective is that the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo did not want their
Constitution to be changed. The Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was not changed.
That was a victory for the opposition, the majority and
civil society. It was a victory for the opposition because
it more or less demonstrated that we are in a country
where there is an opposition that does not allow the
authorities to do whatever they want. It was a victory
for the majority and those in power because, by not
changing the Constitution, they could also consider
making a forced transition, but they did not do so. It
was a victory for civil society, which has always sought
to defend the Constitution, because that objective
was achieved.
The second objective, which I underscored for the
Congolese people, is that the Congolese people did not
want there to be a third term for the Head of State, the
outgoing President of the Republic. Indeed, he did not
run as a candidate, which reflects the fact that we had
21 candidates other than him. That is a victory that has
been achieved.
The third objective is that we have achieved a
handover of power at the highest level of the State.
This handover of power is all the more important for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as for the first
time in the 60 years of its post-independence existence,
we will experience in the weeks to come a handover
of power between an outgoing Head of State and an
incoming Head of State. For the very first time, we will
see how, as is done in other countries, the two Heads of
State greet one another. Indeed, over the course of 60
years we have had four Presidents: President Kasavubu,
President Mobutu, President Laurent-Désiré Kabila
and President Joseph Kabila. The first four Presidents
succeeded one another without ever engaging with one
another — either through coups or assassinations. We
will have the first peaceful handover of power in the
weeks to come, of course after having processed all the
documents and dossiers pertaining to the provisional
results. The Commission stands ready; its team has
already been put together to manage the challenges.
In conclusion, what should I say? You, Mr. President,
invited me to take part in this meeting. In about 30
minutes after my statement, we will proclaim the
provisional results of the national legislative elections.

19-007385/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This is an election conducted under circumstances
of which we are all aware. However, to general
surprise, the elections were well organized. In that
regard, we wish to pay tribute to the Commission’s
representatives. A large number of them — 32 agents
of the Commission — perished during this process. We
pay tribute to them by noting that we have achieved
what we sought to achieve, what the Congolese people
have been awaiting all this time. That is briefly what I
wanted to note.
I will conclude by stating that the Commission
worked under difficult conditions with constant
challenges, whether the controversies were fabricated
not. However, regardless of the difficulties encountered,
it has done what it was able to do. We also say that we
were not perfect. The Commission, through me, asks for
indulgence for every time we made a mistake. However,
the essential thing is that the results are within reach
today and that it is time, with the beginning of this
new mandate, for the new authorities to be supported
by the international community as always. Why should
one try to weaken them when they have not even taken
their first steps yet? Yes, there may be challenges from
various quarters. We believe that the competent courts
will take care of the rest. We expect to submit the final
reports of the process, which will lead us, more or less,
to the first peaceful and civilized handover of power in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without
thanking the United Nations. Some believed that
the Commission received only logistical support for
the process. That is not true. We wish to thank the
United Nations for its ongoing technical assistance to
the Commission. More than 150 international experts
work alongside us in the same building. Only badges
distinguish a Commission employee from a United
Nations employee. The relationship was decisive in
the planning stages, the concept and design of certain
processes and for our reporting. We would also like
to thank other actors and stakeholders, including the
political parties, who participated in the process.
The Congolese voiced their views. Today we have a
President-elect. We hope that the process will continue
until he is officially sworn in as President.
I also wish to draw the attention of members to
the fact that there is controversy. There are only two
options for addressing it: either confirm the result of
the Commission or cancel the election. Cancelling the
election would mean that current institutions would
6/27

11/01/2019

remain in place because we will not have a President
until new elections are organized.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: First of all, I would like to convey
to you, Mr. President, the greetings of Chairperson
Moussa Faki Mahamat and his thanks for the invitation
extended to the African Union Commission to brief the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular on the recently
held elections in that country.
That invitation is a further illustration of the
close partnership that exists between the African
Union and the United Nations on matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The partnership has been significantly strengthened
over the past few years. One its main features is the
promotion of African leadership and ownership as a
key principle for ensuring sustainable solutions to the
peace and security issues of concern to the continent.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a matter of the utmost importance to the
African Union. Peace and security in the Congo is
critical to the well-being of its people, but also to the
overall stability and prosperity of the region and the
continent as a whole. The African Union has therefore
been actively involved in efforts to assist the Congolese
stakeholders in reaching the required political
consensus towards the holding of the recent free, fair
and transparent elections, in order to consolidate the
gains made over the past decades. Let me take this
opportunity to also express the African Union’s deep
appreciation to the United Nations for its invaluable
support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including through the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
In that context, the African Union, in response to
the invitation received from the Congolese authorities,
decided to dispatch an election observation mission to
monitor the polls that took place 30 December 2018.
The African Union deployed 80 long- and short-term
observers, under the leadership of former President
Dioncounda Traoré of Mali. The team included members
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the Pan-African Parliament and election management
bodies on the continent, as well as civil society
representatives. On election day, the African Union
election mission deployed 23 teams in 13 provinces,
which observed voting and tallying operations in 317
polling stations that served as samples. It is important
to highlight that there were 75,000 polling stations in
total, including those located in the provinces where
the voting was eventually postponed due to security
and health concerns.
The mission made the following observations
relating to the polling stations it visited. First, the polling
stations opened on time, although in some of them
the commencement of voting operations was delayed.
Secondly, voting materials were available in most of the
polling stations and polling staff was present throughout
the operations. Thirdly, the elections took place in a calm
and peaceful atmosphere. There were, however, isolated
incidents of violence and shortcomings that marred
the voting operation. Fourthly, the representatives of
the candidates were present in all the visited polling
stations. And, fifthly, closing and tallying operations
were conducted in accordance with the existing legal
framework. The observation mission strongly urged
that, first, the results that will be proclaimed should
reflect the will of the people. Secondly, the Congolese
stakeholders should preserve the climate of peace that
prevailed during the voting. And, thirdly, any challenge
to the result should be channelled through the existing
legal process.
As members are all aware, the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante proclaimed the
provisional results of the elections yesterday. As far
as the presidential election is concerned, Mr. Félix
Tshisekedi, from Cap pour le changement, was declared
the winner. Given that the Commission is the only legally
mandated body to proclaim the results of the elections
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union can rely only on the outcome as announced. It is
important to note in that connection that the African
Union election observation methodology focuses on
the process that leads to the outcomes of the elections.
Additionally, given the limited number of polling
stations that were observed by the election observation
mission, the African Union, even if it were granted that
power, is not in a position to provide figures on the
outcome of the election.
Obviously, the results that were announced, while
welcomed by Congolese stakeholders and part of the

S/PV. 8443

population, have been challenged by others, including
in street protests that led to unfortunate loss of life.
In line with the rule of law, it is the African Union’s
position that such challenges, including claims relating
to discrepancies between the proclaimed results and
the verdict of the ballot boxes, should be addressed
peacefully and through recourse to existing legal
avenues and political dialogue.
Clearly, the 30 December 2018 elections were a
watershed in the history of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Congolese people and the institutions
involved in the electoral process should be commended
for their efforts. The Congolese stakeholders owe it
to their people and their country to act in a manner
that fosters democracy and preserves peace. In that
respect, the African Union is of the strong view that
the current situation in the Congo calls for as large a
consensus as possible among all Congolese based on
respect for democracy and human rights, as well as the
maintenance and consolidation of peace. The African
Union is ready to assist to that end in any way deemed
to be appropriate.
The statements issued by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Chairperson of
the Southern African Development Community on
10 and 11 January, respectively, clearly articulate the
views of the continent on the issue at hand. It is our
hope that the Security Council, as it has done before,
will extend full support to the African-led efforts to
assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
people to successfully complete the electoral process
and overcome related challenges. That approach is the
surest path towards effectively achieving our shared
objective of peace, democracy and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mohammed for her briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Malanji, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia.
Mr. Malanji (Zambia): As you have indicated,
Mr. President, I am Honourable Malanji, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia and Chairperson of
the Ministerial Committee of the Organ on Politics,
Defence and Security Cooperation of Southern African
Development Community (SADC). Allow me to deliver
this statement to this meeting of the Security Council.

19-007387/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/01/2019

On 30 December 2018, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo held its much-awaited presidential,
legislative and provincial elections. In line with its longstanding tradition, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) deployed its electoral observer
mission, which I had the honour to lead. The elections
were postponed from 23 December 2018 following
an unfortunate fire that gutted the warehouse of the
Commission électorale nationale indépendante in the
capital city of Kinshasa. No party could ascertain
whether it was arson. On that premise, we therefore
consider it an act of force majeure. Security threats and
an outbreak of the Ebola virus also necessitated the
postponement of the elections to March 2019 in three
areas of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
that regard, for us not to be biased, we had to receive
communication from the World Health Organization,
which provided us with clear statistics indicating the
existence of the Ebola virus in those areas. Furthermore,
there were isolated incidences of violence in a few areas
of the country. Such circumstances understandably
created some tension leading up to the election day on
30 December 2018.

allow me to quote some paragraphs of the statement of
His Excellency Mr. Edgar Chagwa Lungu, President of
the Republic of Zambia and Chairperson of the Organ:

Notwithstanding the abovementioned and the
historical challenges facing the country, our considered
view is that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante and all stakeholders managed the elections
and the immediate post-election period relatively
peacefully and in a calm atmosphere. In addition, we
note that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo funded the elections, thereby showing its
commitment to consolidating the democratic process in
the country.

I now give the floor to Monseigneur Utembi.

SADC has taken note of the release of the
provisional results of the presidential election provided
by the Electoral Commission on 9 January. We also
note that there are some stakeholders that are not
satisfied with the outcome of the presidential election
in particular and that it is within their constitutional
right to present their grievances through the legal
framework of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in a peaceful way. SADC remains on hand to assist the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
process of consolidating their democracy and urges the
international community to give stakeholders in the
country an opportunity to engage themselves and their
legal institutions in the post-election period. I know that
it has already been mentioned by other stakeholders, but
8/27

“SADC further takes note of the disputes
that have arisen, and encourages all concerned
stakeholders to remain calm and act in a way that
consolidates democracy and preserves peace.
“SADC calls upon stakeholders with concerns,
including regarding the accuracy of the results, to
pursue any election dispute about the provisional
results peacefully through the avenues provided
by the existing national legal framework, and to
resolve their differences through political dialogue
among all stakeholders.
“SADC reaffirms its commitment to continue
to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
respect to neutralizing the negative forces and other
armed groups operating in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Malanji for his briefing.
Monseigneur Utembi (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo
(CENCO) and in my personal capacity, we would like to
sincerely thank the Secretary-General and the members
of the Security Council for the special attention that
they pay daily to the situation in our country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the beginning of
this new year of 2019, we would like to express our best
wishes to them. We are pleased to have this opportunity
to provide a general overview of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, focusing on a
few points.
First, recalling the sociopolitical commitment of the
Church, since 2003, the Catholic Church has supported
the Congolese people through numerous actions,
in particular through civic and electoral education,
to promote the dignity of the human person and to
strengthen democracy in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That commitment was also expressed
through mediation, which resulted in the comprehensive
and inclusive political agreement known as the SaintSylvestre agreement, which essentially focused on the
electoral process to ensure the legitimacy of the elected
institutions. Through a pastoral approach, CENCO
enabled the parties involved in the electoral process to
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

resolve certain differences and to reach agreement, inter
alia, on the electoral register and on the use of voting
machines for the elections that have just taken place.
With regard to the electoral mission, CENCO
participated in observing the elections through its
Justice and Peace Commission in order to contribute to
the credibility of the electoral process in our country.
For the presidential, national and provincial legislative
elections of 30 December 2018, CENCO’s electoral
observer mission trained 41,026 short-term and longterm observers. It obtained the accreditation of 40,850
observers. One hundred and seventy-six candidates did
not receive accreditation. However, they assisted in
monitoring incidents outside the polling centres.
From the pool of accredited observers, at least one
was deployed to each of the 21,784 polling stations
throughout the entire country. That represents 100 per
cent comprehensive coverage of the polling stations,
as foreseen by the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante, with a ratio of one observer to every
one to two polling stations. Of the 40,850 observers,
959 were deployed to Beni, the cities of Beni and
Butembo, and Yumbi. Rather than the 40,000 shortterm observers who were initially planned for, only
39,824 were effectively deployed. Until the very
moment when text messaging services were cut off,
the CENCO observer mission had already received at
least 43 per cent of the data transmitted by its observers
in areas covered by mobile-phone networks, as well as
those who were in areas lacking such coverage but had
access to Thuraya satellite phones. It is worth noting
that our observer mission worked synergetically with
other accredited observers, in particular those of the
Church of Christ in the Congo and of the Synergie des
Missions d’Observation Citoyenne des Elections, but
it worked independently from all parties and political
platforms and received no financing from them.
With respect to methodology, in terms of the
collection and transmission of data, the CENCO observer
mission had a data collection and analysis hub with a
call centre staffed by 408 agents who were in contact
with observers on the ground. In order to enable data
to be transmitted back to the centre from areas lacking
cell-phone network coverage, during the period when
texting service was suspended, the CENCO observer
mission had the use of 600 Thuraya telephones, which
enabled the CENCO mission to collect data relating to
more than 13,110,999 of the 18,329,318 votes cast that
were reported by the Commission électorale nationale

S/PV. 8443

indépendante, which translates into more than 71.53 per
cent of legitimately cast votes counted by CENCO.
In terms of analysis, in order to analyse the
number of votes received by the various candidates for
the presidency of the Republic, the CENCO election
observer mission used a parallel vote tabulation based on
a representative sample of 10.72 per cent of the polling
stations, applied proportionally to each of the electoral
wards of the provincial deputies, that is, territories in
rural areas and communes in urban areas, resulting
in a sample of 7,886 polling stations for parallel vote
tabulation. That sample was selected randomly and has
a strict margin of error of 1 per cent, with a confidence
level of 95 per cent. In addition, a further verification
measure was taken based on a representative sample
of 42.92 per cent of the votes legitimately cast that
confirmed the trends just mentioned. Lastly, voting
trends remained relatively similar following the
counting of 71.53 per cent of the legitimately cast votes.
Concerning the 30 December 2018 holding of
elections, voting took place throughout the entire
country, with the exception of a few areas, namely,
Beni territory and the cities of Beni and Butembo,
in North Kivu province, and Yumbi territory, in Mai
Ndombe province. Our observers noted a significant
level of voter participation, although some of them were
unable to participate effectively in the voting owing to
unforeseen circumstances.
The provisional results of the 30 December 2018
elections were made public by the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante on 10 January.
CENCO took note of the publication of the provisional
results, which make it possible, for the first time in
our country’s recent history, to embark upon the path
leading to a peaceful transition of power at the highest
levels of the State. However, in its analysis of certain
elements that it has considered objectively, the CENCO
observer mission noted that the results of the presidential
election, as they appear in the publication issued by
the Commission électorale nationale indépendante,
do not correspond to the data collected by the mission
originating at the polling and counting stations.
We call for a recommendation to be made based
on the solidarity of the United Nations with the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
call on the Security Council to ask the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante to publish, as soon
as possible, the records of the polling stations so as

19-007389/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to enable candidates to compare their data with that
of the Commission. That would dispel any doubts
regarding the number of votes among the people and
the candidates, and thereby put their minds at ease. In
the case of any potential challenge to the outcome, the
Security Council could invite the relevant stakeholders
to prioritize the path of truth and peace, which would
go a long way towards maintaining peace and stability
in our country.
In conclusion, in reiterating CENCO’s sincere
gratitude to the Security Council, we once again wish
members a happy 2019 and commend the Council to
God so that, through its constructive deliberations,
peace can be achieved in our country, the Democratic
Republic of Congo.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Monseigneur Utembi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, to whom I wish once again to pay tribute; the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia; the President
of the Commission électorale nationale indépendante;
the President of the Conférence épiscopale nationale
du Congo; and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations for their important
interventions. It is vital that the Security Council gain
a broader perspective on the conduct of the elections,
including through the assessments of the organizations
that carried out electoral observation missions on the
ground, alongside civil-society organizations.
France wishes first of all to pay tribute to the
Congolese people as a whole, who demonstrated
patience when the elections were postponed for more
than two years and who turned up in large numbers on
30 December to exercise their right to vote. While there
were many technical and political pitfalls during those
two years and numerous hiccups in the implementation
of the agreement of 31 December 2016, what we will
remember most of all is the image of those Congolese
who queued up in an orderly manner, sometimes for
several hours, in order to exercise their right to freely
choose their representatives. That is an example of
democratic vitality that France wishes to commend.
10/27

11/01/2019

France also extends its congratulations to the
political actors, civil society and relevant institutions
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the
organization of the elections, which were held under
conditions that were deemed satisfactory, despite some
irregularities, by the international election observation
missions of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the Southern African Development
Community and the African Union. France commends
the work of the observer missions and of Congolese
civil society, whose presence throughout the country
contributed to the smooth conduct of the vote.
The process is not over. The Commission électorale
nationale indépendante announced provisional results on
10 January regarding part of the provincial elections, as
well as the presidential election. France is now awaiting
the publication by the Commission of the results of the
legislative elections, as well as the compilation of the
minutes for the provincial elections and the detailed
results of the presidential elections. The initial results
have been disputed publicly. Congolese law provides for
remedies and, as the African Union has pointed out, it
is vital that any challenge to the results, in particular in
relation to a discrepancy between them and the verdict
of the ballot boxes, be carried out peacefully through
existing legal procedures and political dialogue among
all stakeholders.
In this crucial period, France renews its appeal to
all parties to stay calm. It calls on all actors concerned
to demonstrate responsibility and to foster national
consensus, based on respect for democratic principles
and the will expressed at the polls by Congolese
voters, as well as for human rights and civil peace.
These elections represent a historic moment for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that could lead to
the first peaceful alternation of power in the history
of the country as well as to the strengthening of its
democratic institutions. That would be the culmination
of a cycle that began in Sun City, South Africa, 16
years ago.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has taken
important steps in recent weeks towards that goal.
France stands with the Congolese nation and people and
will accompany them on their path, while respecting
the democratic choice made by the Congolese. In that
context, France will propose to States members of the
Council to adopt as soon as possible a press statement
welcoming the conduct of the elections, calling on
all parties to engage calmly in the next stages of the
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

process and inviting them to build national consensus
in respect for the law and in the service of peace.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We convey sincere greetings to all of the
speakers who are with us this morning representing the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante, the African Union,
the Southern African Development Community and
the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo, and
we welcome the presence of the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at this important
meeting. We welcome their interventions, which help
provide us with a full understanding of the situation
under consideration this morning.
We commend and value positively the high level of
determination and commitment of the Government, the
political parties, the Electoral Commission, civil society
and the Catholic Church, but above all the attitude of
the Congolese people, who have demonstrated their
great sense of historical responsibility. We also thank
all the regional and international actors who have
accompanied the Congolese people on the long journey
that culminated on 30 December with the conduct of
fair, transparent and peaceful elections. The Congolese
people, in spite of alarmist predictions, managed to
overcome the many political, logistical and technical
challenges in an authentic democratic election that the
African continent is proud of and that undoubtedly
constitutes a decisive step towards the consolidation
of democracy, peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the subregion.
In accordance with the official declaration of
the African Union following the publication of the
provisional results of the presidential elections, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on all the political
actors and the general population of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, at this crucial juncture in
the country’s political situation, to remain calm and
exercise restraint, prudence and moderation in order
to preserve an atmosphere of peace, tranquillity
and national harmony in this post-election period.
Equatorial Guinea believes that any claim or assertion
challenging the results should be made through the
legal institutions of the country that are competent in
such cases, so that the way to a peaceful transfer of
power to the victorious candidate may be opened, in
accordance with the Constitution of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

S/PV. 8443

In the same vein, we ask regional and international
actors to remain politically neutral and to refrain from
carrying out actions or making statements that could
alter the development of events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is very important that the
Congolese themselves take the reins of their destiny at
this historic moment.
We believe that, at such a decisive and delicate
moment of its history, all of the Congolese people must
prioritize the supreme interests of their country over
their personal interests in order to guarantee a peaceful
transfer of power in accordance with the Constitution
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
agreement of 31 December 2016. We would also like
to recall that elections cannot be considered as a zerosum game, where the winners take all and the losers
get nothing.
We cannot conclude without conveying our best
wishes for calm, tranquillity and peace to the brotherly
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and reminding all political actors to abide by their
commitment to the road map until power has been
transferred effectively, in an atmosphere of solemnity,
pride and national harmony, thereby opening up a new
chapter in the history of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have listened attentively — extremely
attentively, even — to today’s briefers, and we thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo,
Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Mr. Joseph Malanji, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, and Monseigneur Utembi
for their information.
We have taken note of the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante’s publication of the preliminary
results of the presidential elections held on 30 December.
As we understand it, in accordance with the election
law of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
official outcomes of an election must be certified by the
Constitutional Court, after which the inauguration of
the elected Head of State will take place. We view the
holding of the presidential elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as an important step in the
gradual normalization of the situation in this major
African country, which has been experiencing internal
political tensions for several decades, and we hope to
see Congolese society making further progress on the
path to political and socioeconomic development.

19-0073811/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We note that the elections were held peacefully, and
we respect Kinshasa’s right to postpone the voting in
areas where there are security problems or where the
Ebola outbreak has not yet been stamped out. We note
the generally positive reports by the regional observer
missions from the Southern African Development
Community and the African Union. We agree with the
observers’ opinion that the fact that the elections took
place is in itself a major victory for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and we commend
the efforts of the Government and the Electoral
Commission in that regard.
In our view, the parties in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should resolve potential disputes about
election issues through legal channels, and we join the
Secretary-General in his call to that effect. We hope
that the country’s political actors can display calm,
patience and a commitment to exclusively legal and
peaceful methods of political expression. We consider
any pressure on the country’s judiciary or the Electoral
Commission unacceptable.
We would like to remind those who have been
actively commenting on the elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that the right to certify election
results is the sovereign prerogative of that country’s
relevant authorized bodies. We urge the international
community to behave responsibly in that regard and
to avoid any interpretations of issues related to the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We believe that at the moment any speculation
about the published voting results is not simply
inappropriate and a violation of the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but could have farreaching repercussions for the stability of the country
and the entire Great Lakes region.
We hope that during this critical period the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will adhere strictly
to its mandate under resolution 2409 (2018). Right
now it is especially important to maintain the unity
of the Security Council and take a calm and balanced
approach to the situation without interfering in the
domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in full respect for its sovereignty.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to begin by thanking Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing
and for her efforts to promote peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also listened
12/27

11/01/2019

attentively to the briefings by Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo,
President of the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante, Ambassador Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union (AU) to the United
Nations, Mr. Malanji, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia, and Monseigneur Utembi, representing the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo.
On 30 December, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo held its presidential, National Assembly
and provincial assembly elections, in which nearly
20 million people voted. Regional organizations such
as the AU and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) sent observers, and on the whole
the election process was peaceful, stable and smooth.
The Electoral Commission announced the preliminary
results on 9 January. All this testifies to the strong desire
of the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to safeguard peace and stability
based on Congolese ownership and on their aspirations
to achieve a smooth transfer of power through peaceful
elections. China commends the Government and the
Commission for their efforts.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is now at a
historic juncture. A peaceful handover of power is in the
interests of its people and will be conducive to peace,
stability and development in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Africa as a whole. We see elections
as a country’s internal affair. We believe that the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
the ability and wisdom to resolve the issues involved
in their own way, and we hope that the Congolese
parties will remain calm, show restraint and resolve
their differences through dialogue and negotiation with
a view to maintaining peace and stability. We believe
that the international community should focus on the
following three priorities.
First, the international community should show
full respect for the country’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity and for the authority of the
Commission électorale nationale indépendante.
Secondly, in order for the international community
to continue to assist the Government in maintaining
internal peace and stability, we are keen to see the AU,
SADC and other regional organizations continuing to
lead the mediation efforts. We encourage the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to help
the Government as and when it is needed. Thirdly, we
should maintain active humanitarian assistance to the
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of the Congo. Last year, as the
security situation in certain parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo improved, approximately
1 million displaced people returned home. Nonetheless,
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo continues to face challenges and the
level of food insecurity is especially serious. China
calls for vigorous support from various quarters of
the international community. The Ebola epidemic in
the country’s north-east remains dire and requires the
continued support of the international community for
the work of the World Health Organization and the
International Committee of the Red Cross in order to
enable them to effectively respond to the outbreak and
contain its further spread.
China has been a staunch and long-standing
supporter of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and is actively involved in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in the country.
We will continue to provide medical, food and other
humanitarian assistance, remain actively engaged in
its economic and social development and do our part
for peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I
would first like to thank Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo, representing
the Commission électorale nationale indépendante,
Ms. Mohammed, the Permanent Observer of the
African Union (AU), Mr. Malanji, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia, representing the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and Monseigneur
Utembi, representing the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO).
I would like to focus my statement this morning on
three key points.
First, Belgium is and will remain a staunch partner
of the Congolese people, in a spirit of solidarity with
them. Since November 2016 and the signing of the
Saint-Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016, the
entire Congolese people, from the Atlantic coast to
Virunga, from Gbadolite to Lubumbashi, had been
awaiting the holding of inclusive, transparent, credible
and peaceful elections. The holding of such elections
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was crucial,
as this represents an important stage in the process
of peacebuilding and promoting security and lasting,
inclusive development not only in the country, but also

S/PV. 8443

in the broader region. The elections promised to be a
historic opportunity for the peaceful handover of power
for the first time in the country’s history.
Despite the many shortcomings that marred the
inclusive, equitable and transparent character of the
presidential, legislative and provincial elections of
30 December 2018, the high rate of turnout of the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
elections reflected their unshakeable determination
to ensure that their voice was heard. They sometimes
used creative means to that end, including in Beni and
Butembo, where the elections were postponed. We hail
this democratic commitment on the part of the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who voted in
an atmosphere of calm. The voice of an entire people
must be heard and respected.
Secondly, we have taken note of the provisional
outcomes announced by the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante on 10 January. Together with
our international partners, we are awaiting clarification
on questions that have been raised by some segments
of the opposition and civil society concerning the vote
count. Electoral transparency is therefore vital.
A milestone was reached with the announcement of
the provisional outcome. It now falls to stakeholders in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region,
who have followed the elections closely, to speak up
and to indicate whether the results reported reflect
what was observed and if the count was done correctly.
We commend the work done by the observation
missions dispatched by regional organizations, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
the African Union (AU) and Congolese civil society.
Belgium has already echoed the various appeals made,
particularly that of the AU electoral observation mission
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
calling for official results to accord with the votes cast
by the Congolese people.
Against that backdrop, we have taken note of the
statement issued on 10 January by the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO), which
monitored the electoral process through a mass
deployment of observers across the country, to the
effect that the data collected by its observation
mission at polling stations and counting offices did not
correspond with the data compiled by the Independent

19-0073813/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/01/2019

National Election Commission. This morning we heard
Monseigneur Utembi reiterate this observation.

peace and stability, and which might need our support
in the days and weeks to come.

This message is of importance. In order to
guarantee that the democratic choice of the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is respected,
a discussion based on facts and figures is crucial.
Transparency could provide answers to the questions
that have been raised from certain quarters and at the
same time set minds at ease and forestall any violence.

The current situation is tense, and there is a
palpable atmosphere of confrontation. Belgium joins
the call of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on the main players
to refrain from acts of violence and to resolve any
electoral dispute through the institutional mechanisms
established under the Constitution of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in line with the relevant
electoral legislation.

We thus encourage CENCO to share its findings
and figures. The Commission should publish the
results, disaggregated by polling station, as well as the
minutes of each local counting centre, and, ideally, also
provide neutral observers access to the central server,
in keeping with the electoral law. Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo
spoke of a climate of total mistrust, and I think that,
against that backdrop, it is all the more important to
ensure the maximum degree of transparency.
The parties also have the option of requesting a
recount. We would suggest that national observation
missions as well as those of the AU and SADC continue
with their work during this crucial stage.
We deplore also the fact that the elections took place
in an atmosphere in which public space was clamped
down on, which does not promote transparency. During
the campaign we heard appeals for greater openness;
it is regrettable that they have not yet been heeded.
We therefore remain deeply concerned by the repeated
interruptions of Internet capabilities and other means
of communication, as well as by the decision of the
Congolese authorities to withdraw the reporting permit
previously granted to Radio France Internationale.
The Security Council must remain attentive to the
remarkable people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who, calmly but with determination, continue
to insist that their voice be heard so as to claim their
right to vote and to a better future. We must remain
attentive also to civil-society organizations and to those
that have since the very outset supported the electoral
process, such as CENCO — a key player in the context
of the 2016 Saint-Sylvestre agreement, which created
the framework within which the long-awaited elections
were finally able to take place.
Let us also remain attentive to the countries of the
region, which, through their political commitment,
have expressed their determination to uphold regional
14/27

Thirdly, today’s briefings should not obscure the
other ongoing challenges facing the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, most of which are
listed in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/6). They include the fight against armed groups,
myriad humanitarian challenges, the fight against
impunity, health challenges such as Ebola and cholera,
and the fight against the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. The challenges are many, and Belgium will
remain committed to helping the Congolese people
overcome them.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) is mandated to ensure the protection
of civilians and to support the implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement and the electoral process.
We encourage MONUSCO to fully play that role in
the evolving context in the country. Given the very
high level of political tension and the increase in the
activities of armed groups, we must all be alive to our
responsibility, as members of the Security Council, to
ensure that MONUSCO can fully play the role conferred
upon it.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Our
profound thanks go to Special Representative
Zerrougui, Foreign Minister Malanji, Ambassador
Fatima Mohammed, Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo, President
of the Commission électorale nationale indépendante,
and Monseigneur Utembi, President of the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO), for their
informative, important and timely briefings today. I
thank Ms. Zerrougui for the continued efforts of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to support the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, protect civilians and secure
areas for health workers who are responding to the Ebola
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

outbreak. We are especially grateful for MONUSCO’s
work during the past week and throughout the electoral
process. We know that Ms. Zerrougui and her team
have repeatedly offered to support the Government and
have stood at the ready in case that call for support ever
came. We appreciate the Mission’s efforts.
We want to acknowledge the millions of Congolese
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo who
exercised their right to vote last week after two years
of delay. Despite confusion, technical issues, inclement
weather and long lines, the citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo showed the world that they have
a voice. The United States stands with the Congolese
people at this historic moment. It is they who should
determine their country’s future.
We take note of the provisional results of the
elections and await the clarification of questions that
have been raised regarding the electoral count. We look
forward to hearing more from the Electoral Commission
and CENCO about the data underlying their vote tallies.
We will continue to urge all parties to use the systems
and procedures in place to reach a final outcome,
and refrain from all violence. We remain prepared to
hold accountable individuals who threaten the peace,
stability or security of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or undermine its democratic process.
In the post-electoral phase, we must not forget
that the eastern areas of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are still confronting both increased armedgroup activity and the second largest Ebola outbreak
in history. While the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has cancelled presidential
elections in Yumbi, Beni and Butembo, we expect that
citizens will be able to vote for their provincial and
legislative representatives by March, as announced by
the Electoral Commission.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the briefings by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Foreign Minister Joseph Malanji, Ambassador Fatima
Mohammed, Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo and
Monseigneur Utembi.
Peru takes note of the holding of presidential,
legislative and provincial elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which were described by various
bodies as inclusive. We congratulate the Congolese
people and all the institutions that have contributed to
the process on this historic event. We also welcome the
constructive role of the United Nations Organization

S/PV. 8443

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in this complex electoral stage. We were
interested to hear the announcement of the provisional
results by the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante last Wednesday establishing the winner
of the elections, as well as the valuable information
provided by the observers. Like them, we deplore
the incidents that took place yesterday and hope that
the transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of
Congo will take place in a peaceful, orderly manner
and in accordance with the constitutional mechanisms
and electoral regulations of the country, with the full
participation of Congolese civil society. We believe that
any challenge to the results by participating political
actors or observers should be carried out peacefully
through the competent legal bodies.
We also believe that it is vital that the Council
remain united in support of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in this post-electoral period, which will
help to strengthen democracy in the country and its
institutions and promote a political dialogue that
seeks a genuine national consensus and preserves and
consolidates peace, as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission has indicated, with all of it being
done on a basis of respect for the decision of the
Congolese people, as expressed at the polls.
However, with regard to the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2019/6), we are very concerned about
the continuing precarious situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, exacerbated by the
Ebola outbreak, which according to the World Health
Organization had claimed the lives of 370 people as of
2 January, and which is the reason for the three-month
postponement of the elections in the provinces of North
Kivu and Mai-Ndombe.
Finally, we would like to stress the need for the
international community, particularly the regional and
subregional organizations that played a pivotal role in
the pre-electoral phase, to continue monitoring the postelectoral process closely, with a view to overcoming
any impasses and supporting an orderly transfer of
power that will enable the new Government to focus
on the major challenge that lies ahead, that of building
sustainable peace.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would also like to add
my voice to those of all who thanked all the briefers.
I want to start by underlining what my French
colleague said, which is that the elections represent

19-0073815/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

a historic moment for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I also want to echo Ms. Zerrougui’s point
about the fact that the elections truly expressed the
will of a majority of the Congolese people and that
we must commend the patience they showed during
the postponement of the elections and the delay in
announcing the results.
We take note of the provisional results as published
by the Commission électorale nationale indépendante.
We recognize that the results have been contested by the
opposition and by members of civil society. Right now,
I want to echo what everyone has said, that what is most
important is ensuring that the situation remains calm.
We therefore call on all sides to refrain from violence.
The electoral process has not ended. As others and
our Belgian colleague have said, what is most important
is full transparency. To that end, Internet access must
be restored. The Electoral Commission must then
release detailed election results from polling stations
and especially from the compilation centres. After we
see the published results from the Commission and
those arrived at by civil society, we must ensure that
the challenges are handled as has been described. First,
the appropriate legal procedures must be followed
and, as the African Union and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) have requested,
there must be a political dialogue. We urge the African
Union and SADC to continue to be engaged in a
political dialogue and in the process for publishing the
results. What is most important is that a dialogue be
held and work to create real trust among the parties in
the country.
I want to end by echoing Ms. Mohammed’s words
when she said that calm, peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are very important
not just for the country but for the entire region and
for all of Africa. I also support the call by my French
colleague for a press statement in which the Security
Council also demonstrates its unity on the issue.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative Leila Zerrougui for her
briefing today. I want to express our appreciation to her
personally and to the entire team of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for their tireless efforts in
support of peaceful elections and the consolidation of
stability in that country.
16/27

11/01/2019

I would also like to thank all of our briefers,
especially Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo, Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Mr. Joseph Malanji and Monseigneur
Marcel Utembi, for their contribution to our discussion.
I also thank all the observer missions engaged in the
process, such as the Conférence épiscopale nationale
du Congo, the African Union and the Southern African
Development Community, for their extremely important
work in challenging conditions on the ground.
Poland congratulates the Congolese people and
praises their restraint and determination to participate
in the elections and to execute their democratic rights.
Poland takes note of the announcement made by
the Commission électorale nationale indépendante
(CENI) of the provisional results of the elections in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same
time we note that these results are disputed by some
important national actors. Therefore, we call on CENI
to publish the data from all local results collecting
centres, in accordance with the electoral law, as the
most important way of addressing concerns about the
transparency and legitimacy of the election.
We do hope that the presidential, legislative and
provincial elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will constitute an important step in the
consolidation of peace, stability and democracy in the
country. We hope that elections will be the beginning
of a period of peaceful transition and necessary reforms
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge all
the political and civil society actors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to explain any doubts through
dialogue and call upon them to use only legal channels
for possible recourse. We hope that all the stakeholders
will remain constructively involved until the final
conclusion of the electoral process.
Peaceful assemblies should not be restrained by
unproportionate measures. No violence should be
tolerated towards the peaceful expression of the public
opinion of the sovereign Congolese nation. Poland
welcomes the reports of the observatory missions,
indicating that despite some irregularities the elections
were held under satisfactory conditions. Poland shares
the view of the African Union Commission Chairperson
that the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo requires genuine national consensus based on
respect for democratic principles and human rights, as
well as the preservation and consolidation of peace.
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

To conclude, there is no doubt that the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has significant
impact on the stability of Central Africa and the whole
of sub-Saharan Africa. Therefore, Poland emphasizes
the critical role that regional and neighbouring
States need to play at this historic moment. Thus, we
encourage them to maintain their effective support for
the credibility of the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as the only way to bring peace
and stability to the Congolese people.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking
all the briefers this morning: Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO); Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo, President
of the Commission électorale nationale indépendante
(CENI); Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia, Mr. Malanji; and Monseigneur Marcel Utembi,
President of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du
Congo. I thank them for their valuable briefings.
I wish to focus on three main issues: first, the
political situation and the electoral process; secondly,
the security situation; and thirdly, the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With respect to the political situation and the
electoral process, we have followed the conduct of the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since the issuance of the electoral timetable on
5 November 2017 and the commitments undertaken by
CENI to implement the timetable until the elections,
which were held on 30 December 2018. The elections
took place, despite the fire that occurred on 13 December
2018 and destroyed nearly 8,000 electronic voting
machines in the capital, Kinshasa. That postponed the
date of the election from 23 to 30 December 2018, in
addition to the acts of violence that compounded the
situation in some parts of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo during the election campaign and on
election day.
As for 30 December, elections were held in a
relatively peaceful environment. That said, we wish to
commend the efforts undertaken by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the
Electoral Commission. We commend their commitment

S/PV. 8443

and their organization of the elections as scheduled.
We also laud the support extended by the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the Southern Africa Development Community
and other international partners that made positive
contributions in election day.
On Wednesday, 9 January, we took note of the
statement issued by CENI, in which it noted the
provisional outcomes of the presidential election held
on 30 December 2018. We commend the responsible
and committed approach of the Congolese people
during the three electoral processes — the presidential,
legislative and municipal elections — as well as of all
the candidates and the large-scale participation by the
political parties. We call on all parties to demonstrate
the same degree of responsibility and to refrain from
any acts of violence. That is necessary to move on to
the next stage of challenging the outcomes with the
relevant authority, in line with the Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the applicable
electoral law.
We hope that the efforts undertaken by all
stakeholders will be completed and that CENI, the
Congolese Constitutional Court, the Government,
political parties and civil society will shoulder their
responsibility so as to safeguard stability and democratic
practices until the culmination of the electoral recourse
procedure and the announcement of the final results in
an official and transparent manner. That would lead to
fulfilling the aspirations of 38 million Congolese who
turned out at the polling stations on the day of the vote.
We hope that the results will reflect their will and lead
to the realization of their aspirations.
Turning to the security situation, the ongoing
incidents of violence and armed conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are very disturbing,
specifically in the eastern part of the country, a
region that has witnessed armed escalations directly
threatening the lives of unarmed civilians, exposing
them to danger and depleting the natural resources
of the State. We call on all stakeholders to cease such
hostile acts so as to safeguard the lives of unarmed
civilians and to achieve stability and security. In that
context, we commend the efforts of MONUSCO and its
troops to ward off those armed attacks and to protect
Congolese civilians.

19-0073817/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We strongly condemn the acts of violence
perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
yesterday, which claimed the lives of a number of
policemen and civilians. We call on all parties to
exercise restraint during this sensitive period in the
history of the country.
As for the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is of a concern in some
regions, especially after the decision to close certain
camps for internal refugees, the spread of the cholera
epidemic and other diseases, as well as the ongoing
armed conflict in certain regions, particularly in the
east of the country.
We are deeply concerned also at the continuing
spread of Ebola in the east of the country. That has been
compounded by deterioration in the security situation,
which is preventing the disease from being addressed.
The number of people contaminated by the Ebola
virus, according to the World Health Organization
(WHO), is 563, of whom 326 have died. Despite the
fact that the epidemic still represents a great danger
to Congolese civilians and neighbouring countries, we
highly appreciate the concerted efforts undertaken by
the Congolese Ministry of Health, WHO and the United
Nations through MONUSCO to combat the virus. We
hope that efforts will continue in order to fully eradicate
the epidemic as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks
and appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, as well as to all the Mission personnel,
for their tireless efforts and consistent support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We wish them
every success.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, let me also
thank Special Representative Leila Zerrougui; the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Zambia, who spoke on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community; my sister Ambassador
Mohammed, who spoke on behalf of the African
Union; Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo, President of the
Commission électorale nationale indépendante; and the
President of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du
Congo for their briefings.
My statement today focuses on three main issues:
the elections, the security situation and the need for
sustained international assistance.
18/27

11/01/2019

First, we would like to congratulate our Congolese
brothers and sisters on the convening of the historic
elections on 30 December 2018, which took place in a
relatively calm and peaceful atmosphere, despite many
challenges. The democratic experience is anything but
easy. Elections are not an easy task, in particular in an
area as large as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We have experience in elections in areas as large as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with remote
areas to be covered. Covering an area with 75,000
polling stations is an enormous undertaking. Indonesia
commends the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for taking ownership and full financial
responsibility of the elections, while demonstrating
perseverance throughout the process.
We are encouraged by the reports of high voter
turnout — evidence of the commitment of the Congolese
to the country’s first democratic and peaceful transfer
of power. It is imperative now for all stakeholders
to exercise maximum restraint in their actions and
statements and to respect the democratic process of the
election. It is incumbent on all of us to ensure a calm
and stable environment in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is for the Congolese now to seize that
momentum to consolidate stability in the country and
create an environment conducive to development. We
should respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
Indonesia is deeply concerned about the continued
presence of armed groups in some parts of eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Just two days ago,
the Allied Democratic Forces attacked a military post
in Beni, taking the lives of seven civilians and three
soldiers. For far too long, the country has suffered
from recurring cycles of conflict, persistent violence
and the loss of life of innocent civilians. My delegation
concurs with the view that the illegal exploitation and
trade of natural resources are among the root causes
of conflict in the region. The implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region holds
the key to building confidence among countries of the
region and promoting lasting regional stability.
Thirdly, we urge the international community to
provide sustainable development and humanitarian
assistance to the people in need in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Years of war and instability
have left millions of Congolese in dire humanitarian
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

situations and extreme poverty. The outbreak of Ebola
has exacerbated pre-existing needs for international
assistance. We express our solidarity to our Congolese
brothers and sisters who are affected by Ebola, and
commend the swift response of the World Health
Organization in leading international efforts against
one of the world’s deadliest viruses. It is critical for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the World Health Organization to have the support
needed to prevent a further outbreak of Ebola.
I should like to pay tribute to the important role
of the African Union and the Southern African
Development Community in helping the people of
the Congo. We believe that neighbours know best and
will be the first to assist. In that regard, I would like
to commend the critical work of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), including its
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians,
as well as support to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. Indonesia takes pride in
being one of the largest troop-contributing countries
to MONUSCO, with 1,039 personnel on the ground.
We now have 27 female peacekeepers, who we hope
will be able to contribute to community-building. That
includes an 850-personnel rapidly deployable battalion,
which was deployed in November to provide assistance
in the elections.
We will continue to support any effort to secure
long-lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. As we are approaching the mandate
renewal for MONUSCO, I would like to reiterate the
importance of meaningful consultations with troopand police-contributing countries and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, once again we look forward to
a peaceful and prosperous Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Peace is a luxury that the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have deserved for
far too long. I think that it is our responsibility to ensure
that they achieve peace at this time.
Mr. Ipo (Cote d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for her briefing on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo following the elections held on

S/PV. 8443

30 December 2018. We also thank Mr. Joseph Malanji,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia; Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations; Mr. Corneille
Nangaa Yobeluo, President of the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante; and Monseigneur Utembi,
President of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du
Congo, for their insightful briefings.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the generally calm and
peaceful environment in which the presidential,
legislative and provincial elections of 30 December
2018 were held. It appreciates the many efforts made
by the Congolese Government and the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante to meet the technical,
logistical and security challenges that arose during the
elections. My delegation takes note of the provisional
results of the presidential election, announced by the
Commission on 10 January. It urges all stakeholders to
preserve the overall peaceful atmosphere that prevailed
during the elections and in the waiting period before the
results were announced and encourages them to employ
institutional and legal channels to contest them. In that
regard, we echo the call made by the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
The political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must not divert the attention of our Council
from the security and humanitarian challenges in the
country. The recurrence of destabilizing activities by
armed groups and the persistent Ebola epidemic have
had an adverse impact on the humanitarian situation
in several provinces, in particular North Kivu, South
Kivu, Tanganyika and certain regions of the West,
including Kasai, and remain a source of concern. In
an environment marked by ongoing attacks by armed
groups against civilians, peacekeepers and members
of the Forces armées de la République Démocratique
du Congo, my delegation encourages the Congolese
authorities to continue and strengthen cooperation with
MONUSCO to end the activities of armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the continued engagement
of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, all MONUSCO personnel, as well
as the staff of United Nations agencies, in the process
of ending the crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It also welcomes the multifaceted support
that regional and international organizations and all
partners continue to provide to the country.

19-0073819/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me join colleagues
in thanking the briefers: Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO); Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo,
President of the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante (CENI) of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; His Excellency Mr. Joseph Malanji, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, who spoke on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), and Monseigneur Utembi, President of the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO).
We welcome Ambassador Ignace Gata Mavita Wa
Lufuta, Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The Security Council’s involvement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been one of
the most protracted, heavily invested and multiphased
engagements in the history of the United Nations.
Today, we meet at one of the most critical junctures
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s process
of consolidating democracy, nearly 60 years since
its independence from Belgian colonial rule. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is larger than the
entire Western Europe. It is less developed and has a
far less developed physical and social infrastructure.
The challenge to organize presidential, legislative
and provincial elections in such a vast country is
therefore enormous.
South Africa welcomes the announcement of
the provisional election results, and we commend
the Commission électorale nationale indépendante
for its hard work under difficult circumstances. We
further congratulate the Commission on managing the
electoral process. The Commission électorale nationale
indépendante is the official legitimate authority
mandated to manage and conduct the elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is the delegated
authoritative body to pronounce on the results of the
elections and must be accorded the right to do so. It
remains imperative that the Commission’s actions and
declarations, including with regard to the outcome of
the elections, should be respected by all, especially the
Security Council.
South Africa calls on all parties to preserve
the generally peaceful climate of the elections and
20/27

11/01/2019

to take up any reservations or disputes through the
proper mechanisms and processes provided for in the
Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its electoral laws, thereby refraining from any
violence or incitement thereof. We must ensure that,
as members of the Security Council, our words and
actions should contribute positively to the aspirations
and collective will of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is rich but
the Congolese people are poor. South Africa remains
concerned about the continuous illicit exploitation
of the natural resources of the country. Since its
independence, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been subjected to interference in determining its
future by external factors. The abundant resources with
which the country is blessed have in many ways led
to the scramble for those resources, to the detriment
of the Congolese people. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, parts of the economy are informal and
the sometimes illicit links between politics and illegal
economic activities have long existed. The estimated
value of the illicit exploitation of natural resources
in the eastern part of the country is billions of
dollars annually.
South Africa has keenly supported efforts to
ensure peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of Congo. In 1998, our late President, Nelson Mandela,
hosted a historic meeting between the former leaders
of Zaire/Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mobutu
Sese Seko and Laurent-Désiré Kabila, off the coast
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and averted
a potentially destructive civil war. In 2002, South
Africa hosted the groundbreaking Inter-Congolese
Dialogue, which led to drafting of the Constitution
and the hosting of the first-ever inclusive multiparty
democratic elections in that country. Such elections
took place again in 2011 and now in 2018.
President Ramaphosa issued a statement in which
he congratulated all the parties and stakeholders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on ensuring peace
and stability during the election process and urged
all regional, international and interested parties to
refrain from speculation and to allow the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante to complete the
process. The President also urged all political parties
and their supporters to allow the Commission to
perform its legal and constitutional duties without
interference or pressure.
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We expect the Security Council to be at the forefront
of providing support to the Congolese authorities to
maintain a peaceful and stable environment following
the landmark elections, and to discourage any violence
after the conclusion of the electoral process. That is
necessary in order to facilitate the historic outcome
of the first-ever democratic transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. South Africa
welcomes the reports of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative and the electoral observer missions
of SADC and of the African Union, and takes note
of CENCO’s concerns. We welcome their continued
commitment to assisting the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in achieving sustainable peace, security and
stability. The continued support and partnership of the
United Nations, the African Union, SADC and other
regional and international actors are necessary for the
consolidation of peace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
MONUSCO played an important role in creating a
climate of relative peace for the conduct of the elections
in some difficult regions of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The provision of timely logistical support
assisted in containing the spread of the Ebola virus in
parts of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Intervention Brigade, which is part of the MONUSCO
force, comprising brigades from South Africa, Malawi
and Tanzania, have successfully neutralized the threat
posed by negative and belligerent armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
South Africa calls for greater inclusion of women
peacekeepers and an increase in the civilian component
of MONUSCO, increasing the role of women mediators
in dealing with conflict mediation at the communal
level in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
recall the role that women played at the Inter-Congolese
Dialogue in South Africa.
We would like to pause and pay tribute to the men
and women who paid dearly and made the supreme
sacrifice in carrying out their international duty on
behalf of us all around the table and in protecting the
Congolese people.
The international community should not lose sight
of the importance of addressing the peace and security
challenges in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which preceded the election process about which we are
talking. Addressing the root causes of conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo requires recognition

S/PV. 8443

of the nexus between development and peace. In that
regard, South Africa emphasizes the need for postelection support in the context of peacebuilding and for
the Security Council to mobilize to the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to provide the necessary support
for the broader Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. The PBC Framework is the most
holistic peace mechanism for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is guaranteed by the United Nations,
the African Union, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community and has been signed by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all the countries
in the region.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has come a
long way in its quest for peace and security.
The elections that have just taken place will lead to
the first democratic transfer of power in the country’s
history. The community of the Congolese people should
be commended for this process. We therefore call on the
international community and the Council in particular
to continue to support the process with a balanced and
measured approach. The road ahead may be difficult
and long, but the journey to long-term stability, peace
and happiness for the Congolese people has begun. As
a Council, let us accompany them.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The fact that we
have been fortunate enough to have so many briefers
today testifies to the importance of this issue. I would
like to thank them and like to thank in particular
Minister Malanji and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for being with us. I would like to
make five brief points.
My first point, as many other speakers said, is that
this is a critical moment in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo precisely because of the prospect
of the peaceful transfer of power. Therefore, there is a
lot at stake. This is a historic chance for the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The second point is that the important thing is
that the democratic will of the Congolese people be
respected. As others have noted, these are provisional
results, so there is a chance for the Congolese people
to have the result that they voted for. To that end, it is
critical that the data and methodology of the voting be
examined. We noted the statement made on behalf of the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO)

19-0073821/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11/01/2019

that its data do not reflect the announced result, and
we therefore request both CENCO and the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante (CENI) to provide
further data and other analyses relating to the electoral
process. Like others, we would like to know if it would
be possible for CENI to publish the results at the level
of local polling centres and bureaux de vote. We believe
that that is a very important next step.

the sign of maturity and political determination that
the Congolese people have shown, as evidenced in the
high rate of participation and in the good management
of the organization of the electoral contest, despite the
challenges that arose. However, we regret the loss of
lives and the episodes of violence that occurred during
and after the process, and offer our condolences to the
relatives of the victims.

My third point is that, as we know, the electoral
process is ongoing. It will therefore be important
in the coming days that the Congolese people see a
process that delivers what they voted for and that any
disagreement is voiced through the proper channels,
peacefully and constructively.

We received with interest the publication by CENI
of the preliminary results of the presidential elections.
We also understand that the incoming Government
should enjoy the maximum possible consensus, which
would guarantee a climate of stability and governability
in the country. We therefore urge all actors to do their
best to ensure that the final results accurately and
beyond all doubt reflect the decision of the majority of
the Congolese people and that this decision is respected.
We also trust that the process of the transfer of power to
the winners is carried out peacefully and with respect
for the Congolese Constitution.

My fourth point is to echo calls for lifting media
restrictions, including with regard to the Internet.
My fifth and last point is to support the African
Union’s call for all stakeholders to act in a way that
consolidates democracy and preserves peace and for
violence to cease.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
First of all, we thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/6) on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as well as the good offices
of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge her
to pursue her efforts in the post-electoral stage and in
the implementation of the mandates of MONUSCO
in order to successfully conclude the election process
and continue making progress towards the political,
economic and social stability of all the Congolese people.
I also want to highlight and commend the valuable
briefings delivered by the President of the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante (CENI), as well
as by the representatives of the African Union, the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo and the
Southern African Development Community. We
commend their dedication and valuable contributions
to the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
In particular, the Dominican Republic wishes to
congratulate the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
undertaking this historic election process. We recognize
22/27

We support the statement of the SecretaryGeneral, calling on all actors to channel any electoral
dispute through the established institutional channels.
Similarly, we trust that they will act responsibly by
putting the democratic stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo above all other considerations.
To conclude, we trust that the conclusion of the
recent elections and the presence of new actors in the
national political life will open a new stage of open
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and contribute to the development of an increasingly
participatory democracy, with the inclusion of all
sectors of the population. We urge the Congolese people
to undertake the process of transition in a peaceful
climate, to look to the future with optimism and to
participate actively in the construction of an inclusive
country, in a climate of peace and lasting union that
will bring stability to the entire Central African region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir, I am
honoured to congratulate your country, the Dominican
Republic, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to express our
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

full appreciation for the good manner in which you are
leading our debates. I also thank you for having taken
the initiative of convening this important meeting to
consider the situation in my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I take this opportunity to once again express the
thanks and gratitude of the Congolese people and their
Government to all members of the Security Council for
the tireless efforts they continue to make in seeking
solutions to ensure that my country regains the peace
and stability it so badly needs for its reconstruction
and development.
My delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zambia; the Permanent Observer
of the African Union Mission to the United Nations;
the President of the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante (CENI); and Monsignor Marcel Utembi
of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo
(CENCO) for their briefings on developments in the
electoral process in my country. I, in turn, should like
to convey the position of my Government developments
in that process.
As the Special Representative highlighted in
her briefing, the electoral process has just reached
a milestone with the organization of elections on
30 December 2018 throughout the country, with the
exception of the region of Beni and Butembo in North
Kivu province, where the Ebola epidemic has been
raging for several months, and in the Yumbi territory
of Mai-Ndombe province, which has seen violence
causing loss of life. The elections were postponed until
March 2019 for all of those regions.
The Council is already aware that Mr. Félix
Tshisekedi Tshilombo was proclaimed the winner of
the presidential election by the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante and will be invested as
President of the Republic as soon as the Constitutional
Court publishes the final results.
I should emphasize that, despite some scattered
incidents during the electoral campaign that have
already been mentioned and occasional voting machine
power failures registered on polling day, which were
repaired by CENI technicians, it is important to
recognize that the elections went smoothly in general.
The candidates for the three polls conducted their

S/PV. 8443

campaign freely, and voters came out in large numbers
and expressed their choice with complete peace of
mind. Similarly, the candidates’ observers, deployed
in all constituencies across the country, also performed
their duty freely. As for the duly accredited national
and international observers, they welcomed the smooth
conduct of the elections. In the end, the voting machine
that was disparaged by some was not only appreciated
but was also used by the population and all candidates.
Given the low percentage of votes — 20 per
cent — counted in the two or three days preceding
the scheduled date of 6 January for the publication of
the provisional results, CENI deferred the publication,
which occurred on 10 January, opening the way for a
changeover at the highest level of State for the first
time in the history of our country. The results that were
released to the public were received favourably across
the country.
It goes without saying that, in the event of a possible
challenge by those candidates who do not agree with
the results, especially with regard to the presidential
election, they have remedies similar to those available
in other countries. According to the Constitution and
the laws of the Republic, the deadline for appeal is 48
hours after the publication of provisional results. My
delegation draws the attention of the Council to the
fact that the Democratic Republic of the Congo, like
any sovereign State, has institutions established by the
Constitution and the law of the land to settle disputes.
Many Council members have advised us to resort to
that procedure. However, it is not good policy for the
international community to impose requirements on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that are likely to
replace those institutions.
In view of the foregoing, we feel it important
to urge our partners and friendly countries not to
pour oil on the fire by speculating on the results, but
instead to work to strengthen democracy and peace by
encouraging all political actors and their supporters
to exercise restraint, to prioritize the greater interests
of the nation by avoiding any act of violence likely to
compromise social calm, and to resort to legal channels
if necessary. It is important that the peaceful climate
that prevailed during the elections continue after the
publication of the results until the peaceful and historic
transfer of power at the highest level of State between
an outgoing Head of State and an incoming Head of
State occurs.

19-0073823/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I cannot close this chapter without paying
due homage to His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila
Kabange, President of the Republic, who honoured
his commitment to respecting the Constitution by not
seeking a third term and leading the country towards
the organization of free, democratic and transparent
elections. In the same vein, the Government should
be commended for the efforts made to fully fund
the elections with its own funds. CENI is also to be
congratulated on having remained on course despite
interference and pressure. It can be proud today of the
work accomplished. Finally, the Congolese people, who
have demonstrated maturity and patriotism throughout
this process, must be congratulated.
My Government, as the principal body responsible
for ensuring the well-being of its people and for
consolidating democracy, has a duty to ensure by all
legal and regulatory means that the electoral process
succeeds in peace. In that context, it shares the desire
expressed in the various pre-reports of international
election observers to see this electoral cycle continue in
a calm manner until the local and municipal elections.
The Government therefore invites all stakeholders in
the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to combine their efforts responsibly to ensure a
soft landing for the aforementioned process.
The security situation prevailing in the eastern part
of our country continues to be an issue of concern for
my Government. The Forces armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo (FARDC), in collaboration
with MONUSCO, is pursuing military operations in
that part of the country. Particularly with regard to
the Allied Democratic Forces terrorists who, in recent
months, have distinguished themselves with a series of
deadly attacks against our people in Beni and Butembo
and against MONUSCO and FARDC troops, Council
members will recall that following the dismantling of
their main strongholds early last year, their operational
capacity was appreciably diminished. Their current
modus operandi is unusual and should lead MONUSCO
and the FARDC to review their strategies and join
forces to do away with these terrorists and put an end
to the suffering endured by the populations of Beni
and Butembo.
With regard to child protection, the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/6) states in paragraph
52 that:
24/27

11/01/2019

“MONUSCO continued to engage with armed
groups in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu,
resulting in the release of more than 440 girls
and boys. During October and November, six
commanders of armed groups signed a declaration
stating that they would no longer recruit children or
commit other grave, child-related violations. That
brought the total number of armed groups who have
signed engagements with MONUSCO to eight,
five of which are listed by the Secretary-General
for child recruitment. The commanders also
committed to implementing a road map, which, in
addition to preventing grave child rights violations,
also requires them to take measures to stop and
prevent sexual violence.”
The Council will agree that, in the context of
the restoration of State authority and peace, my
Government is waging a great struggle to eradicate
armed groups that disturb the peace and sow insecurity
in the communities where they operate. The FARDC is
assisted in this fight by MONUSCO. We ask ourselves
therefore how MONUSCO is able to maintain relations
and collaborate with the armed groups it is supposed to
fight alongside the FARDC.
Turning to humanitarian concerns, the many
population displacements due to the insecurity created
by the armed groups of which we have just spoken, the
resurgence of certain diseases and the unscheduled
return of several thousand of our compatriots from
Angola along the border with that country are issues of
concern to the Government to which it is working to find
urgent solutions. It goes without saying, moreover, that
any assistance from our partners to ease the suffering
of those in need will always be welcome.
Turning to the Ebola virus, which is raging in
the Beni and Butembo regions, efforts continue to be
undertaken by the Government, in collaboration with
the World Health Organization and a number of other
partners, to combat the disease. Since the outbreak of
the epidemic, the total number of cases reported as of
8 January is 628 — of which 580 are confirmed and 48
probable — with 383 deaths reported and 222 persons
having recovered. In terms of treating those afflicted,
a new centre opened on 3 January in the Katwa health
district. Also, the Beni transit centre, which was
destroyed during protests on 27 December, is once
again operational.
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Before concluding, allow me to remind the Council
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is writing a
new chapter in its history. It looks forward to the support
of the international community and all its friends to help
it usher in a new era in a calm and peaceful way. In that
regard, my Government commends and warmly thanks
all those who stood by our side in good times and in
bad and who offered their assistance when we needed
it most. We are especially grateful to the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the African
Union. We also express our profound gratitude to the
troop-contributing countries and the United Nations,
which have contributed so much to the restoration of
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My delegation also reiterates its gratitude to all
the members of the Security Council for their consistent
focus on the situation in our country and, as the new
year opens, we wish all members the very best in 2019.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo to respond to the
comments that have been made.
Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Security Council once again for giving
me this opportunity to clarify a number of issues. I
would also like to thank the President of the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo for providing certain
details drawn from their own observation mission,
while noting at the same time that the law provides that
the mission should present its report to the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante, which has not yet
received any such report; we have learned about it only
from the media. In the meantime, I would like to clarify
three points.
First, the elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo were organized in conformity with the legal
framework as defined by the Constitution, laws and
relevant electoral provisions. Accordingly, the Electoral
Commission announced the provisional results in
conformity with that legal framework.
Secondly, the Electoral Commission has of course
taken note that the elections, as I mentioned in my
introduction, have aroused much passion so that, for
some people, as long as a certain candidate does not
win it will never be right. As I also indicated in my
introduction, the process was conducted over three
years, and at every stage there were requests and
demands that we clarify this or we do that. All of that

S/PV. 8443

reflects the distrust among all the stakeholders. I was
fully expecting that, when the results were announced,
some people would say they did not agree and some
people that they did agree, but that is democracy. In
the interim, it has to be recognized that the Electoral
Commission has announced the preliminary results
of the elections and the country is calm, which shows
that the people have accepted the outcome. If that were
not the case, Kinshasa would already be in flames and
there would be blood on the streets. The country is calm
in the aftermath of the elections, and all the pressure
everyone was feeling is for the most part behind us.
Meanwhile, in conformity with the law, the
Electoral Commission has just published the
preliminary results. I must stress that they are
provisional results. The law provides that, after the
publication of the preliminary results, those who do
not agree with them may address themselves to the
relevant authorities. And we are prepared for that. If
a clarification or some other response is called for, the
Commission will answer only to those authorities. If
called upon by the Courts to provide information, the
Commission will provide information regarding its
activities. Again, regarding the Constitutional Court,
there will be two options: either to declare the results of
the Electoral Commission as valid — in which case we
will put this cycle of elections behind us and await the
next one in five years — or else to declare the results
as invalid, in which case the elections will be annulled
and the electoral process restarted — or some may
even protest that. But all such considerations are under
the jurisdiction of the Court, and in the meantime it
would be a violation of the law for me to claim to be in
a position to present any clarification or certification to
any authority other than the Court. That would not be
allowed under Congolese law.
Moreover, what is essential is that dialogue should
continue, and that whoever wins, whatever the outcome
of the elections, the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo speak to each other, talk to each other.
They need to look at each other and say “OK, this is
the situation we are in. What do we do now?” But my
advice, not as a representative of the Commission but as
a Congolese, would be to say, look, the elections were
organized in difficult circumstances against impossible
odds. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a vast
country, and everything was stacked against us getting
to where we are today. One cannot clean house overnight
given everything that was done by the different parties,

19-0073825/27

S/PV.8443

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

or continue to act as if we can just keep starting over
every day. The Commission has published its results.
It cannot be said that the elections were perfect. Even
in the United States, we have learned that in the last
elections certain things happened. Is that a reason to
challenge the entire process? No.
At every stage, it must be said, there are always
protests, probably legitimate ones. We will duly answer
to the competent authorities and will continue to
monitor the situation. That is all we will do. I cannot
make a commitment to exceed what is provided by law
and put myself at the disposition of some other body or
organization that questions what went on and calls on
us to justify ourselves. No. We will abide by the law and
we hope that others will do the same. We will see what
the Constitutional Court does about the presidential
and legislative elections, and what the various courts of
appeal do about the provincial elections.
Three elections in one day in a country like ours
was no easy feat. We slept only two or three hours a
day for a month. Given that we held three elections in
one day and managed to achieve what we have — that
is, the Congolese people voted and we are now enjoying
calm in the country — my advice is that we must not
poke the bear or seek justifications to be bogged down
in the perpetual beginning of negotiations.
As has been said, these elections are historic, so
let us not make the Congolese people miss what they
have been waiting for so long. We now find ourselves
within 10 days of proceeding with the establishment
of the new institutions, such as the swearing-in of
the new President-elect, if the Constitutional Court
confirms the results, and the installation of the new
National Assembly and the new provincial assemblies,
which will ultimately lead to the holding of indirect
elections — those for the members of the Senate, as
well as governors and vice-governors.
However, for the province of North Kivu
specifically, I note that we have scheduled those
elections for March. We are, of course, already
beginning to prepare accordingly, in the hope that the
efforts led by the Congolese Government, with the
support of its partners, with respect to the Ebola virus
disease will bear fruit, and that the formation of the new
Government will also lead to stability and security in
the region. For the North Kivu province, the provincial
assembly will therefore be established only after the
North Kivu elections because the related indirect
26/27

11/01/2019

elections — those for governor and senators — will be
held only after those elections.
That is what we meant when we said that we are
not perfect. No election in the world is perfect, but I
will remain at the disposal of organizations that have
something to say. The Election Commission will remain
at the disposal of the Conférence épiscopale nationale
du Congo for further exchanges on anything that may
arise, in the understanding that, in our opinion, the
priority should be to move forward and turn the page.
The population is suffering. We have been in the
midst of political discussions for two, three, even four
years. There is a time for everything — a time for
elections, but also a time for development. These are
the clarifications I wanted to make at this stage, in the
hope that we will inch closer to an end with the final
reports that we will present in March, if necessary.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Germany has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I sincerely thank the
President of the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante for his clarifications, which lead me to
the following question. According to the information
that I have, the election results have to be published.
In the President’s explanation, I understand that he
said that the details of the elections results will go only
to the Constitutional Court. Perhaps he could clarify
that point, because I think that it is very important that
the elections results, according to the polling stations,
be published, as several speakers around the table
have requested.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo to answer the question.
Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo (spoke in French): It should
be noted that the elections took place at 72,000 polling
stations. Each polling station opened in the morning,
at 6 a.m., and closed 11 hours later, at 5 p.m. Once
the voting was closed, the polling stations turned into
counting stations. The manual counting was carried
out and other results were also available because of the
voting machines. After the counting, the law requires
that the results be posted. That is the first level of
publishing the results.
Each polling station was able to post the results.
But we must be careful, because when we publish the
results in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, if a
19-00738

11/01/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

candidate senses that they are not good enough, his or
partisans may often tear up the posted sheets. Those
results, however, are the voting records. The district
sends the voting records and result sheets to the central
level via the local compilation centres.
In this case, since we are interested in the
presidential election, the corresponding constituency
is national territory. The results therefore are not
posted in a specific territory or district. The posting
or publication of the results of the presidential election
is done at the national level, which is what we mean by
national consolidation, because the constituency is the
national territory. That said, the results that were posted
at the polling stations are what we have. Some are sent
to the various courts and others to the Commission
électorale nationale indépendante.

S/PV. 8443

They say that people will challenge the results.
We will, of course, forward to the courts the evidence
at our disposal that led us to whatever the results are.
As we have said, we will provide those results to the
Constitutional Court, especially since the law does
not stipulate that we must give them to the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo or other organizations.
Those results will be presented to the Constitutional
Court if they are disputed. That is how that works.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

19-0073827/27
