A/66/PV.94

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

94

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 25 January 2012, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. Malam Bacai Sanhá, President of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau
The President (spoke in Arabic): It is my sad
duty to pay tribute to the memory of the late President
of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency
Mr. Malam Bacai Sanhá, who passed away on 9 January.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of Guinea-Bissau to convey our heartfelt
condolences to the Government and people of GuineaBissau and to the bereaved family of His Excellency
Mr. Malam Bacai Sanhá.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Malam Bacai Sanhá.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expense of the United Nations (A/66/668)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In document
A/66/668, the Secretary-General informs the President
of the General Assembly that 21 Member States are in
arrears in the payment of their financial contributions
to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of
the Charter.
I remind delegations that, under Article 19 of the
Charter,

“A Member of the United Nations which is
in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the preceding two
full years.”
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of the information contained in document A/66/668?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Draft resolution (A/66/L.34)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the Assembly held the debate on agenda
item 33 at its 90th plenary meeting, on 20 December
2011.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to introduce draft
resolution A/66/L.34.
Mr. Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): On 20 December 2011 (see
A/66/PV.90), the 2011 Chairman of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme, Mr. Matthieu Yamba, had
the honour of presenting to the General Assembly the
report of the Process (A/66/593, annex). I now have the
honour of taking the floor on behalf of my delegation
and of all 44 sponsors to introduce the draft resolution
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict:
breaking the link between the illicit transaction of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-21461 (E)

*1221461*

A/66/PV.94

rough diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to
prevention and settlement of conflicts” (A/66/L.34).
Since the adoption, on 1 December 2000, of the
General Assembly’s first resolution on the role of
diamonds in armed conflict (resolution 55/56), and the
creation of an international certification system for
diamonds, the General Assembly has never missed an
opportunity to reaffirm its firm and consistent support
for the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. The
draft resolution before the Assembly is part of this
context. In both its structure and content, it conveys the
aspirations of Member States, as expressed in
resolutions adopted by the Assembly on blood
diamonds at previous sessions, and draws directly on
the text of resolution 65/137, of 16 December 2010.
Resolution 65/137 contained 23 operative
paragraphs; the current text includes an additional
10 paragraphs that reflect the progress made during the
plenary in Kinshasa. This includes the implementation
of a framework that meets the minimal requirements of
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, with the
addition of new members and new elements, including
monitoring and assessment by peer review; cooperation
with the World Customs Organization; traceabilityrelated technology; and a strengthening of internal
control.
The Kinshasa plenary adopted two key decisions
on the reform of the Process. Paragraph 24 of the draft
resolution acknowledges four administrative decisions
in addition to those mentioned in paragraphs 19 and
21, including the administrative decision on Marange,
Zimbabwe. In paragraph 30, the draft resolution
reaffirms the importance of the tripartite nature of the
Kimberley Process, regrets the absence of civil society
from the Kinshasa plenary, and welcomes the decision
by the plenary to reaffirm its commitment to continue
its constructive engagement with civil society in
recognition of the role that civil society plays in the
Kimberley Process.
Finally, paragraph 31 notes with great appreciation
the important contribution that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as Chair of the Kimberley Process in
2011, has made to curb the trade in conflict diamonds.
It also welcomes the selection of the United States of
America as Chair and of South Africa as Vice-Chair for
2012.
In concluding the introduction of his report, on
20 December 2011, the Chair of the Kimberley Process
for 2011 said:

2

“Contrary to tradition, because there is a lack
of consensus, I will not be able to submit the draft
resolution to the General Assembly. Discussions
are continuing with all parties so as to arrive at a
text that reflects everyone’s views, in the interest
of the great family of the United Nations.”
I am pleased to inform the Assembly today that
developments have been positive. The draft resolution
before us represents the outcome of the lengthy
negotiations that began in December 2011. It may not
be a perfect text, but it is the result of a compromise
that saw a consensus achieved, on the basis of the
differing views of delegations, on a common objective:
the promotion of a joint initiative among Governments,
the diamond industry and civil society aimed at keeping
blood diamonds out of the legal international market.
In other words, the goal is to limit the role that conflict
diamonds play in armed conflicts, protect the legal trade
in diamonds and guarantee the effective implementation
of resolutions relevant to the trade in conflict diamonds.
I should like to thank the delegations of the States
that participated in the Kimberley Process, which took
an active role in preparing the current draft. It is thanks
to their spirit of cooperation that we have been able to
narrow differences and achieve a consensus. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
General Assembly Affairs Branch for their assistance
in that respect.
On that basis, I would recommend that the
plenary join with the sponsors and other participants in
the Kimberley Process to ensure that the draft
resolution is adopted by consensus.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/66/L.34.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): Zimbabwe would
also like to take this opportunity to express its deep
gratitude to the current Chair of the Kimberley Process,
Mr. Mathieu Yamba of the Democratic Republic of
Congo, and his team for their clear and informative
report (A/66/593, annex), as well as their able
stewardship of the Kimberley Process over the past
year. That is evident in the balanced draft resolution
(A/66/L.34) that they have presented for our
consideration.

12-21461

A/66/PV.94

Zimbabwe would like to express its utmost
appreciation for the milestone decision taken by the
Kimberley Process at its plenary meeting held last
November in Kinshasa to certify the Marange
diamonds, thereby enabling Zimbabwe to freely sell its
diamonds on the international market. The decision
was overdue, as the welfare of the people of Zimbabwe
depended on it. In addition, the decision will enable
Zimbabwe to realize its dream of developing a vibrant
diamond industry. Let me reiterate our firm stance that
Zimbabwe, as a founding member of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme, is fully committed to
upholding the organization’s standards and objectives.
Any protestations to the contrary should be laid to rest.
We fully acknowledge the professionalism and
resolve of the African Diamond Producers Association
in ensuring that the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme remains focused on its core business. It was its
commitment to fair and transparent processes that
ensured that the process continued to respect the
certification standards acceptable to all participants.
They undertook visits to Marange and satisfied
themselves that the mining operations there fully
complies with the minimum requirements of the
Kimberley Process. In that regard, Zimbabwe would
like to express its gratitude to the African diamondproducing countries for their solidarity with us during
the past three years of contention and impediments
imposed by some members of the Kimberley Process
over Marange diamonds. It was their solidarity that
resulted in the Process certifying Marange diamonds as
conflict-free. We would like to reiterate our stance that
the Marange diamonds are not “blood diamonds” by
any standard, a fact that has been certified by
Kimberley Process monitors.
Despite the outcome of the Kinshasa plenary
meeting regarding Marange diamonds, we note with
grave concern that there are still participating countries
that continue their efforts to deny Zimbabwe the right
to benefit from Marange diamonds. A few weeks after
the Kinshasa meeting, therefore, a number of companies
mining Marange diamonds were slapped with sanctions.
We wonder how the countries doing that want to be
judged in terms of their commitment to abide by the
decisions of the Kimberley Process. It is important that
the decisions made by the Process be upheld and
respected if the organization is to realize its goals and
objectives. Zimbabwe wants economic progress and
must not be held back by issues outside the framework
of the Process. Instead, we should be given a chance to
use our God-given natural resources to develop our

12-21461

economy and raise the living standards of our citizens.
We believe that the days of bickering belong to the past
and have no place in the future work of the Kimberley
Process.
Zimbabwe therefore stresses the need for the
Kimberley Process to stick to its founding statute, rules
and mandates. It must remain insulated against the
influence of national, bilateral and regional political
agendas. Politicking should not be allowed to infiltrate
and influence its work. No member should pursue
agendas that are alien to it. The Kimberley Process
should not be allowed to be plunged into turmoil over
issues that are outside its mandate.
Finally, while Zimbabwe fully acknowledges the
role of civil society in the Kimberley Process, it would
like to stress that that role must not be hijacked by
certain countries that wish to use it as an instrument to
hamper the developmental aspirations of members of
the Process. We note with great concern the use of civil
society by certain powerful countries to advance their
own hidden agendas in the context of the Kimberley
Process.
My delegation wishes the incoming Chair of the
Process success and constructive leadership and hopes
that the Process will continue to be directed through
consultations and with the utmost cooperation,
transparency and impartiality. The Process can count
on our cooperation as long as it implements agreed
positions without prejudice to any members.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/66/L.34,
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict:
breaking the link between the illicit transaction of
rough diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to
prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/66/L.34,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors: Armenia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iceland, Montenegro, New
Zealand, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia, Singapore
and Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/66/L.34?

3

A/66/PV.94

Draft resolution A/66/L.34
(resolution 66/252).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of the United States of America.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The United States is honoured and grateful for the
opportunity to serve as the Kimberley Process Chair
for 2012. We look forward to working closely with the
Vice-Chair, the Republic of South Africa, in the year
ahead to advance the credibility of the Process and the
efficacy of its work. We thank the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for its leadership as the
Kimberley Process Chair in 2011.
The Kimberley Process is making tangible
progress in breaking the link between illicit
transactions in rough diamonds and armed conflict.
However, we believe there is still much work to be
done. Further efforts are needed to fully and
meaningfully address this challenge in the second
decade of the twenty-first century. We need integrated
solutions to the development and enforcement
challenges that are implicated by the diamond trade —
solutions that benefit from the involvement of the
private sector and non-governmental organizations.
Until necessary changes are made to ensure that the
diamond trade brings prosperity to all those throughout
the supply chain, the risk will continue that diamonds
will be used to fuel conflict.
The Kimberley Process has confronted a
succession of complex challenges over the past several
years, raising questions about both the credibility of
the Process and its future sustainability. As Chair, the
United States will seek to ensure that all stakeholders
in the Process — Governments, industry and civil
society — roll up our sleeves and rededicate ourselves
to the progress of this initiative.
At the 2011 plenary, a founding pillar of the
Kimberley Process — civil society — was absent. The
United States is committed to advancing reforms that
will bring civil society back to that forum to ensure
that the Kimberley Process reflects the voices of all
stakeholders, including those of local communities,
producers, traders and consumers. The commitment of
those groups and the willingness of countries to work
with them remain essential to our collective objective
of effectively addressing the nexus between diamonds
and conflict.
As Chair, we will be committed to bringing
consensus-based decisions on the fundamental issues

4

facing the Process to the plenary in 2012. All
stakeholders have a responsibility to ensure that, as the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme approaches its
tenth anniversary, it continues to be relevant. Among
our priorities as Chair, we intend to seek an evaluation
of whether changes to the original mandate are needed.
In addition, we look forward to pursuing the Kinshasa
plenary’s decision to explore the creation of a muchneeded administrative staff that can better handle the
many technical tasks now expected of the Kimberley
Process Chair and other participants. Finally, we will
also seek to promote discussion of how the Process can
progress on other governance, enforcement and
development issues, particularly with respect to
improving outcomes for artisanal miners.
In conclusion, we look forward to engaging all
stakeholders in 2012 as we pursue a stronger and more
effective Kimberley Process.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 127
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994
Letters from the Secretary-General (A/66/620
and A/66/625)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/66/660)
Draft decision (A/66/L.35)
The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
proceed to consider draft decision A/66/L.35.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/66/L.35 was adopted.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 127.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

12-21461
