A /69/PV.92

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

92nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 3 June 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Al-Mughairy
(Oman), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/722/Add.8)
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
items on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/69/722/Add.8, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/69/722/Add.7, Vanuatu has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in that document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/69/L.72)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13 and

its sub-item (a), jointly with agenda item 115, at its
51st plenary meeting, on 14 November 2014. Members
will also recall that, under sub-item (a) of agenda item
13, the Assembly adopted resolution 69/108, at its
65th plenary meeting, on 8 December 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of Hungary
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.72.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/69/L.72, entitled “World
Statistics Day”, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 13.
By adopting the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would designate 20 October 2015 as the second World
Statistics Day, under the general theme “Better data,
better lives”. The draft resolution calls on Member
States, members of United Nations specialized agencies,
the United Nations system, other international and
regional organizations and all other stakeholders to
observe the day in an appropriate manner. The General
Assembly will also decide to celebrate World Statistics
Day every five years on 20 October.
Having achieved consensus after just two rounds
of informal consultations, the text builds on resolution
64/267, which designated 20 October 2010 as World
Statistics Day, and follows up on decision 45/113 of the
United Nations Statistical Commission. The proposal
does not create any additional programme budget
implications for the United Nations system.
Hungary’s interest in the issue of statistics and
its decision to actively promote a draft resolution
creating impetus for further dialogue and interaction
in the fields of statistics stems from its role as former
co-Chair of the Open Working Group of the General
Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals and from
its long-standing leadership activities in the Statistical

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-16549 (E)

*1516549*

A/69/PV.92

Commission. The role of statistics and reliable data
in general and in the planning, implementation and
monitoring of the future sustainable development
agenda has been reconfirmed time and time again.
There is a need to advance innovation and analysis
to support national data capacities and a global data
partnership.
Since statistics are at the crossroads, there is no better
moment and method to affirm this than in a General
Assembly resolution that brings worldwide focus to the
topic. World Statistics Day creates a universal platform
that enhances visibility and facilitates the organization
of events and the achievement of synergies. The initiative
provides a universal framework for, and new focus on,
statistical activities. However, its concrete utilization at
the national, regional and international levels remains
in the hands of the different stakeholders, based on
their special circumstances, needs and priorities.
The first World Statistics Day, in 2010, was an
overwhelming success, with activities being organized
in more than 130 Member States and territories and by
at least 40 international and regional organizations and
entities. We have every reason to presume that these
results will be surpassed in 2015.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Member States
from the bottom of my heart for their overwhelming
support for and constructive participation in the open
and transparent consultations. We also appreciate the
qualified support of the truly cross-regional group of
sponsors, which reflects the universal recognition of
statistics and their role in creating better lives. In this
spirit, Hungary and the sponsors respectfully call on all
Member States to support the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.72, entitled
“World Statistics Day”. I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/69/L.72, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Azerbaijan,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, Fiji,
Georgia, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Nepal, New Zealand, Oman, Peru, the
Republic of Moldova, the Sudan, Suriname, Tonga,

2/16

03/06/2015

Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, the United
Arab Emirates and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.72?
Draft resolution A/69/L.72 was adopted (resolution
69/282).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
(c) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
Draft resolutions (A/69/L.67 and A/69/L.68)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (c) of
agenda item 19 to the Second Committee. Members
will also recall that the Assembly decided to consider
the sub-item directly in a plenary meeting and adopted
decision 69/556 at its 81st plenary meeting, on 5 March
2015.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/69/L.67 and A/69/L.68.
In connection with draft resolution A/69/L.68, I now
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/69/L.68, entitled “Establishment
of an open-ended intergovernmental expert working
group on indicators and terminology relating to disaster
risk reduction”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By paragraphs 4 and 5 (a) of draft resolution
A/69/L.68, the General Assembly would decide that,
first, the work of the working group would be completed
by December 2016 and be submitted to the General
Assembly for its consideration, as stated in paragraph
4; secondly, the working group would hold three formal
sessions, at the United Nations Office in Geneva,
including one session in 2015 and two sessions in 2016,

15-16549

03/06/2015

A/69/PV.92

each session lasting two days, and additional informal
sessions if needed, as stated in paragraph 5 (a).

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.68?

It is anticipated that the request for documentation
contained in paragraph 4 would constitute an addition
to the documentation workload of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management for
one pre-session document in all six languages. That
would entail additional requirements in the amount of
$38,300 for documentation services in 2016.

Draft resolution A/69/L.68 was adopted (resolution
69/284).

Furthermore, the request contained in paragraph 5 (a) to
hold three formal sessions of the working group would
require four meetings in 2015 and eight meetings in 2016,
in all six languages. Those meetings would constitute an
addition to the meetings workload of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management, which
would entail additional requirements in the amount of
$27,600 in 2015 and $55,200 in 2016 for meeting services.
No provision has been included under the programme
budget for the biennium 2014-2015 and the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017 for the
above activities, and therefore additional allocation of
funds would be required.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.68, additional requirements
under section 2, General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council affairs and conference management,
would arise in the amount of $27,600 of the programme
budget for the biennium 2014-2015, and $93,500 of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20162017. However, all possible efforts would be made to
absorb the additional requirements from within existing
resources under section 2.
The Acting President: The Assembly will first
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.67, entitled
“Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 20152030”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.67?
Draft resolution A/69/L.67 was adopted (resolution
69/283).
The Acting President: The Assembly will next
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.68, entitled
“Establishment of an open-ended intergovernmental
expert working group on indicators and terminology
relating to disaster risk reduction”.

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this meeting. I am very happy to see you
presiding over the General Assembly this morning. I
would also like to express our thanks for the support we
received from the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Sam Kutesa, during the process of holding the
United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction, which was held in Sendai, Japan, in March
2015.
As the host country of the Sendai Conference,
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the
6,500 participants from 187 Member States, which
included a great number of Heads of State and
Government and cabinet ministers. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for his attendance at the Conference, and the many
representatives who made the trip with me to Sendai
from New York. I would like to extend my gratitude
to the following countries in particular. I thank
Switzerland, the host country of the meetings of two
preparatory committees, and Thailand and Finland for
their tireless efforts as co-Chairs of the preparatory and
main committees. I would also like to thank Jamaica
for its great contribution in chairing the working group
for targets on the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction. Finally, I express my appreciation for the
preparation efforts by the Inter-Agency Secretariat of
the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction and
Ms. Margareta Wahlström, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the implementation of the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction.
I strongly welcome the endorsement of the outcome
document of the World Conference, namely, the Sendai
Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction, as contained in resolution 69/283.
I also welcome the adoption of the resolution on the
establishment of an open-ended intergovernmental
expert working group on indicators and terminology
related to disaster risk reduction (resolution 69/284).

15-165493/16

A/69/PV.92

Our Peruvian and Chilean colleagues made great efforts
to establish those two key elements on implementation
of these outcome documents, and I would like to
thank them for that. Following the endorsement of the
outcome documents, it is important to implement the
Sendai Framework. We should conduct a follow-up and
review that are coherent with the post-2015 development
agenda.
Since 90 per cent of those affected by disasters live
in developing countries, disaster risk reduction is high
on their priority list. The way that the international
community shows its support after the great earthquake
that hit Nepal in April will be an important test of its
commitment to the Sendai Conference. Japan would
like to serve as a co-Chair at the donor conference
for Nepal to be held on 25 June. It is important for the
international community to continue to support Nepal,
from emergency response to recovery, in a seamless
manner. In doing so, we can realize “Building Back
Better”, which is one of the priorities of the Sendai
Framework.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of raising preparedness and awareness
concerning natural disasters so as to minimize their
risks, as also set out in the Sendai Framework. In
her concluding remarks at the Sendai Conference,
Mrs. Eriko Yamatani, Japan’s Minister of State for
Disaster Management and President of the Conference,
urged that we establish a World Tsunami Day for that
purpose. We are considering a draft resolution, to be
proposed at the Assembly’s seventieth session, on
establishing a World Tsunami Day, and would like to
take the initiative on the matter.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
In Peru’s view, establishing an open-ended
inter-governmental expert working group on indicators
and terminology relating to disaster risk reduction is
extremely important. As one of the facilitators of the text
of today’s resolution 69/284, we would like to highlight
the constructive work by the various delegations and
their commitment to undertake action in the wake of
the third United Nations World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction, held in Sendai, Japan, in March. We
are also grateful to the Government of Japan for the
Conference’s excellent organization and work. It was
the first of a series of decisive meetings on sustainable
development to be held throughout the year, the others
being the third International Conference on Financing
for Development, the September summit to adopt the

4/16

03/06/2015

post-2015 agenda and the 2015 United Nations Climate
Change Conference, in December.
The goals of sustainable development at the centre of
the post-2015 development agenda demand coordinated,
effective and, especially, coherent action in all these
processes. That is why establishing an expert working
group to develop global indicators and finalizing the
work to update the Terminology on Disaster Risk
Reduction is the next step — a small but important step
within the framework of the international strategy for
disaster risk reduction that will contribute to reaching
the central goal of sustainable development that we all
desire.
As has been demonstrated, there is a substantive
relationship between the occurrence of disasters in a
country and its prospects for development. I therefore
wish to reiterate our thanks to all delegations,
particularly those that participated in the working group.
We also thank the office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk Reduction,
whose technical support will continue to be extremely
valuable.
Mrs. Robl (United States of America): The United
States was pleased to participate in the third United
Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction,
held in Sendai, Japan, earlier this year. We are deeply
grateful to the Government of Japan for hosting the
Conference and providing invaluable leadership in
efforts to address disaster risk reduction. The United
States was a strong supporter of the Hyogo Framework
for Action and will continue to participate actively in
global efforts to reduce the risk of disasters, consistent
with the core principle of disaster risk reduction that
gives each State the primary responsibility for taking
effective measures to reduce disaster risk.
The United States is nonetheless obliged to
reiterate its concerns about the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction, expressed in our explanation
of position of 18 March at the Conference, dissociating
itself from certain paragraphs in the Framework
containing elements that detract from our collective
efforts to address disaster risk reduction. The United
States continues to dissociate itself from those
paragraphs. In particular, concerning the transfer of
technology, the United States supports a broad range
of initiatives and mechanisms that provide technical
assistance, including through the transfer of technology,
to developing countries.

15-16549

03/06/2015

However, we maintain that the transfer of
technology must not be coerced and that the rights of
private holders of intellectual property must not be
abrogated. For that reason we underscore our view
that the Framework as it stands does not change the
obligations of countries under national law and the
relevant international agreements. The language on
technology transfer in this Framework can therefore not
serve as a precedent for future negotiated documents,
including any documents relating to the sustainable
development goals or the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, or any other negotiations inside or outside the
United Nations system.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): With regard to the General Assembly’s
adoption today of resolution 69/283, an outcome
document of the third United Nations World Conference
on Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Sendai, Japan, El
Salvador, as a country highly vulnerable to the effects
of natural incidents originating in climate change and
other phenomena, is pleased to note the issuance of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and
supports international cooperation in efforts aimed at
substantially reducing deaths, victims and economic
losses by 2030.
Taking into account the enormous damage inflicted
on its economy by the frequent national disasters it has
suffered, El Salvador is pleased with the decision of
the Sendai Conference to encourage action designed
to reduce economic losses to the gross national
product resulting from disasters, to reduce damage to
infrastructure and basic services, and to increase access
to early-warning systems and information on disaster
risks. Considering the investments that El Salvador has
put great effort into making but that are insufficient
to deal with the losses and damage caused by natural
disasters, we are confidently expecting improvements
in the levels and effectiveness of international
cooperation in implementing the Framework in
developing countries.
It is essential that the content and implementation
of the Sendai Framework be incorporated as a new
building block into other significantly relevant
international proceedings, such as the International
Conference on Financing for Development, specific
elements of the post-2015 development agenda, the next
World Humanitarian Summit, in 2016, and the third
United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable

A/69/PV.92

Urban Development, Habitat III, which will also be held
in 2016. We also call on the system’s agencies, funds
and programmes and their executive boards to align the
Sendai Framework in their work with the agencies, funds
and programmes on the ground, in order to strengthen
national capacities to deal with potential disasters.
The work of the open-ended intergovernmental expert
working group on indicators and terminology relating
to disaster risk reduction will have a decisive role in
ensuring understanding at the global level, while at the
same time we can maintain and strengthen an effective
response at the local level.
Finally, El Salvador would like to thank the
Government and the people of Japan for their successful
hosting of the Conference and for their ongoing
commitment at the international level to the issue of
resilience and disaster risk reduction.
Mr. Coloma (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
is grateful for the support of all delegations in the
process of negotiations on resolution 69/284, which
we just adopted, and urges all countries to continue
to work on following up the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction. I would like to again thank
the delegation of Japan and all delegations, especially
Peru, for working on the resolution, which establishes
the intergovernmental group of experts and serves as a
triumph in the fight and work to reduce disaster risk.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
On behalf of the President of the General Assembly,
I would like to express my gratitude to the delegations
of Peru and Chile, which conducted the discussions
and complex negotiations on resolution 69/284 in the
informal consultations to bring them to a successful
conclusion. I am sure that members of the Assembly
join me in extending to them our sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item
19.
Agenda item 32
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/69/L.70)
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that the debate on this item will be held at a
later stage, to be announced.

15-165495/16

A/69/PV.92

I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkmenistan to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.70.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian): I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.70,
entitled “Permanent neutrality of Turkmenistan”. Please
allow me to thank all delegations for the constructive
and fruitful negotiations that resulted in the elaboration
of this comprehensive draft resolution. We wish to
especially thank the Department of Political Affairs
and the Secretariat for their valuable contributions,
support and coordinated work on the draft resolution.
On 12 December 1995, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 50/80 A, on the permanent neutrality
of Turkmenistan. That historic event was the starting
point for all actions that followed for Turkmenistan
at the international level to define its principles of
cooperation with other peoples and States. We value
and take pride in the trust placed in us by the United
Nations. We are cognizant of our own responsibility to
the international community and feel that it is a matter
of honour to continue to bring to life the permanent
positive neutrality on the strategic sovereign goals of
our State in this new and often crisis-filled time in
world history. The path of neutrality and the principles
it enshrines allow us to successfully ensure such basic
criteria as peace; respect for all peoples, cultures
and traditions; tolerance and respect for all religions.
Those criteria translate into the practical arena of the
foreign policy and diplomacy of Turkmenistan. Time
has shown the relationship between the neutral status
of Turkmenistan and the long-term goals of the United
Nations and the development of States and peoples of
the planet and the conditions of peace and security.
The foundation of the draft resolution under
consideration today includes the real, practical results
of the neutrality policy of Turkmenistan and examples
of the effectiveness of the model of consistent active
neutrality as a significant factor in international
peacekeeping efforts. That was evidenced by the several
rounds of negotiations, held in Ashgabat with the
support of the United Nations, which have played a key
role in achieving peace and agreements in Tajikistan.
Notably, the capital of our neutral State hosted a
dialogue to regulate the internal Afghan conflict at
the end of the 1990s. Today, Ashgabat continues to
highlight its readiness to hold further multilateral
dialogues in Turkmenistan on issues of rapprochement,
with a leading role for Afghanistan.

6/16

03/06/2015

The United Nations considers Turkmenistan a
true companion and effective partner in maintaining
and supporting political stability in the region and
the development of good-neighbourly relationships,
friendship and cooperation. That was seen in the
2007 decision to open in Ashgabat the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. That decision was based on the need to make the
peacekeeping efforts of the international community
in Central Asia more systematic and to ensure that the
strengthening of United Nations institutions. There was
also an awareness of the importance of the neutrality
model in foreign policy goals and international
preventive diplomacy and in ensuring international
peace and security at the regional and global levels.
Within its mandate, the Centre is today the optimal
platform for cooperation among our countries and
the active involvement of international organizations
in regional issues. Turkmenistan welcomes and fully
supports the activities of the Centre.
The proposed draft resolution touches on the
significantly organic link between economic,
particularly geo-economic, aspects of the stable policy
of neutrality and the issues of ensuring energy and
transport security. Today, without ensuring strong
international guarantees for transporting energy and
fuel, we cannot speak of stable development of the global
economy or a conflict-free secure process regionally or
a predictable foreign policy course, for both separate
States and groups of States. We have shown that a
practice of joint economic trade and investment projects
can smooth and neutralize the most acute foreign policy
discords and serve as an effective measure of preventive
diplomacy. The draft resolution largely focuses on qn
understanding of neutrality through the prism of the
national experience of Turkmenistan. However, the
draft resolution also offers an opportunity to increase
the knowledge of modern models of neutral policies.
The draft resolution shows how neutral status supports
more dynamic intergovernmental cooperation through
Turkmenistan’s permanent neutrality.
In paragraph 3, the draft resolution welcomes
the decision of the Government of Turkmenistan to
declare 2015 the Year of Neutrality and Peace. I wish
to draw the Assembly’s attention to the part of the
paragraph indicating the decision to host in Ashgabat
an international conference on the theme “Policy of
neutrality: international cooperation for peace, security
and development” in December 2015. We are certain

15-16549

03/06/2015

that the adoption of the draft resolution will raise the
profile of the event and serve to increase the level of
participation by world leaders, which would enable an
increase in the current awareness of the potential of
policies of neutrality in building sustainable peace.
On 12 December 2015, Turkmenistan will take
stock of its 20 years of work since the recognition
by the international community of our status as a
permanently neutral State. Turkmenistan’s neutrality
is our reality today and it will remain so tomorrow. It
opens up new opportunities for us to develop broader
international partnerships in all areas, including, as
a priority, enhanced multilevel cooperation with the
United Nations.
We express our gratitude to the delegations of more
than 50 countries that have co-sponsored the draft
resolution and count on consensus in its adoption, as
it is aimed at strengthening regional and international
security and at building peace.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.70, entitled
“Permanent neutrality of Turkmenistan”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.70:
Austria, Bangladesh, the Central African Republic,
China, Colombia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Ecuador,
Estonia, Fiji, France, Georgia, Guinea, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, the Niger, Poland, Slovakia,
Somalia, Sweden, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.70?
Draft resolution A/69/L.70 was adopted (resolution
69/285).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 32.

A/69/PV.92

Agenda item 33
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and
their implications for international peace, security
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/909)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.69)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.69.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Speaking under agenda
item 33, entitled “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM
area and their implications for international peace,
security and development”, I take the floor again this
year to address a very important humanitarian issue
for my country and to solicit the General Assembly’s
support for the draft resolution entitled “Status of
internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”, as contained in document A/69/L.69.
Since its first adoption, in 2008 (resolution 63/307),
the resolution has drawn increasing international
support due to its human appeal and humanitarian
goals. In principle, each Member State’s vote in favour
is a vote in support of the fundamental humanitarian
values based on the provisions of international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations, to which
we all subscribe. Each vote sends a powerful signal
to every displaced person in Georgia. In a country
of 4.5 million, around 400,000 — 10 per cent of my
country’s population — have been forced to flee their
homes and remain unable to return due to circumstances
entirely beyond their control.
With this draft resolution, my Government aims to
galvanize international support for our citizens of all
ethnicities and religions expelled from the two Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia. We reaffirm from this rostrum — and this very
important platform — their right to a safe, dignified
and voluntary return to their places of origin and their
inalienable property rights.
We, as the international community, have a moral
responsibility to come together and demonstrate our
adherence to the humanitarian cause that transcends the
case of a single country and is universal in nature. To
our dismay, currently 50 million people are displaced

15-165497/16

A/69/PV.92

worldwide — the highest number recorded since the
Second World War.
The plight of the Georgian internally displaced
persons and refugees dates back to the early 1990s.
They were forced to flee in search of security and safety.
As the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs so expressively describes it, becoming a forcibly
displaced person
“does not just mean losing the roof over your head.
It is about losing your connection to your family, to
your source of income ... It is about losing access to
the network of people around you who you would
normally turn to in times of hardship.”
Many of us have seen the same sentiments vividly
expressed in the photo exhibition “A Story of Internal
Displacement Captured on Camera”, on a display
just one flight down in this building. The exhibit’s
powerful images tell a story of my countrymen who left
everything behind when they were forced to flee their
homes. The Government of Georgia makes every effort
to alleviate their burden and to ensure decent conditions
for them, in accordance with our national strategy and
its relevant action plan, and without prejudice to their
unalienable right to a safe and dignified return.
The present draft resolution is not directed
against any party, nor does it aim to point fingers at
those responsible for forced displacement. Its primary
focus on human rights is a deliberate choice to avoid
political speculation when the fundamental rights
of the displaced are at stake. The text of the draft
resolution remains unchanged because its provisions
remain unfulfilled. And for this very reason, we need
this draft resolution as an important international legal
instrument. The draft resolution itself and the reporting
mechanism constitute indispensable instruments for
the United Nations to remain seized of the matter.
As the draft resolution shows, its firm commitment
to the Geneva international discussions — the forum
mandated by the 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement
between Georgia and the Russian Federation to address
security issues in Georgia — gives the necessary
impetus to the participants to take immediate steps
to realize in practical terms the draft resolution’s
main goals. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has also
highlighted the fact that

8/16

03/06/2015

“the Geneva international discussions remain the
only forum for relevant stakeholders to meet and
address the issues identified in resolution 68/274.”
Resolution 68/274 and the subsequent report of the
Secretary-General (A/68/868) serve as the reference
points in the Geneva international discussions and
complement the work on humanitarian issues. I would
reiterate that my Government is committed to peace
talks and will remain engaged in the discussions in
good faith to attain tangible results.
I would like now to briefly draw the Assembly’s
attention to the ongoing situation on the ground. The
so-called integration treaties recently signed by the
Russian Federation with the occupation regimes in
Tskhinvali and Sukhumi undermine all principles of
international law and further exacerbate the security
and humanitarian situation. The large-scale installation
of barbed wire and fences along the occupation line has
intensified and already exceeds 60 kilometres. These
artificial obstacles separate families and communities,
significantly affect the livelihoods of the local population
and prevent people-to-people contacts. Due to such
restrictions on their freedom of movement, displaced
people are not even allowed to visit the graves of their
families during religious holidays. While there has been
some progress in the provision of medical services, on
a number of tragic occasions people seeking medical
assistance have died en route to hospital when denied
passage through the occupation line. For our part,
we continue to remain committed to providing free
medical care, as well as other Government services, to
those residing in occupied territories.
It is particularly alarming that no international
monitoring mechanisms are allowed inside the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions. Last year, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons were denied access to the occupied
territories. This year, Mr. Juan E. Méndez, the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment, was
also not allowed in.
When introducing this draft resolution every year,
we leave politics aside and focus exclusively on the
humanitarian dimension of the problem. As SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon rightfully reiterates in his 2015
report (A/69/909),

15-16549

03/06/2015

“the right of return and its exercise by an internally
displaced person cannot ... be directly linked to
political questions or the conclusion of peace
agreements. It is essential to recognize return as
both a human right and a humanitarian issue that
must be addressed irrespective of any solution to an
underlying conflict.” (A/69/909, para. 45)
We thank the Secretary-General for that reminder.
In that light, I urge members once again to support the
fundamental principle of the right of return and to vote
in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development (GUAM) and its member
States, namely, Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine.
The General Assembly has convened today to take
action on draft resolution A/69/L.69, on protracted
displacement in the GUAM area, specifically in Georgia
where, for more than 20 years, hundreds of thousands
of men, women and children have been unable to
return to their homes. The GUAM member States
stand together once again to present a united position
and request members’ support for the adoption of this
purely humanitarian and non-political draft resolution.
States Members of the United Nations are well
aware of the humane goals of the draft resolution before
us, which the General Assembly has adopted annually
since May 2008. Every year, we see a growing number
of supporters. The message behind each vote stands
for increased attention to, and solidarity with, each
and every Georgian citizen forcibly displaced from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia, since the early 1990s. Support for
the draft resolution is rooted in our shared and longstanding commitment to fundamental humanitarian
principles, including the right to return, property rights
and humanitarian access to the affected regions.
Since the adoption of last year’s resolution 68/274,
the situation on the ground has deteriorated due to
additional impediments to the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees to their homes.
Our particular concern remains the continued installation
of barbed-wire fences along the occupation line inside
Georgia, as well as continued unlawful detentions and
obstacles to the freedom of movement. The total length
of barbed-wire fencing along the occupation line has
now reached 60 kilometres, and the process is ongoing.

A/69/PV.92

Those artificial obstacles rip families and communities
apart and restrict people-to-people contacts, in violation
of their civil, social, economic and cultural rights.
Local residents are prevented from cultivating their
agricultural lands, visiting religious sites, accessing
cemeteries and obtaining emergency medical services.
As a result, the local population is compelled to leave
its places of residence, which threatens to create a new
wave of forcible displacements.
The situation is further exacerbated by the fact
that international humanitarian organizations are
continuously denied access to the occupied territories.
In 2014, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights visited Georgia. When she was not
allowed into those two regions of Georgia, she concluded
that the Tskhinvali region remained a black hole and
“one of the most inaccessible places on Earth, with
no access permitted for international agencies”. The
States members of GUAM believe that it is paramount
to redouble our efforts to implement the call of today’s
draft resolution for unimpeded access by humanitarian
actors to the displaced population and those living in
the conflict-affected areas.
Moreover, GUAM member States firmly believe
that the humanitarian concerns of the affected
population, including internally displaced persons,
should be a priority in the present situation, and
that that issue must be addressed regardless of the
political disagreements between the actors involved.
In that context, GUAM appreciates Georgia’s strategy
for engagement through cooperation, which aims
at building trust and confidence among divided
communities. GUAM therefore reiterates its strong
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
The States members of GUAM also reiterate their
firm support for peaceful negotiations. We believe that
the Geneva international discussions are an important
platform for addressing security, humanitarian and
other challenges, as the Secretary-General himself puts
it in his most recent report (A/69/909), dated 20 May
2015. In that regard, we view the draft resolution as an
important tool for reaffirming international support
to the Geneva international discussions. The draft
resolution encourages the Geneva participants to
redouble their efforts to ensure respect for human rights
and address the issues under their respective mandates.
Therefore, we strongly disagree with any attempt to
mislead the international community by characterizing

15-165499/16

A/69/PV.92

03/06/2015

the draft resolution as politicized or as hindering the
process of the Geneva talks. We appreciate the role of
the United Nations as one of the co-chairs of the Geneva
international discussions. We also stress the relevance
of the Secretary-General’s annual reports pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions as a viable instrument
for maintaining the international community’s muchneeded involvement in, and attention to, the issue of the
displaced.

regions, which continue installing barbed-wire fences
and other obstacles along the administrative boundary
lines in Georgia. Those actions compromise Georgia’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty and have a grave
impact on the freedom of movement and other basic
human rights of the local population. We would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our firm support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders.

The issue of forced displacement has been a longstanding one in the GUAM region. Recently, that
problem has acquired new and daunting dimensions as a
result of the aggression against Ukraine. As of now, the
number of IDPs in Ukraine stands at over 1.2 million.
The large-scale displacements in Ukraine intensify the
magnitude of the region’s growing humanitarian needs
and make the international community’s response even
more urgent.

We fully share and support the objectives of the draft
resolution: the recognition of the right of all refugees
and IDPs to return to their homes in Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region; respect for the property rights of
those persons; the prohibition of forced demographic
changes; humanitarian access for all IDPs, refugees
and other persons living within the conflict affected
area; a call on the participants in the Geneva talks to
establish favourable security conditions, conducive to
the voluntary, safe, dignified and unimpeded return of
IDPs; the development of a timetable for their return;
and a request to the Secretary-General to submit a
comprehensive report on the implementation of the
draft resolution at the next session of the General
Assembly.

Taking into account all the preceding arguments,
and bearing in mind the humanitarian goals of the draft
resolution before us, including to secure the right of
safe and dignified return for IDPs and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia, GUAM member States will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/69/L.69 and urge members
of the Assembly to do the same.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): It is an honour for me
to speak today on behalf of the Baltic and Nordic States,
namely, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Lithuania.
Poland associates itself with this statement.
The number of internally displaced persons in the
world remains alarmingly high, with more and more
people forced to flee their homes by armed conflicts,
violence and human rights violations. We call on
the international community to continue seeking
sustainable solutions for displaced persons and to
guarantee the protection of their rights under the
provisions of international law.
The difficult situation of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees from Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia, has been
known to the international community for a long
time, but so far no substantial progress has been
achieved with regard to their right to a safe, dignified
and voluntary return to their places of origin. The
problem has been further deepened by activities of
the foreign security forces in control of the occupied

10/16

The broad and recurring support for the draft
resolution — now for the eighth consecutive
year — demonstrates the importance that the
international community attaches to this issue. It
serves also as a signal to the displaced that they are
not forgotten and that the international community will
remain committed in its active support for their plight.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom looks forward to the adoption of draft
resolution A/69/L.69, on the status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from the Georgian
provinces of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The draft
resolution reaffirms the unalienable right of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees to return to
their homes. This must be done in a safe and dignified
manner, regardless of their ethnic origin. As this is a
humanitarian and human rights issue, we should not
allow wider political issues affecting the region to
obscure this undisputed right of return.
The need is great. There are over a quarter of
a million registered IDPs in Georgia. Many live in
difficult and vulnerable conditions, with poor housing
and limited access to basic services. As they await
their return, they face daily challenges, whether in

15-16549

03/06/2015

integrating into local communities or from their lack
of property rights. It is therefore important that the
General Assembly send a clear and united message to
the IDPs and refugees in the region. We cannot forget
them. We will continue to call for their return home.
We welcome the Government of Georgia’s efforts
to help improve the situation of IDPs. The publication
this week of the first quarterly report (A/69/909)
documenting the human rights situation in the
breakaway territories is a positive development. It is
also important that national and international legislation
be implemented effectively to help and protect the
lives of IDPs. In this context, we call on Russia to stop
borderization activities on the administrative boundary
lines with Abkhazia and South Ossetia. These activities
are both a direct impediment to the return of Georgian
IDPs and in flagrant disregard of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Georgia. Furthermore, we call on
the de facto authorities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia
to allow access to humanitarian agencies, including the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Let me conclude by stressing the importance
of the draft resolution before us today. We must also
recognize that it will be actions from the region, and
not words in New York, that will determine progress on
this issue. We hope that all sides, including Russia and
Georgia, will use the Geneva international discussions
as the forum to discuss and make progress on this issue.
Such progress is long overdue.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Our
delegation thanks you, Madam, for the opportunity to
speak on an issue of importance to our country and
Government.
(spoke in English)
Canada takes an active role in promoting the rights
and well-being of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs), and we are committed to continuing to
work with the international community to address both
long-standing and emerging protection challenges.
Addressing internal displacement is a critical element
of the United Nations mandate and is central to its work
on the protection of civilians.
(spoke in French)
At a time when the number of displaced persons
worldwide is at a record high, international commitment
to fulfilling its moral and legal obligations to protect
civilians and ensure respect for international law is

A/69/PV.92

vital. Equally important is responding efficiently and
effectively to the protection and assistance needs of
displaced persons and refugees. The guiding principles
on internal displacement, the key international
framework for the protection of IDPs, provide a critical
advocacy and monitoring structure for the assistance
and protection needs of IDPs.
(spoke in English)
Canada supports the call in draft resolution
A/69/L.69 for unimpeded access for humanitarian
activities to internally displaced persons and refugees in
all conflict-affected areas in Georgia. We also support
calls for all participants in the Geneva discussions to
intensify their efforts to establish a durable peace,
commit to enhanced confidence-building measures and
create favourable security conditions for the voluntary,
safe and unhindered return of all internally displaced
persons and refugees to their homes.
Canada continues to support Georgia’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty within its internationally
recognized borders. Canada views the so-called
partnership treaties signed between the Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia with the
Russian Federation as both illegal and illegitimate, and
we call on the Russian Federation to put an end to its
various negative interferences in the region, to abide by
fundamental principles of international law and to fully
respect its Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe commitments, in particular the 12 August 2008
ceasefire agreement and its implementing measures of
8 September 2008.
Canada also strongly condemns Russia’s aggression
in Crimea and the eastern regions of Ukraine. The
latest violation of a sovereign nation’s territorial
integrity only further demonstrates Russia’s disregard
for international rule of law.
Sustainable solutions to conflicts must include
respect for the human rights of all individuals,
regardless of ethnic descent, faith or sexual orientation.
Canada will continue to work with other like-minded
countries and international organizations to ensure
that those forcibly displaced are able to exercise those
fundamental rights, and we call on all Member States
to support the draft resolution under consideration this
morning.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): Our position is informed
by a recognition of internationally recognized norms,

15-1654911/16

A/69/PV.92

the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and
the rights of internally displaced persons. We see our
vote here today not as a vote against any of the parties
involved, but a vote for principle. We call on all those
who believe in the peaceful resolution of international
disputes to lend their good offices to the Geneva process
and ensure that internally displaced persons enjoy our
full consideration.
As I have said before, we act out of principle, and
not out of partisan political considerations. Even though
the internally displaced persons are far from our shores
we do identify with them. Therefore, we call on all
delegations to consider the draft resolution before us
(A/69/L.69), which we believe is measured and concise
and acts accordingly in the furtherance of the Charter
and internationally recognized norms.
The Acting President: We have now heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
Before giving the floor to the speakers in
explanation of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The draft resolution (A/69/L.69) before the
General Assembly has not undergone any changes
compared to last year’s text (resolution 68/274). This
initiative is politicized and opportunistic in nature.
The Georgian delegation, as it has done in the past,
is using this theme and its humanitarian character to
promote its approach to the situation in the region and
its own perspectives. Contrary to reality and the will of
the peoples of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Georgia’s
draft resolution again contains the thesis that these
independent sovereign States belong to Georgia.
Security is of key importance to the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees. Georgia’s
persistent refusal to conclude legally binding
agreements with the South Ossetian and Abkhaz
sides on the non-use of force in no way contributes to
creating conditions for the safe return of refugees to the
region. After all, it was the actions of Tbilisi, having
undertaken the massive use of armed force against
South Ossetia, that led to the 2008 conflict. Against
this background, the appeal reiterated in the draft
resolution to the participants of the Geneva discussions
to intensify their efforts to establish peace and to agree

12/16

03/06/2015

to more effective confidence-building measures looks
insincere, to put it mildly.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/69/909)
notes the importance of the Geneva talks as a forum
for the parties to discuss issues of security, stability,
humanitarian aspects, and the efforts made in this
regard. Unfortunately, no progress has been achieved
on the issue of the return of refugees because Georgia’s
approach is to block the considerartion of this topic in
Geneva and to bring it before the General Assembly.
In March in Geneva, the representatives of South
Ossetia and Abkhazia confirmed their position of not
participating in the discussion of refugee problems in
Geneva until Georgia ends its artificial politicization of
this humanitarian topic in the General Assembly.
It is clear to us that the discussion of this topic
in New York without the participation of the Abkhaz
and South Ossetian sides is pointless. The Georgian
delegation is well aware of the position of Sukhumi
and Tskhinvali, but stubbornly persists in the line it
chose several years ago, which is aimed not at seeking
real solutions to the problems, but at confrontation and
achieving a propagandistic impact. The proposed draft
in no way contributes to the practical consideration of
the specific tasks to alleviate the humanitarian situation
for the people who were forced to flee from their homes.
We have long held no doubt about the
counterproductive nature of the Georgian initiative,
which threatens to further stall the difficult negotiations
in the Geneva discussions. We are convinced that it is
not in line with current realities, will not improve the
situation in the region, including in solving humanitarian
issues, and will not facilitate the establishment of trust
between the Abkhazian, South Ossetian and Georgian
sides, which is a key condition for solving the problems
of refugees.
In the light of all this, the delegation of the Russian
Federation requests a recorded vote on draft resolution
A/69/L.69 and will vote against it. We also urge other
States to refrain from supporting the draft resolution
for the reasons I have cited.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.69, entitled
“Status of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia, Georgia”.
A recorded vote has been requested.

15-16549

03/06/2015

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria,
Canada, Central African Republic, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Maldives, Myanmar, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria,
Argentina,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia,
Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa,
South Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu

A/69/PV.92

[Subsequently, the delegation of Austria informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
Draft resolution A/69/L.69 was adopted by 75 votes
to 16, with 78 abstentions (resolution 69/286).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Brazil has
maintained a consistent stance of abstaining in
the voting on on the text adopted today (resolution
69/286), as we believe that it can prejudge or influence
the consideration of sensitive issues that should be
resolved by the relevant negotiations in Geneva. We
acknowledge the pressures arising from the substantial
number of persons displaced and made refugees since
the 2008 conflict. The parties concerned should
create favourable political conditions for their return
and dispel fears of conflict resumption. We also urge
all actors to seek lasting solutions to the situation of
internally displaced persons and refugees, bearing in
mind their right of return.
Brazil recognizes the territorial integrity of
Georgia and expects that the dispute between Georgia
and Russia can be resolved peacefully and through
dialogue in the shortest term. In that sense, we believe
that confidence-building measures and initiatives to
foster cooperation should be pursued by all parties,
including in the framework of the Geneva process.
Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is a country that has considerable domestic and
international experience in the promotion, protection
and defence of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Adherence to international law and
to the principles of peaceful coexistence and territorial
integrity has been a priority of our foreign policy. In
that respect, we believe that it is important to ensure
that the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Special Rapporteur for internally displaced persons
enjoy immediate access to regions where emergency
situations are unfolding, and contribute to identifying
solutions for displaced persons and facilitating their
return.
Furthermore, we believe it essential to foster
conditions that enable them to correctly assess the

15-1654913/16

A/69/PV.92

humanitarian situation of the population in the region
and guarantee secure and uninterrupted access by
humanitarian actors to that region. We believe that
all parties involved must — in all situations and in an
impartial and consistent manner — preserve, strengthen
and respect the norms of international humanitarian
law, which constitute the foundation for the protection
of civilians.
Uruguay considers it important to continue the
discussions in Geneva to find a solution to security
and stability issues and to the humanitarian situation
of internally displaced persons and refugees in the
region, and trusts that those deliberations will conclude
at the earliest opportunity with a positive result for
the people affected, providing conditions for their
voluntary return to their homes and respecting their
human rights without discrimination on the basis of
ethnic origin. Uruguay attributes the highest priority
to the discussions and encourages the parties to make
the greatest effort possible to ensure their success. My
delegation therefore believed that it was appropriate to
vote in favour of resolution 69/286.
Ms. Shilo (Israel): Israel welcomes the steps that
the Government of Georgia has taken to implement
the strategy on internally displaced persons outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General (A/69/909). The
strategy has brought about a marked improvement in
the humanitarian situation of internally displaced
persons in different areas, such as housing and
integration. Israel is encouraged by the action plan
and the implementation of the strategy for 2012-2014.
Israel also views positively Georgia’s programme of
engagement through cooperation, which aims to build
trust and confidence among divided communities.
Israel supports the spirit of reconciliation through
direct dialogue promoted by the Georgian Government.
Israel would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
its support for and recognition of Georgia’s territorial
integrity. Israel does not support or recognize the
unilateral declarations of independence by Abkhazia
and South Ossetia. We reiterate our well-established
position that the way to resolve long-standing conflicts
is through a negotiated, mutually agreed upon approach,
not through unilateral actions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I give the floor to the representative of Georgia to
make a statement.

14/16

03/06/2015

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I want to thank the General
Assembly and all delegations that once again voted
in favour of humanitarian principles and helped us
uphold the Charter of the United Nations. The numbers
of internally displaced persons have been mentioned
several times. They are not just statistics; behind every
number there is a human life. I therefore thank members
once more for taking into due consideration the fact
that lives are at stake and for upholding the Charter.
The Acting President: May I take it that is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/69/L.65)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 74 and its
sub-items (a) and (b), and adopted resolution 69/109
at its 67th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2014.
Members will also recall that, under agenda item 74 (a),
the General Assembly adopted resolution 69/245 at its
76th plenary meeting, on 29 December 2014.
I give the floor to the representative of Trinidad
and Tobago to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.65.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.65, entitled
“Development of an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction”.
The draft resolution represents a combination of
the work of two rounds of informal consultations, two
rounds of exploratory discussions and the work of small
groups, all based on the recommendations of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group regarding
the scope, parameters and feasibility of an international
instrument under the Convention, in accordance with
paragraph 214 of resolution 69/245.
It will be recalled that the Working Group’s mandate
was established by resolution 66/231, and the outcome of
resolution 67/78 relating to the preparation of a decision

15-16549

03/06/2015

on the development of an international instrument
under the Convention on the Law of the Sea to be taken
at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly. At
the same time, during the negotiations that resulted in
the conclusion of the document before us this morning,
delegations were cognizant of the political commitment
made by Heads of State and Government in paragraph
162 of the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled
“The future we want” (resolution 66/288).
It should also be noted that the commitment made at
the Conference was endorsed by the General Assembly
in resolution 66/288, of 27 July 2012, which called for
action to be taken on an urgent basis, building on the
work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group, to study issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond
areas of national jurisdiction.
Today’s introduction of draft resolution A/69/L.65
marks another important phase as the General
Assembly seeks to put in place measures to develop
an international legally binding instrument under
the Convention with regard to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond
areas of national jurisdiction. It would be remiss of me
not to compliment delegations for their commitment and
diligence, which resulted in agreement by consensus on
the text now under consideration.
The draft resolution, among other things,
establishes a preparatory process to lay the foundation
for the convening of an intergovernmental conference,
under the auspices of the United Nations, to consider
the recommendations of the preparatory committee on
the elements and to elaborate the text of an international
legally binding instrument under the Convention on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction.
An examination of the document will also show
that agreement was reached for the preparatory
committee to convene in 2016 and 2017, as detailed in
paragraph 1 (b) of the draft resolution. With respect to
paragraph 1 (i), the understanding is that the elements
where consensus is not attained, even after exhausting
every effort, will be presented in a separate section of
the report that the preparatory committee will transmit
to the General Assembly. Paragraph 2 of the draft text
emphasizes the point that delegations were determined

A/69/PV.92

to build on previous work on the subject and, as such,
the draft resolution would decide that
“negotiations shall address the topics identified in
the package agreed in 2011, namely the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
of areas beyond national jurisdiction, in particular,
together and as a whole, marine genetic resources,
including questions on the sharing of benefits,
measures such as area-based management tools,
including marine protected areas, environmental
impact assessments and capacity-building and the
transfer of marine technology”.
The informal negotiations also showed that
delegations were of the view that there should be
widespread participation in the deliberations of all
Member States, be they developing or developed
countries, as a result of the tremendous importance
delegations attach to the work of the preparatory
committee and the eventual convening of the
international conference for the conclusion of an
international agreement on the subject. As a result,
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution would request
“the Secretary-General to establish a special
voluntary trust fund for the purpose of assisting
developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, land-locked developing
countries and small island developing States,
in attending the meetings of the preparatory
committee and the intergovernmental conference
referred to in paragraph 1 (a)”
of the draft resolution. It goes on to invite Member States,
international financial institutions, donor agencies,
intergovernmental organizations, non-Governmental
organizations and natural and juridical persons to make
financial contributions to the voluntary trust fund. The
emphasis is to ensure that no one is left out.
Delegations were also quite aware of the need
for the provision of the requisite resources to enable
the preparatory committee to perform its tasks, and
therefore paragraph 6 is important to note.
The work of the informal consultations would
not have been possible without the expert assistance
provided by the Division for Ocean Affairs and the
Law of the Sea and other units of the Secretariat, which
provided the coordinator with advice when needed.
At this juncture, I also wish to thank all delegations
that have sponsored the draft resolution to date. It is

15-1654915/16

A/69/PV.92

my sincere hope that when the General Assembly takes
action on this particular topic, the draft resolution will
be adopted by consensus, which will be consistent and
which will have characterized all deliberations on the
question of marine biological diversity beyond areas of
national jurisdiction since this item was placed on the
agenda of the General Assembly.
The Acting President: I wish to inform members
that action on draft resolution A/69/L.65 is postponed

16/16

03/06/2015

to a later date, to be announced, in order to provide
additional time for the Secretariat to inform the
Assembly on the programme budgetary implications of
the proposal, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item
74.
The meeting rose at noon.

15-16549
