C. LETTER FROM THE ACTING CHAIRMAN OF THE
DELEGATION OF GREECE TO THE SECRETARYGENERAL DATED 3 DECEMBER 1946, AND ENCLOSED MEMORANDUM CONCERNING THE SITUATION IN NORTHERN GREECE 1 0

C. LETTRE DU PRESIDENT PAR INTERIM DE LA
DELEGATION DE GRECE AU SECRETAIRE GENERAL, EN DATE DU 3 DECEMBRE 1946, AVEC UN
MEMORANDUM RELATIF A LA SITUATION EXISTANT DANS LE NORD DE LA GRECEl0

12 (1946). Resolution of 10 December 1946

12 (1946). Resolution du 10 decemhre 1946

The Security Council
Resolves that:
1. The representatives of Greece and Yugoslavia
are invited to participate in the discussion without
vote;
2. The representatives of Albania and Bulgaria are
invited to enable the Security Council to hear such
declarations as they may wish to make;
3. Should the Security Council find at a later
stage that the matter under consideration is a dispute,
the representatives of Albania and Bulgaria will be
invited to participate in the discussion without vote.

Le Conseil de sccurite
Decide que:
1. Les representants de la Grece et de la Y ougoslavie sont invites a participer a la discussion, sans droit
de vote;
2. Les representants de l' Albanie et de la Bulgarie
sont invites a faire entendre au Conseil de securite Jes
declarations qu'ils desireraient faire;
3. Si, par la suite, le Conseil de securite estime que
la question a l'etude constitue un diffe.rend, Jes representants de l'Albanie et de la Bulgarie seront invites
a participer a la discussion, sans droit de vote.

Adopted at the 82nd meetin,q_ll

Adoptee a la 82eme scanrtll_

Decision

Decision

At its 84th meeting, on 16 December 1946, the
Conncil decided to invite the representatives of Albania
and Bulgaria to participate, withont vote, in the remainder of the discussion of the question, provided
that they accepted. on behalf of their Governments, for
the purposes of the c;1se. the obligations of pacific
settlement provided in the Charter.

A sa 84eme seance, le 16 decembre 1946, le Conseil
a decide d'inviter Jes representants de I' Albanie et de
la Bulgarie a participer, sans droit de vote, au reste de
la discussion de la question, sous .reserve qu'ils acceptent, au nom de leurs gouvernements, aux fins de la
cause, Jes obligations de reglement pacifique prevues
par la Chart e.

15 (1946). Resolution of 19 December 1946
[S/3391

15 (1946). Resolution du 19 decembre 1946
[S/339]

Whereas there have been presented to the Security
Council oral and written statements by the Greek,
Yugoslav. Albanian ,md Bnlgarian Governments relating to disturbe<l con<litions in northern Greece along
the frontier between Greece on the one hand and
Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other, which
conditions. in the opinion of the Council, should be
investiv.ated before the Council attempts to reach any
conclusions regarding the issues involved,

C onsiderant que des exposes oraux et ecrits ont ete
presentes au Conseil de securite par les Gouvernements
grec, yougoslave, albanais et bulgare, concernant la
situation troublee en Grece septentrionale le long de la
frontie~e entre la Grece, d'une part, et I' Albanie, la
Bulgane et la Yougoslav.ie, d'autre part, situation qui,
clans !'opinion du Conseil de securite devrait faire
l'objet d'une enquete, avant que le C~nseil ne ,tente
d'arriver a une conclusion, quelle qu'elle soit sur Jes
faits en question,
'
Le Conseil de securite
Decide:

The Security Council
Resolves:
That the Security Council under Article 34 of the
Charter establish a Commission of Investigation to ascertain the facts relating to the alleged border violations
along the frontier between Greece on the one hand
and 'Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other;
That the Commission be composed of a representative
of each of the members of the Security Council as it
will be constituted in 1947 ;

Que, conformement a l' Article 34 de la Charte une
Commission d'enquete sera instituee afin de verifi;r Jes
£~its relatifs aux violations de frontiere qui auraient eu
l!eu le l~mg de la frontiere entre la Grece, d'une part, et
l Albame, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie, d'autre part;
Que la Commission sera composee d'un representant
de chacun des membres du ·Conseil de securite tel qu'il
sera constitue en 1947;
10 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 10, annex 16.
1 and 2 were adopted unanimously; paragraph 3 was adopted "by a majority vote". No vote was taken
on the draft resolution as a whole.
10 Ibid.,

Supplement No 10, annexe 16.
Les paragraphes 1 et 2 ont ete adoptes a l'unanimite · le
paragraphe 3 a ete adopte "a la majorite des voix". Ii 'n'y
a pas eu de vote sur !'ensemble du projet de resolution.
11

11 Paragraphs

6

That the Commission shall proceed to the area not
later than 15 January 1947, and shall submit to the
Security Council at the earliest possible date a report
of the facts disclosed by its investigation. The Commission shall. if it deems it advisable or if requested
by the Secnrity Council, make preliminary reports to
the Security Council:
That the Commission shall have authority to conduct
its investigation in northern Greece and in such places
in other parts of Greece, in Albania, Bulgaria and
Ymroslavia as the Commission considers should be included in its investigation in order to elucidate the
causes and nature of the above-mentioned border violations and disturbances:
That the Commission shall have authority to call
upon the Governments, officials and nationals of those
c01mtries, as well as such other sources as the Commission deems necessary, for information relevant to its
investigation :
That the Security Council request the SecretaryGeneral to communicate with the appropriate authorities
of the countries named above in order to facilitate the
Commission's investigation in those countries;
That each representative on the Commission be entitlrd to select the personnel necessary to assist him
and that, in addition, the Security Council request the
Secretary-General to provide such staff and assistance
to the Commission as it deems necessary for the
prompt and effective fulfilment of its task;
That a representative of each of the Governments of
Greece. Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia be invited
to assist in the work of the Commission in a liaison
capacity;
That the Commission be invited to make any proposals that it may deem wise for averting a repetition
of border violations and disturbances in these areas.

Que la Commission se rendra sur les lieux, au plus
tard le 15 janvier 1947, et presentera au Conseil de
securite, a la date la plus rapprochee possible, un rapport sur les faits reveles par son enquete. La Commission adressera, si elle le juge convenable ou si elle en
est requise par le Conseil, des rapports preliminaires
au Conseil de securite;
Que la Commission aura autorite pour conduire son
enquete en Grece septentrionale et en tous lieux clans
les autres parties de la Grece, en Albanie, en Bulgarie
et en Yougoslavie que la Commission jugera devoir
comprendre clans son enquete pour elucider les causes
et la nature des violations de frontiere et des troubles
precites;
Que la Commission aura autorite pour faire appel
aux gouvernements, aux fonctionnaires et aux nationaux de ces pays, ainsi qu'a toute autre source qu'elle
jugera necessaire, pour recueillir les informations pertinentes;
Que le Conseil de securite prie le Secretaire general
de communiquer avec les autorites competentes des
pays precites, afin de faciliter l'enquete de la Commission clans lesdits pays ;
Que chaque membre de la Commission sera habilite
a choisir le personnel necessaire pour !'assister et que,
en outre, le Conseil de securite demande au Secretaire
general de fournir a la Commission le personnel et
!'assistance que celle-ci jugera necessaires a !'execution
prompte et efficace de sa tache ;
Qu'un representant de chacun des Gouvernements
de la Grece, de 1' Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie sera invite a assister la Commission clans ses
travaux a titre d'agent de liaison;
Que la Commission sera invitee a faire toute proposition qu'elle jugera susceptible d'empecher le renouvellement de violations de frontiere et de troubles clans
ces regions.

Adopted unanimously at the
87th meeting.

Adoptee d l'unanimite d la
87eme seance.

THE INDONESIAN QUESTION

LA QUESTION INDONESIENNE

Decisions

Decisions

At its 12th meeting, on 7 February 1946, the Council
decided to invite the representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic to participate, without vote,
in the discussion of the question.

A sa 12eme seance, le 7 fevrier 1946, le Conseil a
decide d'inviter le representant de la Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine a participer, sans droit de
vote, a la discussion de la question.

At the 18th meeting, on 13 February 1946, following
the rejection by the Council of the draft resolutions
submitted under this item, the President declared that
the matter was closed and the Council passed to the
next item on the agenda.

A sa 18eme seance, le 13 fevrier 1946, le Conseil
ayant rejete les projets de resolution dont il etait saisi
au sujet de cette question, le President a declare que
la question etait close et le Conseil est passe au point
suivant de l'ordre du jour.

7
