S/PV.8406

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8406th meeting

Monday, 19 November 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-38650 (E)
*1838650*

S/PV.8406

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. De Mistura is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: It is good to be with the Council.
Since my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.8383), the Secretary-General has announced
that Mr. Geir Pedersen of Norway — a good friend of
mine and an excellent choice, if I may say so — will
be the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, following my own announcement that I will be
moving on in the near future. The precise date will be
determined by the Secretary-General in the light of all
of the relevant circumstances. I therefore anticipate
that I will be briefing the Security Council once again
in December.
The Secretary-General has asked me to complete
one final task: to verify whether the Sochi final
statement can be implemented or not, and either to
convene — which I hope to do — or leave clarity on
exactly why we have not convened a United Nationsfacilitated, Syrian-owned and Syrian-led constitutional
committee that is credible, balanced and inclusive, and
that contributes, in the context of the Geneva process,
to the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
That work is therefore — as far as I am concerned and
I am sure the Council will agree with me — absolutely
urgent. It is vital to make progress in the political process,
particularly on the constitutional committee. It is also
central to the Secretary-General’s considerations on the
upcoming sequence of events, and I am not the only one
2/17

19/11/2018

to emphasize the urgent need to advance that work. On
27 October, we saw a quadrilateral summit take place
in Istanbul between the Presidents of the Republic of
Turkey, the French Republic and the Russian Federation
and the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany.
I attended that meeting and briefed the four leaders.
The summit was important because it was
composed of two groups of countries with influence,
including some of the guarantors of the Astana group,
who had also been convening the Sochi meetings in
January, and the members of the so-called small group
on Syria. I saw how much importance the four leaders
and their teams gave to the issue of the constitutional
committee in hours of tough negotiation, including at
the highest level. The four leaders were able to find
common ground. They took many of my own messages
on board and they produced a final declaration that I
saw as positive and helpful. Other Governments have
also thereafter welcomed it. Let me highlight three
aspects in particular.
First, the declaration commended the progress
made in implementing the Idlib memorandum. We
all know how concerned we were just over one month
ago about the developments in Idlib. We therefore also
assessed that there continues to be progress on the
implementation of the memorandum. We acknowledge
that there have been occasional setbacks, including
reports of violations on the part of both sides. However,
it is still holding and it is holding much better than we
had ever dreamt, so we should be keeping our fingers
crossed. But any civilian from either side of the front
line would definitely say that the overall situation has
improved from that of a few months ago. That should
be preserved and built upon. We therefore echo the
emphasis of the Istanbul summit final declaration on
the lasting ceasefire in Idlib.
Secondly, the declaration called for creating the
conditions for the safe and voluntary return of refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to their
original places of residence in Syria. The guarantors
underscored that returnees needed security from armed
conflict, political persecution and arbitrary arrests, as
well as humanitarian infrastructure, including water,
electricity and health and social services. Let me
translate that for the Council, if I may. It is clear that
we need to establish the basic conditions of a safe, calm
and neutral environment that will help to realize the
conditions conducive to the safe and voluntary return
of millions of IDPs and refugees, which is, in any
18-38650

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

case, a fundamental element of a political package to
implement resolution 2254 (2015).
Thirdly and, frankly, perhaps most importantly,
the declaration outlined very concrete steps towards
that political package by calling for the establishment
and early convening, considering the circumstances,
of the constitutional committee in Geneva by the end
of this year with a view to achieving constitutional
reform, paving the way for free and fair elections under
United Nations supervision and in compliance with the
highest international standards of transparency and
accountability, with all Syrians, including members of
the diaspora, who are eligible to participate.
Since Istanbul, I have been proactively in touch with
relevant players. I have been, as Council members know,
in various places, and in London I hosted a consultation,
within the context of the Geneva process, with senior
officials of the small group, comprising Egypt, France,
Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom
and the United States. I also had a bilateral meeting
with the Geneva negotiations head of the Syrian High
Negotiations Committee, Naser Al-Hariri, who briefed
me on the Committee’s in-depth discussions that they
are having in Riyadh on the constitutional issues. In
fact, he indicated that they are ready to move forward
and participate in any meeting convened by the United
Nations within that context.
I have been in contact with officials from Russia,
Turkey, the United States and other countries. An
Iranian delegation came to see me just a few hours ago
here in my office in Geneva on that subject, after its
members had themselves been in Damascus. Senior
Russian, Iranian and United States officials have also
been travelling the region recently. Presidents Erdoğan
and Putin are meeting, as far as I understand, today and
tomorrow in Istanbul.
Regarding the broader atmospherics, since this
briefing is predominantly a political one, allow me to
briefly refer to some bullet points.
First, we have noted some violations in Idlib, but,
as we have said, they have been limited so far, as well
as some infighting there. Secondly, there have been
signs of activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) in eastern Syria, with reports of many
civilian deaths resulting from the fighting with ISIL.
Thirdly, there have been reports of tensions between
the Turkish armed forces and the Syrian Democratic
Forces along the Turkey-Syria border. Fourthly, there

S/PV. 8406

are reports of detainees facing new death penalties in
Syria. Fifthly, a breakthrough convoy to Rukban has
been facilitated — and we are very pleased to see that
type of cooperation — by the Russian Federation, the
Government, the United States and Jordan. My own
colleagues returned from the area expressing shock at
the terrible human misery in that stretch of the desert,
including reports of severe protection issues, such as
sexual and gender-based violence and the recruitment of
child soldiers in that camp. Recently, we received some
good news of the liberation in the south of children and
women, who had been held by ISIL for far too long.
Let me note, apart from what I have said and going
back to the political context, the announcement that the
three guarantors — the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Russian Federation and the Republic of Turkey — will
meet again in Astana at the senior level on 28 and
29 November. We believe that the meeting should be
an opportunity for them to consolidate their efforts
on the implementation of the Idlib memorandum of
understanding. On the issue of detainees, abductees
and missing people, we strongly urge them to make the
kind of progress that we have so far not seen and which
has been forecast in that context. Many thousands of
families in Syria are asking for no less.
It is also clear that the meeting in Astana will take
place against the backdrop of the efforts being made
by the same three countries, in their own capacity as
conveners of the Sochi meeting almost a year ago, to
begin the implementation of their own final statement.
It was in January that the Sochi declaration made
clear that they, and all of us, wanted to establish a
constitutional committee. I will be closely monitoring
to see if the progress will be useful in informing the
preparations for the Astana meeting in relation to the
constitutional committee.
As members can see, there are many strands of work
under way, and we will draw final conclusions only in
December. By that time, the Presidents of the Russian
Federation and the United States of America will also
have met on the margins of the Group of 20 meeting
in Buenos Aires, where, presumably, they will also be
discussing Syria. Many other important consultations
will have taken place by then as well.
As I told the Council from Beirut, the United
Nations welcomes and indeed encourages constructive
and moderate suggestions on the issue of constitutional
committee as long as they maintain the same spirit of

18-386503/17

S/PV.8406

The situation in the Middle East

credibility, balance and international legitimacy of the
middle third list. Let me unpack what I mean by that.
I mean that the middle third list must fulfil the Sochi
declaration criteria of
“Syrian experts, civil society, independents, tribal
leaders and women, [and] adequate representation
of Syria’s ethnic and religious components”.
I mean that the middle third list cannot just be a vehicle
for political representatives, particularly eminent
political leaders, of the political side, whether the
Government or the opposition side. Civil society — the
Syrian people — deserves a voice in a process that
will determine their future. The first and second lists
include political representatives, so here we should
include the other Syrians.
To be credible and productive, the constitutional
committee should contain experts who are known
not only for their own relevant technical prowess, but
who are broadly acceptable and known for their own
skills in bridge-building between the sides. I also mean
that there must be a balance of political orientations,
including space for people who do not identify with the
Government or the opposition.
Finally, a key part of legitimacy, which is very
important to me and, I know, to the Secretary-General,
is for the committee to contain a minimum of 30 per
cent of women. The Government and the opposition
lists fell short of that standard. In fact, the Government
was better than the opposition. We need the middle third
list to make up for that. The United Nations-facilitated
middle list, as it stands, is on the table and encompasses
all those dimensions.
Of course, credibility, balance and international
legitimacy also relate to the overall package, including
voting, the mandate, the chairmanship and the role of
the United Nations. For instance, for us, credible rules
of procedure mean that they do not make it possible for
any single party to dictate or to encourage paralysis.
Those are some of the criteria I had in mind when I
constructed the elements that are currently on the table,
and they will remain the litmus test for how I will be
assessing any suggestion regarding a credible, balanced
and legitimate constitutional committee. If that is not
going to happen, we may have to conclude then that it
may not be possible to form a constitutional committee
that is credible and inclusive at this stage.
4/17

19/11/2018

In such an unfortunate case, I would certainly
be ready to explain to the Council why it had arisen.
However, let me be clear that our aim is and remains
for the United Nations to issue invitations at the latest
by mid-December and to convene a first meeting of
the constitutional committee before 31 December,
which is the date indicated in the very constructive
Istanbul declaration.
Respect for Syria’s sovereignty has never been
called into question. I would like to remind Ambassador
Ja’afari, who is present in the Chamber and often talks
about it, that the United Nations has never questioned
Syria’s sovereignty. Resolution 2254 (2015) is explicitly
prefaced by a strong commitment to Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. It makes
clear that the process must be Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led.
However, let us also remember that this is a
constitutional discussion in the context of one of
the most tragic, brutal, cruel and merciless armed
conflicts of this century. The Syrian people therefore
must be enabled independently and democratically to
determine their own future. That is called sovereignty
of the people. For that reason, in the same resolution,
the Security Council gave the United Nations the
mandate to convene a political process, which, must,
inter alia, identify a process and schedule for drafting
a new constitution. As I have repeatedly stated, the
Sochi meeting itself appealed to the United Nations
to convene the constitutional committee in Geneva
and was accompanied by a firm understanding in
that regard.
At my last briefing in December, it will be my duty
to explain where we are in terms of the constitutional
committee and to leave a clean and clear path to my
successor in that regard. In other words, we are
in the final days of the attempts to implement the
constitutional committee in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Sochi final statement. The weeks to
come will be of crucial importance in that regard. The
United Nations remains ready for the establishment of
the constitutional committee. It is prepared to do its
part, and I personally will spare no effort towards that
goal up until the final day of my tenure.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
18-38650

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We would
like to thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing
and for all the work that he has done on behalf of the
Syrian people.
Today’s meeting takes place in an atmosphere of
uncertainty and urgency about the future of Syria. The
violence on the ground has diminished for now. That
de facto de-escalation provides an opportunity to move
forward decisively with a political process to bring about
a peaceful and permanent resolution of the conflict. At
the same time, the longer we allow the Syrian regime
to stall and equivocate and to do everything that it can
to avoid coming to the table for constructive talks on a
political settlement, the greater the danger of a return
to the violence that has plagued Syria for nearly eight
years will be.
The United States reiterates its firm position that the
constitutional committee should be convened without
delay — in December, before the end of the year, if not
sooner. The United Nations and the Special Envoy must
move towards that goal by issuing invitations to all 150
committee members without further delay.
The Special Envoy and the Security Council have
been discussing the formation of that committee for
almost a year. The United Nations has compiled the list
of the committee members with input from the relevant
parties. The list of civil society representatives was
to be determined by Special Envoy De Mistura. He
has been more than patient and flexible in accepting
input from the Syrian regime and from others. Any
further deliberation must be seen for what it is: an
artificial delay and a transparent attempt to distract
and delay progress towards a political solution in Syria.
Neither the Syrian regime nor the Astana group, in
particular Iran and Russia, can be allowed to veto the
Special Envoy’s decision on the membership of the
constitutional committee.
A committee over which Al-Assad or Iran have
veto power is not credible and does not represent the
interests of the Syrian people. Let us recall how this
began — not with terrorism or with military combat
but with a Government violently repressing peaceful
demonstrators. That Government must not now be
given a veto over fixing the mess that it made.
The burden is on Russia to show that it wants its
own diplomatic initiative to succeed. Russia must
bring the Syrian regime to the table. If it truly wants
a political solution, Russia must end the obstruction

S/PV. 8406

of that process. In the past, Moscow has proved that
it has the ability to influence its client in Damascus.
It must use that influence today to prevent the Syrian
regime from continuing to delay the formation of the
constitutional committee.
The convening of the constitutional committee is
a first and critical step towards a political transition
in Syria. However, the international community will
not even begin to consider providing reconstruction
support before a durable and irreversible political
process is clearly on track. Providing assistance before
that point does nothing to address the root cause of the
Syrian conflict: the repression by Bashar Al-Assad
and his regime of the Syrian people. Al-Assad cannot
be rewarded for destroying his own country and
overseeing the killing of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians. The international community must hold
Al-Assad accountable, and the Syrian people must have
the opportunity to hold him accountable. All those who
were displaced or forced to flee the regime’s repression
must have the opportunity to have a new constitution
that will protect them, as well as deliver parliamentary
and presidential elections in line with resolution 2254
(2015). Only then will Al-Assad’s victims achieve a
measure of justice and only then will all the people of
Syria be able to look forward to a better future.
It is long overdue that we begin the difficult task
of ending the conflict and providing for the safety and
stability of Syria. The Syrian people must not be forced
to wait any longer. We must urgently seize this fleeting
window of opportunity to achieve a political transition
and a lasting peace in Syria.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his briefing today and for his ongoing work to advance
the political process. I reiterate the appreciation and
gratitude of the State of Kuwait for all his endeavours
over the past four years to carry out his difficult task.
The Sochi agreement reached in January on the
formation of a constitutional committee was a beacon
of hope for the Syrian political process. However, 11
months since the agreement was struck, no progress has
been made and hope is giving way to disappointment,
particularly among the Syrian people, who have long
awaited a political settlement that would meet their
aspirations and legitimate demands after years of
killing, destruction and displacement, and that would

18-386505/17

S/PV.8406

The situation in the Middle East

preserve the unity, independence and sovereignty
of Syria.
The State of Kuwait supports the final declaration
issued at the summit between Turkey, Russia, France
and Germany in Istanbul on 27 October, in particular
with regard to launching the work of the constitutional
committee by the end of this year. We encourage the
Special Envoy to continue to engage with the relevant
parties so as to establish a credible and balanced
constitutional committee as soon as possible. The
committee is a key milestone in the transitional political
process and a basis for additional milestones, as set out
in resolution 2254 (2015), including the drafting of a
new constitution and the convening of free and fair
elections in Syria, under the auspices of the United
Nations and with the participation of all Syrians.
We reiterate that the Sochi agreement clarifies the
role of the Special Envoy and the Geneva process in
the final formation of the constitutional committee.
We believe that the Special Envoy has the necessary
mandate to establish such a committee.
We reaffirm that there is no military solution to
the Syrian crisis. All Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2254 (2015), which was adopted
unanimously, must be respected and should not remain
dead letters. We are at a critical juncture regarding
the Syrian issue. We must all seize the window of
opportunity afforded to us by the upcoming days as
long as there is relative stability in Idlib as a result of the
Russian-Turkish agreement. We hope that progress will
be made in advancing the political process before the
end of the year so that Syrians do not enter their eighth
year of conflict with no real and tangible prospects for
lasting and sustainable peace.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his very
detailed and informative briefing. On my own behalf
and on behalf of France, I would like to once again
commend his work and reiterate our full support for his
tireless efforts.
We have again reached a moment of truth in Syria.
On 27 October in Istanbul, the Heads of State and
Government of France, Germany, Russia and Turkey
underlined their commitment to a lasting ceasefire
in Syria. That truce offers a narrow window of
opportunity that we must seize in order to generate real
political momentum. At this key moment, all our efforts
6/17

19/11/2018

must now be focused on relaunching a comprehensive
political solution to the Syrian crisis. The establishment
of the constitutional committee by the end of December
should be the first step, and we hope it will be a
catalyst. In other words, the creation of the committee
could and should be the turning point that we have
long sought — the first step towards real political
momentum. The establishment of the committee by the
end of December, at the latest, is therefore our main
priority today.
Of course, there are differences among us, but
everyone around this table has called for the holding
of the first meeting of the constitutional committee
by the end of the year. France, Turkey, Russia and
Germany expressed that idea clearly in a statement on
27 October in the communiqué adopted in Istanbul. On
27 September here in New York, the members of the
small group on Syria also called for such a meeting.
I know that Russia is also mobilized to implement the
outcome of the Sochi Congress, adopted in January.
We must now all give shape to that shared objective by
honouring our commitments.
It is important to note that the establishment
and functioning of the committee are not in dispute.
The rules of composition were set forth in the Sochi
communiqué within the framework set by resolution
2254 (2015). The Special Envoy has full authority to
convene the constitutional committee immediately. The
United Nations also has the power to appoint the list
of committee members from civil society. There is no
ambiguity in that regard. The Special Envoy therefore
has our full support in moving forward independently
and without external pressure. In that context, all the
conditions are now in place for the Special Envoy to
issue invitations to the 150 members of the committee
as soon as possible, so that an initial meeting of the
constitutional committee can be held in December, in
line with the Istanbul summit declaration.
It is the responsibility of the United Nations to
ensure that the final composition of the committee is
balanced, lest it lack all legitimacy. We will keep a
close watch. No one — neither the regime, the Astana
guarantors nor the opposition — has veto rights over the
composition of the third list. The argument put forward
by Damascus about respect for its sovereignty should
fool no one and cannot be used as a pretext to violate its
obligations and commitments. Resolution 2254 (2015),
which we adopted unanimously, has set a legitimate
framework for action that we must all follow. The
18-38650

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

commitment made in Sochi is part of that framework. All
of us — including the authorities in Damascus — have
an interest in abiding by the framework, as it is the only
way to achieve lasting peace.
Let us make no mistake — if the process fails,
it will be due to those who sought to derail the rules
established by the international community and
undermine the legitimacy of United Nations mediation.
In that case — that is, if the committee were unable to
meet — we would expect the Special Envoy to clearly
and publicly attribute responsibilities.
Although its establishment is crucial, the
constitutional committee is only a tool. After seven
years of war, there is no trust between the parties and
little trust among international actors. It is therefore
necessary to agree on clear parameters that can be
shared by all. Those parameters exist. They were
reaffirmed in Istanbul and I will recall them here:
first, a durable ceasefire; secondly, the protection of
populations through free and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance throughout Syria, as well
as the definitive destruction of the Syrian chemical
arsenals; thirdly, a constitutional process and free and
impartial elections, monitored by the United Nations,
that ensure the participation of all Syrians in Syria and
beyond its borders, including refugees and internally
displaced persons; fourthly, the adoption of essential
confidence-building measures, in particular on the fate
of detainees; and fifthly, the establishment of political
conditions for the voluntary and safe return of refugees
and displaced persons, including protection against
political persecution and arbitrary arrests.

S/PV. 8406

Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. In the case of France, we especially welcome the
issuance of three arrest warrants by the French judicial
system against Ali Mamlouk, Jamil Al-Hassan and
Abdel Salam Mahmoud — three senior officials of the
Syrian repressive apparatus and accomplices in crimes
against humanity in connection with the Caesar files,
including the mass use of torture by the Syrian regime.
We will never compromise on issues of impunity. Only
under such conditions can Syria rebuild economically,
because any other construction would be built on sand.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura and his team for all the work
they do on the ground.
It is good that we are discussing this issue
because it gives us an opportunity to recall, as the
French Ambassador has just done, exactly how many
agreements have been reached by the Security Council,
including but not limited to resolution 2254 (2015), on
what exactly the political process needs to do. I will not
repeat what Ambassador Delattre said, but I do want
to express the full support of the United Kingdom for
everything said.
It is also good that we are discussing this because
the people of Syria continue to need our help. They
cannot rely on their own Government to protect them
and, after all of the shenanigans over the constitutional
committee and Sochi, they cannot rely on the partners
of their own Government — namely, the Russian
Federation and Iran — to protect them. I think that is a
key point that the proponents of the Syrian authorities’
sovereignty mantra would do well to bear in mind.

Those parameters must guide the Council in the
coming months and create a safe and neutral environment
that will make a political solution credible. Together
with the members of the small group on Syria, we will
firmly support the Special Envoy and his successor to
achieve a political solution based on those principles.

We fully support Special Envoy de Mistura.
We want him to convene an inclusive, balanced and
constitutional committee by the end of the year, and
I join other colleagues in urging him to fully use
the authority that has been granted to him through
resolution 2254 (2015) in order to do so.

In conclusion, Syria must rebuild itself politically
to regain stability. It will also have to rebuild itself as a
society. That is also why we remain fully committed to
pursuing the important fight against impunity, so that
the Syrian people can one day enjoy justice and lasting
peace once again. In that regard, we welcome the recent
decisions of the national courts and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law

The key to moving forward is obviously rapid
and palpable progress on the political track. Other
speakers have referred to the commitment undertaken
in the Istanbul communiqué of 27 October to launching
the constitutional committee by the end of this year.
Given that Foreign Minister Lavrov and President
Putin contributed to the Istanbul communiqué, it is
mystifying why it has not yet been implemented. The
Special Envoy has been crystal clear that it is vital to
have political progress. Resolution 2254 (2015), which

18-386507/17

S/PV.8406

The situation in the Middle East

was adopted unanimously, is also clear that the Special
Envoy has the authority to bring it about. We would
welcome more detail as to why that vital piece of the
political machinery has not yet been put in place.
It is right that the Special Envoy should consult,
and we completely agree that if it is to be effectiveness,
the constitutional committee must be credible and
acceptable to all sides. That obviously requires the
committee to be representative and inclusive, but not
that any one side has a veto over its makeup. The Syrian
authorities’ argument that Syria’s “sovereignty” defines
what the international community can and cannot do in
the Syrian crisis is a red herring and a distraction.
Under Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Members of the United Nations agree to confer
on the Security Council the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, and they
further agree that the Council acts on their behalf. That
is true whether the resolution falls under Chapters VIII,
VII or VI, or where there is no specification. They agree
that the Security Council acts on their behalf. That is
what the Special Envoy is doing, and he deserves the
explicit and concrete support of everybody around
this table. I repeat that I would really welcome an
explanation today on why further progress has not been
possible. It is absolutely vital that we get this political
process launched before the end of the year.
I will end by making a statement about the political
process that, although general, holds deeply true.
Without an irreversible and durable political process,
there will be no reconstruction, refugee return at scale
or rehabilitation for Syria. We have all been shown a
way forward and I would welcome everybody around
this table to today rallying to the Special Envoy and
getting the constitutional committee set up well before
the end of the year, so that this crisis can eventually
begin a long and slow path towards resolution.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing on the political
process in the Syrian Arab Republic, and thanks
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, for his excellent briefing, updating
us on the status of the political process in that country.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the signing on 17 September
in Sochi, under the auspices of the Russian Federation and
Turkey, of an agreement providing for a demilitarized
zone that has generally calmed the fighting, particularly
in Idlib governorate. My country therefore urges the
8/17

19/11/2018

parties involved in the Syrian crisis to comply strictly
with the memorandum of understanding and to refrain
from any action likely to lead to a resumption of
hostilities, which would further aggravate an already
worrisome humanitarian situation.
My delegation believes that the memorandum
will provide a new impetus to the process of political
settlement of the Syrian crisis. In that regard,
my country welcomes the holding in Istanbul, on
27 October, of a quadripartite summit involving France,
Germany, Russia and Turkey, which stressed, inter alia,
the importance of a lasting ceasefire through the full
implementation by all parties concerned of the measures
contained in the agreement on the demilitarized zone.
Côte d’Ivoire also supports the call issued at
the summit for the effective establishment of the
constitutional committee and a start to the drafting of
a new constitution by the end of 2018, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of Council resolution 2254
(2015). It also calls on the Syrian parties to define
as soon as possible the regulatory framework for the
organization of free and transparent elections, which
will ensure the restoration of lasting peace in Syria.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its call for a
political settlement to the conflict and urges the Syrian
parties to resume negotiations. Côte d’Ivoire reiterates
its support for Special Envoy De Mistura, warmly
congratulates his successor, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and
urge all stakeholders to support them in their quest for
a lasting political solution to the Syrian conflict.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his briefing. On this occasion,
we reiterate our gratitude to him and his team for their
important and tireless work, which is consistently
constructive and thoughtful, to find a solution to the
conflict in Syria and protect civilians.
Peru is closely following developments following
the positive agreement reached between Turkey and the
Russian Federation in September on the establishment
of a demilitarized zone in Idlib. While we welcome
the decrease in violence following this agreement, we
cannot fail to underline the extremely fragile nature
of the current Syrian situation, taking into account
the diversity of actors present in the area and their
opposing positions.
18-38650

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

We believe that we are at a critical moment in
which it is essential to act swiftly in the political sphere
and to achieve commitments and concrete progress
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). In the immediate
term, that will require the constructive participation
of the Syrian Government and opposition groups in
the establishment of a constitutional committee, in
accordance with the Sochi declaration. The drafting of
a new constitution is necessary to lay the political and
institutional foundations for sustainable peace in Syria.
We therefore welcome the commitment made in the
Istanbul communiqué of 27 October to convening the
constitutional committee by the end of this year. We
encourage the parties to maintain a constructive spirit
in the Special Envoy’s forthcoming meetings with the
Syrian Government and the countries of the Astana
group, with a view to finding points of convergence on
the specific issue of the composition of the committee’s
third list.
Peru reaffirms its commitment to Syria’s
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. Without
prejudice to that, we stress that, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, every Government must
exercise its sovereignty in a manner consistent with the
legitimate efforts of the international community to
maintain international peace and security, in particular
when the responsibility to protect millions of people in
grave situations of vulnerability is at stake.
To that end, we emphasize the importance of all
parties engaging constructively in the negotiations,
demonstrating their commitment to the future and unity
of the country, and fostering the confidence required to
advance a process of national reconciliation and build
sustainable peace in Syria. In that regard, efforts should
seek primarily to avoid the further fragmentation of the
country and to achieve its long-term stability, and not
be motivated by the ulterior strategic and geopolitical
considerations that have broadly intensified the conflict
in Syria.
We consider it essential, within the framework
of those efforts, to promote the adoption of
confidence-building measures that would contribute to a
more favourable environment for Syrian reconciliation.
In particular, we expect substantive developments in
the identification of missing persons, the surrender
of mortal remains, and the release of detainees and
missing persons. It is also necessary to address the

S/PV. 8406

serious humanitarian situation of millions of refugees
and internally displaced persons, and to guarantee
the availability of financial resources and, above all,
the political will to allow them a safe and dignified
return under internationally accepted parameters. In
conclusion, I reiterate the importance of establishing a
representative constitutional committee before the end
of the year and continuing to provide all the necessary
support to the efforts being taken by the Special Envoy
to achieve that end.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy De Mistura for his briefing. At the outset, on
behalf of Kazakhstan, I would like to express our
most sincere gratitude for his efforts and those of his
team in their commitment to peace in Syria. Most of
all, we express our recognition for the Special Envoy’s
outstanding engagement, as demonstrated in the
intensive consultations to make it possible to convene
a constitutional committee that is credible, balanced,
United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-owned and Syrianled.
We believe that United Nations mediation towards
the resolution of the Syrian crisis is very crucial and
needed. As the Astana format remains relevant, we
would be honoured to see both the outgoing and
incoming Special Envoys of the Secretary-General
at the meeting on the settlement of the Syrian crisis
to be held in Astana on 28 and 29 November. Many
critical issues need immediate attention. Therefore,
we must proactively continue to support the goals of
the Astana and Geneva negotiations in order to see
positive outcomes.
At present, the contours of a peaceful life in
Syria are becoming increasingly clear. We therefore
consider it very important to continue to work on the
establishment of the constitutional committee. That
will allow for the drafting of a new basic legal for Syria.
In our opinion, the Istanbul summit, which included the
participation of the Heads of France, Germany, Turkey
and Russia, outlined the prospects for creating the
constitutional committee by the end of 2018. The first
summit on Syria to bring together the representatives of
the Astana process and the small group demonstrated
that we may be close to finding a solution to the crisis,
with new approaches to both political and humanitarian
issues. In that regard, we hope that outcomes will be
reached at the summit, including those relating to the
establishment of the Syrian constitutional committee.
Kazakhstan underlines the need for such a committee

18-386509/17

S/PV.8406

The situation in the Middle East

as a starting point in the revitalization of the process
of political settlement in Syria, where it would work
in compliance with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and United Nations resolutions.
Kazakhstan supports all initiatives aimed at
resolving the violent conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic
as soon as possible. We consider the protection of
Syrian people, civilians and property as a high priority.
Only a political-diplomatic approach in the spirit of the
Charter and Security Council documents on preventive
diplomacy and sustaining peace can bring appropriate
results. Kazakhstan will work with the international
community to support all parties to the inter-Syrian
negotiation process, aimed at strengthening the path
to a peaceful solution to the crisis and the mitigation
of the humanitarian situation. Moreover, given that the
situation in Syria is gradually stabilizing, we hope that
humanitarian assistance will reach the population in
need through direct routes as soon as possible.
We welcome the positive changes in Idlib after the
creation of a demilitarized buffer zone, in particular
with the restoration of transport and communications.
We believe that the Sochi agreements should be
promptly implemented in full compliance with the
norms and principles of international humanitarian law.
The agreements will consolidate the progress achieved
and provide an opportunity to begin much-needed
political negotiations. At the same time, we condemn
the provocative actions of terrorist organizations. We
concur unanimously that the international community
should not allow terrorist groups to undermine
the agreements.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Security Council has a special responsibility to end this
tragic period in Syria. We urge the Council to unite
around that common political goal, voice support for
the Geneva and Astana processes and, most of all,
for the Special Envoy to help the country achieve a
comprehensive political settlement.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I would like to express my
gratitude for the convening of this meeting and to
once again thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
his comprehensive assessment of the latest political
developments with regard to the conflict and, in
particular, the contentious issue of the establishment
of the constitutional committee. The Government of
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its gratitude to the Special
10/17

19/11/2018

Envoy for his firm commitment and hard work over the
past four years on this situation.
As some delegations before me have stressed,
we are at a critical juncture. It is critical because two
months ago we hailed the agreement between Russia
and Turkey as a diplomatic success that could enable a
ceasefire in the province of Idlib and subsequently pave
the way for a possible definitive solution to the conflict.
The recent quadripartite summit in Istanbul and the
meeting of the small group in London even allowed for
an opportunity to not only endorse the ceasefire agreed
on by Ankara and Moscow, but above all to insist on
the need for the establishment of the constitutional
committee, in accordance with the Sochi declaration
and resolution 2254 (2015).
Let us not deceive ourselves. Terrorists will
continue to take advantage of our discord. The existing
difficulties surrounding the establishment of the
constitutional committee do not benefit those that, like
Equatorial Guinea, want to find a definitive solution to
the conflict; rather, they primarily benefit the illegal
armed groups — the terrorists who in that situation
may see an additional opportunity to not lay down
their arms and instead continue to perpetrate acts of
violence. In that context, we stress that it is necessary
to make significant progress. In order to establish a
committee that is representative, inclusive and credible,
all of the parties concerned must fulfil their obligations.
Furthermore, all parties have reiterated in various
contexts that the political process in Syria should
continue to be led by the United Nations. Therefore,
we believe that the United Nations should continue
its facilitator role, working with unquestionable
transparency with regard to building a sound structure
for the committee.
We reiterate that, in order to ensure the successful
work of the constitutional committee, its participants
must be willing to renounce partisan interests. As in
any successful negotiations, the parties must have the
ability to yield, even on certain issues, if necessary. On
the other hand, the facilitator role of the United Nations
is in no way a substitute for the will or sovereignty
of the Syrian people. If we succeed in launching the
work of the committee, it is essential that no external
force interfere or attempt, by whatever means, to
influence its decisions, which must be fully sovereign.
Along those lines, my Government hopes that the
forthcoming international consultations on Syria in
Astana, scheduled at the end of the month, will provide
18-38650

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

an opportunity to reaffirm the need to achieve a lasting
solution for Syria in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
and, most important, initiate a discussion on the launch
of the work of the constitutional committee.
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea is a peace-loving
country that has historically enjoyed substantial
peace and stability, and that has been made possible
by the policies undertaken by the Government led by
His Excellency President Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo. We want every country to have what we
have. Equatorial Guinea does not have any economic or
strategic interest in Syria. Our only interest is in ending
once and for all the suffering of millions of innocent
people. The conflict is entering its eighth year. Over
those eight years, massive economic and human
resources have been mobilized that unfortunately
have not allowed for an end to the violence. The
reconstruction of the country will be very costly. We
must always bear this in mind — the longer we prolong
the conflict, the heavier the moral and financial burden
will be for the Syrian people.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let
me first thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his clear
and comprehensive briefing. We very much appreciate
Mr. De Mistura’s unwavering commitment in the
remainder of his term in office. I would like to focus
on the following three points today: the urgent need to
convene the constitutional committee, the continuing
need for sustained de-escalation in Idlib and northern
Syria and the future outlook.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
Istanbul summit communiqué of 27 October. The
constitutional committee should convene as soon as
possible, before the end of the year, and move ahead with
the establishment of a new constitution. The invitations
to the 150 committee members should be sent out as soon
as possible. It is the prerogative of the United Nations
to do so. Staffan de Mistura has been given a clear
mandate by the Security Council, through resolution
2254 (2015), and through the Sochi outcome document.
Now is the time to deliver. All parties, particularly the
Syrian authorities, should cooperate constructively
with the United Nations to prevent further delays in the
political process. Those with leverage bear a specific
responsibility in that regard. The committee is not a
goal in and of itself. It is, and should remain, part of
the broader United Nations-led political process, based
on resolution 2254 (2015). One can speak of a credible
political process only when the constitutional committee

S/PV. 8406

itself is credible. The convening role of the United
Nations ensures this. No one should be able to hold
the convening of the constitutional committee hostage.
The inclusiveness and representation of all Syrians are
key. The committee itself, and any subcommittees that
will be created, should at a minimum include 30 per
cent women.
That brings me to my second point — our concern
about the increased shelling in Idlib and the continued
need for sustained de-escalation in Idlib and northern
Syria. The increased shelling that we have seen in Idlib
over the past couple of weeks is reason for concern.
It is of key importance that the agreement on Idlib
between the Russian Federation and Turkey hold, and
that it is implemented by the parties through continued
cooperation. The alternative to sustained de-escalation
is a devastating humanitarian catastrophe. Let me also
stress the importance of stability in north-east Syria and
continued progress in the joint fight against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). Military actions in
that area should stay sharply focused on addressing the
threat of ISIS.
That brings me to my third and final point, with
regard to the outlook for the future. Syria currently is
not ready for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees. Voluntary return can be facilitated only when
the internationally agreed protection thresholds are in
place. It is essential that security and property rights
guarantees be established for refugees and internally
displaced persons seeking to return. In that regard, we
are deeply concerned about Law 10, which apparently
has been reincarnated into Law 42. We support the
United Nations in its call to suspend that law.
We need accountability for all the grave human
rights violations and atrocity crimes in Syria and to
bring those responsible to justice. The Conference of
States Parties to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons is currently under way in The
Hague. It is crucial that we achieve attribution for
chemical-weapons use as a step towards accountability.
Let me stress once again in that regard our support to the
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011. A referral of the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court remains the best path
forward to fight impunity.

18-3865011/17

S/PV.8406

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, we strongly disagree with the
premature calls for reconstruction aid. We reiterate
that the European Union will be ready to assist in the
reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition is firmly
under way.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, and we reiterate
our support for his continued diplomatic endeavours to
facilitate a political solution to the Syrian conflict. He
has devoted his full energy and decades of experience
and knowledge to facilitate a peaceful end to the Syrian
crisis. We are deeply grateful for his indefatigable
efforts and sense of optimism while dealing with one of
the most difficult diplomatic assignments.
Although there are still clashes in some areas, the
relative calm in Syria is encouraging. Particularly, the
implementation of the demilitarization agreement,
reached between Russia and Turkey, has averted
a possible humanitarian catastrophe in Idlib. The
sustained and full implementation of the Idlib agreement
is indeed vital, and we thank Russia and Turkey for their
endeavours in that regard. We note the relentless efforts
that the Special Envoy has continued to make in order
to establish the constitutional committee. In addition,
there have been international diplomatic initiatives,
including the quadrilateral summit, held in Istanbul
on 27 October, which called for establishing and early
convening of the constitutional committee in Geneva
by the end of the year. In that regard, we stress the
importance of supporting the Special Envoy to form the
committee as soon as possible, according to the Sochi
final agreement and resolution 2254 (2015). That would
be a significant step in revitalizing the Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political process under the auspices of
the United Nations. We encourage all Syrian parties to
engage constructively with the Special Envoy. All other
Member States with influence should also support the
efforts of the Special Envoy.
The Syrian people have endured an unspeakable
tragedy over the past eight years. As there is no
military solution to the Syrian conflict, the current
situation should be seized as a window of opportunity
to reinvigorate a comprehensive political dialogue that
could support the legitimate demands and aspirations
of the Syrian people. The Council should also speak
with one voice and support the work of the Special
Envoy and his successor in facilitating progress on
the political track to resolve the Syrian crisis. We look
12/17

19/11/2018

forward to hearing from the Special Envoy next month
and to receiving his comprehensive assessment of the
Syrian peace process and the way forward.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, whose work to date
we acknowledge.
We believe that tensions in Syria have been
reduced thanks to the efforts of the Astana guarantors,
as well as other countries whose agreements, such as
that between Russia and Turkey, have made it possible
to reduce violence in Syria so as to allow relative
peace to return among the civilian population. We
are hopeful with regard to the outcome of the meeting
with the three guarantors to be held at the end of this
month. Moreover, we emphasize the tireless work of
Mr. De Mistura with regard to such a sensitive issue,
which is important not only for the Security Council
but for the entire international community. At a time
that we are thanking him for all the work done over
the years, we reiterate our full support for the efforts
that he has made and will make until the end of this
year to foster a political solution to the situation. We
highlight the efforts made to date, as well as the highlevel diplomatic meetings held over recent weeks. We
welcome the holding of the quadrilateral summit in
Istanbul and its outcome document. We hope that such
rapprochements will produce results in the coming
months, with the establishment of a credible, balanced
and representative constitutional committee that will
allow for consolidating the relative peaceful situation in
Syria, which necessarily entails working in accordance
with the conclusions arrived at in the Sochi declaration.
Accordingly, we call on the parties to join forces to
make that happen.
We once again reiterate our call to resolve this
conflict through an inclusive political process,
including concerted dialogue, led by and for the
Syrian people, leading to a peaceful and sustainable
solution to the situation within the framework of the
Geneva process and resolution 2254 (2015), under the
auspices of the United Nations. We reject any attempt
to foment fragmentation or sectarianism in the country,
as well as the presence of foreign military forces
in Syrian territory without the authorization of the
Syrian Government. We therefore highlight the need
for them to withdraw from Syria under international
18-38650

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

law and, above all, in accordance with the principles
of sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Lastly, we welcome the appointment of Mr. Geir
Pedersen as the new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, to whom we convey our full support
for his work.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General De Mistura for
the update on the constitutional committee. We would
like to say that we very much appreciate and support his
tireless efforts to set up the committee before the end
of the year. We are deeply disappointed with Syria’s
demonstrated lack of willingness to cooperate with the
United Nations and the Special Envoy in the political
process, which is in breach of the Sochi agreement. The
establishment of a constitutional committee, which was
agreed to in Sochi, is now long overdue. It is high time
that those who initiated the committee, particularly
Russia, intensified their efforts to ensure Syria’s full
cooperation with the United Nations. The Astana
guarantors must now also deliver on their commitments
in support of the United Nations-led process.
High-level meetings in the relevant formats have
shown that there is now international momentum
with regard to Syria that must be seized. As agreed
in Istanbul, a constitutional committee should be in
place before the end of the year, and invitations should
be sent out by mid-December, as the Special Envoy
mentioned. He has our full support in convening it
within that deadline. We fully support his efforts to
ensure that the committee is credible, balanced and
representative of the Syrian people, as is also provided
for in the Sochi final statement, and that it includes a
minimum of 30 per cent women. His list of participants
must now get the support it needs, particularly from the
Astana guarantors. We reiterate that the Special Envoy
has a mandate to establish a committee and decide on
its composition. The Sochi final statement made it clear
that the final selection of the committee would be made
through the United Nations-led process.
We are encouraged that the agreement to cease
hostilities in Idlib held, but there are now worrying
signs of escalation. We welcome the call made at
the Istanbul summit for the ceasefire to be upheld,
and we reiterate our expectations of the guarantors
in this regard. However, the best way to prevent a
humanitarian disaster in Idlib is ultimately by enabling
genuine progress towards a political solution and

S/PV. 8406

ensuring respect for international law. We also reiterate
that Sweden, like the rest of the European Union, will
not assist in Syria’s reconstruction until a political
transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process is firmly under way. The return of
refugees must be safe, voluntary and dignified, and the
conditions for that are clearly not in place at the moment.
The Special Envoys need the Council’s active
backing. At this critical moment, all the members of
the Council should take a clear stand and deliver on
their commitment to supporting the United Nationsled political process and the Special Envoy. We
must step up our joint efforts to make sure that the
constitutional committee will indeed convene before
the end of the year. Only through a United Nationsled process can we achieve a sustainable political
solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process, acceptable to all Syrians and the
international community.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing and
his long service in his position.
Possibly for the first time in the history of the
Syrian crisis, today an overwhelming majority of
the members of the Security Council have made the
important admission that the situation in Syria is really
continuing to stabilize. This trend began in October
2015 when at the request of the Syrian Government the
Russian Federation began a counter-terrorist operation
in Syria. Today we can say that the greater part of
Syrian territory has been cleared of terrorists.
We are worried about the activities of terrorist
groups in Idlib, which are violating the de-escalation
agreements and putting them in jeopardy. A number of
attempts by Al-Nusra militias and groups associated
with them to infiltrate Aleppo have been suppressed.
Civilians in the western part of the city have been killed
by jihadist shelling. The Turks are making serious
efforts under their existing obligations to separate
the moderates from the terrorist groups. That would
be greatly facilitated by having those who prepared,
financed and sent those groups to Syria in the early
stages of the conflict with the aim of ousting the
legitimate Government — thereby crudely violating
the Charter of the United Nations and the principle of
non-interference in States’ internal affairs — educate
them on the situation. Believe me, that would be a much
more meaningful contribution to our efforts to reach

18-3865013/17

S/PV.8406

The situation in the Middle East

a settlement than endless, unfounded questions and
demands on Russia and other States about what to do
and how to do it.
In parallel with progress on the military front,
there has been also been progress on political
cooperation. There is ongoing constructive dialogue
between the Russian and United States specialists.
A significant summit was held in Istanbul at which
leaders from Russia, Turkey, France and Germany
made major decisions, and work is currently under way
to implement them. At the same time processes for
organizing refugees’ voluntary return and rebuilding
the country are being established, but it would greatly
help our efforts if our Western partners joined these
processes in a constructive spirit and stopped violating
Syrian sovereignty and illegally occupying its territory.
Another point I want to make is that we are once
again calling on our partners to stop using phrases such
as “the Syrian regime”. No one has certified the use
of such definitions or labels anywhere. What should
be happening is that more attention should be paid to
Syria’s reports of indiscriminate coalition air strikes east
of the Euphrates that have killed dozens of people and
should be investigated. In that connection, we share the
concerns of the United Nations about the consequences
for civilians of the military operation is conducted in
that area. We also want to remind the Council of the
results of the coalition forces’ bombardment of Raqqa,
where mass graves have been found.
At the end of November, we plan to hold the
next Astana format meeting with our partners in
the process. We are trying to make progress on the
political front with regard to implementing the Syrians’
decision in Sochi to set up a constitutional committee.
Needless to say, it was a decision taken by the Syrians
themselves in response to the prolonged stagnation of
the peace process, and it has given momentum to the
United Nations-led intra-Syrian dialogue that Mr. De
Mistura has been shepherding for the past few years
under resolution 2254 (2015). As the leaders of the
four States said in their joint statement in Istanbul on
27 October, we intend to start the work by the end of
this year, circumstances permitting. As before, we
believe that all the parameters for the committee’s
operations, including its structure, composition and
rules of procedure, should be decided by the Syrians
themselves. That is the only way to ensure that it is
effective and fit for purpose. Any attempt to dictate
how or what to do to the Syrians is a sure way to a dead
14/17

19/11/2018

end. And we suggest that we all get to work collectively
instead of asking each other questions. That would
help us to solve a lot of the problems quickly and really
get the political process moving under the exclusive
leadership of the Syrians themselves.
We hope that as he begins his duties in early
December, Mr. Geir Pedersen, the new Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, who we know is an experienced
and impartial diplomat, will base his efforts on the
robust foundation established in the Geneva, Astana
and Sochi forums.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive briefing.
The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year
of continuing widespread violence and persistent
violations of international law, including abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law, by
all parties. Now we are at a critical juncture. On the
one hand, we strongly believe that the Idlib ceasefire
agreement could be an opportunity to build on the de
facto ceasefires in place. On the other, unfortunately,
we are still seeing a growing escalation of violence in
some parts of Syria, especially the north-west.
Keeping that in mind, it is necessary to emphasize
that the political process has continued to fail to
gain traction, including over the establishment of the
constitutional committee. That is why we have already
expressed on several occasions our strong support for
maintaining the Idlib de-escalation zone. We urge the
parties to the conflict to respect the agreement on the
ceasefire. We strongly believe that a political solution is
key. We share the assessment made by Mr. De Mistura
that the alternative would be territorial gains and not
sustainable peace.
We also call on the Astana guarantors to follow
through on their commitment and protect civilians as a
matter of priority. As there is no military solution to the
conflict that could bring sustainable peace to Syrians,
we should aim at reaching an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement. It is also important to note that a
cessation of hostilities may give the peace talks under
the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva a chance
to gain momentum, so that a political solution might be
finally reached.
Let me also underline that a political solution must
be brokered in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). The
18-38650

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

United Nations, and specifically Special Envoy De
Mistura, have a special role in that process. That is why
we express our full support for all the efforts of the
Special Envoy to establish a constitutional committee
as soon as possible.
In a broader context, we also welcome the Istanbul
joint statement’s commitment made on 27 October
to launch the constitutional committee by the end of
the year. It should be implemented now, as a priority,
and further steps should swiftly follow to enable a
negotiated political transition process. That requires
the full and constructive engagement of all the parties
to the conflict. A special role has to be played by the
Syrian authorities, which should participate in the
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Poland
will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria
only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties to
the conflict within the United Nations framework, is
firmly under way.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
First, I thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his
briefing. I express my appreciation to the Special
Envoy for his unremitting efforts to promote a political
solution to the Syrian question. Recently, there has been
positive momentum in the political arena. The leaders of
Russia, Turkey, Germany and France held the Istanbul
meeting aimed at promoting the political process, while
Special Envoy De Mistura has continued his efforts to
establish the constitutional committee. The eleventh
meeting of the Astana process will also be held soon.
The memorandum on stabilizing the de-escalation
zones in Idlib has generally been implemented, which
is conducive to creating favourable conditions for a
political settlement. However, challenges remain in
Syria.
Political negotiations are the only way out to
reach a political and durable solution in Syria. While
maintaining the United Nations as the main channel
of good offices, the international community should
continue to promote an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrianowned process on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015).
The focus should now be on the following three areas.

S/PV. 8406

First, efforts must be stepped up to form a
representative constitutional committee that is
acceptable to all parties. A balanced approach is
required to accommodate the legitimate concerns
of the Syrian Government, so as to start an effective
and sustained political process. The United Nations,
in conjunction with leveraging the role of the Astana
process, must continue to increase its good offices to
help the parties in deepening their consultations.
Secondly, continued efforts are required to steer
Syria towards sustained stability and improvement on
the ground. The stakeholders that have influence over
the parties must make sure that the demilitarized zones
function effectively. The international community
should work together to fight terrorists and prevent
terrorist groups from staging a comeback. It is necessary
to respect and maintain the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and create a
favourable environment for the political process to
take hold. The international community should support
the return of the Syrian refugees and help with the
reconstruction of the country with a view to creating
favourable conditions for the return of refugees.
Thirdly, the Government and the opposition groups
must act on the basis of their country’s future and
the fundamental interests of their people, solve their
differences and take it step by step to reach a political
settlement that reflects the conditions on the ground.
While also accommodating the legitimate concerns
of all parties, the international community should
encourage the parties to make conciliatory gestures
and enhance mutual trust. Council members must
strengthen unity and speak with one voice.
China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community and will continue to play a
positive and constructive role in helping to promote
the political process, rebuild the country and improve
the humanitarian situation, so that the country and the
region can reclaim peace and stability.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank the presidency and the
delegation of the Russian Federation, as well as all the
delegations that used the official name of my country

18-3865015/17

S/PV.8406

The situation in the Middle East

in their statements. Roughly one month ago, the Chair
of the General Assembly Third Committee asked all
delegations to use the official names of countries when
they make statements. Some tried to make an exception,
but the Chair of the Third Committee interrupted them
and compelled everyone to respect the official country
names, in line with the rules and regulations and for
maintaining the political discourse. That Committee
Chair therefore succeeded in upholding respect for
the way of addressing each other. I humbly ask the
Security Council to follow the example of the Chair of
the Third Committee.
The founding fathers of our Organization carefully
drafted the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
because it represents the foundation of the provisions
of the Charter itself. They began the Preamble with
those words,
“We the people of the United Nations
determined ... to live together in peace with one
another as good neighbours, and to unite our strength
to maintain international peace and security”.
Unfortunately, those noble principles have been
flouted over the past seven decades, given the practices
of some States that have tried to impose their hegemony
on our Organization and turn it into an instrument to
achieve their political objectives by manipulating those
principles in order to justify their military aggression
and deprive peoples of their rights. That has happened
in Palestine, Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya, Yemen and
many other countries in Asia, Africa and Latin
America. Furthermore, those States have tried to invest
in terrorism in Syria, as we are witnessing today in my
country.
Are the hopes of the founding fathers to live
together in peace with one another consistent with the
conduct of certain States, including some permanent
members of the Security Council that support armed
terrorist groups in my country, Syria? Are the hopes
of the founding fathers to live as good neighbours
consistent with actions of certain States in the region
that have issued takfiri fatwas to the terrorist groups
and provided them with funds, weapons and training
camps? Are the hopes of the founding fathers to pool our
strength to maintain international peace and security
consistent with the launching of aggression after
aggression against my country, Syria, by the United
States, Britain and France under flimsy pretexts? Are
those hopes consistent with the establishment of an
16/17

19/11/2018

illegal United States coalition as a means to carry out
the most heinous crimes against Syrian civilians, the
most recent of which were the air strikes on the villages
of Al-Boubadran and Al-Sousa on 15 October, killing
23 martyrs, most of whom were women and children;
and the latest attack on Baka’an and Al-Sha’afa villages
in the rural area of Deir ez-Zor two days ago, leading to
the deaths of 40 civilian martyrs? In only one week, 100
civilians have been killed by the United States coalition
forces in the rural area of Deir ez-Zor.
Such practices by those States against our region
and other regions of the world show that they do not
respect the aspirations of the founding fathers or the
principles of international law. For them, it is as if such
principles were nothing but a kind of sorcery.
As one of the founding fathers of the United
Nations, my country continues to believe in the role of
the Organization — a role that respects the principles
of the Charter and the provisions of international
law; a role that respects the sovereignty of States
and rejects blackmailing policies imposed by certain
influential States; a role that is based on impartiality,
honesty and non-interference in the domestic affairs of
any Member State; a role of good offices and not one
that seeks to dictate conditions, ultimatums, threats
and guardianship.
The Congress of the Syrian National Dialogue
held in Sochi represented an opportunity for the
Syrian people to engage in dialogue without foreign
interference. All sectors of Syrian society participated
in the Congress. We therefore hold a positive view of its
outcome, including the establishment of a committee
to discuss the current constitution. We are eager to see
the formation of such a committee as soon as possible.
We were the first to present our list of the members
supported by the Syrian State. No one, therefore, can
question our support for that process or our commitment
to the outcome of the Sochi Congress.
In that regard, my country reiterates the important
role played by the Russian Federation and Iran as
guarantors of the Astana process. We note in particular
that the idea of establishing a committee to discuss the
current constitution was the result of an agreement by
the Syrians who participated in the Sochi Congress,
as affirmed by the Russian Deputy Permanent
Representative, Mr. Vladimir Safronkov, and supported
by the two guarantor States of the Astana process. We
18-38650

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8406

have always been part of the process, so no one can
ignore our role or their role therein.

concept that represents interference in Syria’s domestic
affairs is unacceptable.

Concerning the role of the United Nations and the
mandate of the Special Envoy, especially with regard
to the third list, I would like to make our position quite
clear. We wish the Special Envoy every success and
we welcome his role as a facilitator of the committee’s
work. However, he cannot impose himself as a third
party, in line with the mandate entrusted to him and
with the Charter and principles of the United Nations
in terms of impartiality, honesty and non-interference
in domestic affairs, which are an integral part of the
sovereignty of any State. The issue of forming the
constitutional committee is based on certain key
general principles that we believe to be indispensable
to the establishment and functioning of the committee.
In brief, those principles are as follows.

Thirdly, no prior conditions or conclusions
with regard to the work of the committee and its
recommendations are acceptable. The constitutional
committee is sovereign and takes its own decisions,
which are not subject to any other State or party, such
as the so-called small group on Syria, which decided a
priori on the outcome of the constitutional committee
with the aim of sabotaging any progress made on the
political process so that the outcome would be in line
with the interests of the members of that group.

First, there must be a true commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic and of its people. There is
no place for terrorism or support for terrorism in Syria.
Any constitutional process must not undermine that
commitment pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, and Security Council
resolutions relevant to Syria.
Secondly, the political process must be Syrianowned and Syrian-led because the Syrian people have
the exclusive right to decide the future of their country
without external interference, given that the constitution
and all related matters are an issue of sovereignty
that must be decided by the Syrians themselves. Any

Fourthly, it is unacceptable to impose any kind
of arbitrary duration or timetable concerning the
committee, because that would be counterproductive.
Our steps must be thoroughly considered and discussed,
since the constitution will define the fate of Syria and
future generations. No pertinent issue in that regard
should be addressed in haste. We wish to see progress
achieved, but the foundations must be solid.
In conclusion, my country, Syria, has always
been serious in its efforts to achieve a political
solution through intra-Syrian dialogue without foreign
interference. However, the fight against terrorism is
a priority issue at all stages of the political process,
as are the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes; the launch of the reconstruction
and recovery process; and the liberation of the Syrian
territories that remain in the hands of terrorists and all
occupying and illegal foreign forces.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

18-3865017/17
