S/PV.7036

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7036th meeting

Thursday, 26 September 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Bishop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Mammadyarov
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Fabius
Mr. Pérez Molina
Mr. Asselborn
Mr. El Othmani
Mr. Aziz
Mr. Yun Byung-se
Mr. Pankin
Ms. Mushikiwabo
Mr. Menan
Mr. Clegg
Ms. Power

Agenda
Small arms
The impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons on international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on Small arms (S/2013/503)
Letter dated 6 September 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/536)

13-48674 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1348674*

S/PV.7036

Small arms

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Expression of condolence in connection with the
terrorist attack in Kenya
The President: I wish to confirm the Council’s
condemnation in the strongest possible terms of
the recent terrorist attack in Nairobi, which caused
numerous deaths and injuries, and to convey our
condolences to the victims and their families and to
the people and the Government of Kenya. I note that
the Council issued a press statement to that effect on
21 September.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Small arms
The impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and
light weapons on international peace and
security
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms
(S/2013/503)
Letter dated 6 September 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/536)
The President: I warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral, the President of Guatemala, the Deputy Prime
Ministers of Luxembourg and the United Kingdom,
Ministers of the countries members of the Security
Council and other representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Germany,
Japan, Liberia, Lithuania, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste and Trinidad and Tobago to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to participate in this meeting.

2/20

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

26/09/2013

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/570, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, France, Germany, Guatemala, Japan, Liberia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Morocco, New Zealand,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
I draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/503, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms.
I also draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/536, which contains a letter dated
6 September 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Australia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I am very pleased that the Council is convening this
high-level meeting to consider the issue of small arms.
The proliferation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons threaten peace and drive conflict in many of
the countries the Council considers. It is an issue that
cuts across much of the Council’s work, from sanctions,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding to the women, peace
and security agenda. Yet it is an issue that the Council
has not considered in a dedicated way for more than
five years. It is therefore entirely appropriate that we
do so today.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank you for your
initiative, Madam President. At the outset, I would
like to sincerely welcome your participation to preside
over the Security Council immediately after your
appointment as Foreign Minister of the Australian
Government. You can count on me. I wish you all the
best and continued good success.
In recent years, the Security Council has
recognized the devastating impacat of small arms on
peace and development. The excessive accumulation of
arms has fuelled insecurity and conflict from Mali to
Afghanistan and beyond. But weapons trafficking has
affected far more than the immediate security situation.

13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

Armed conflict is the main cause of people fleeing their
homes and of food insecurity.
The uncontrolled availability of guns and bullets
threatens peace processes and fragile reconciliation
efforts. It leads to a vast range of human rights violations,
including killing and maiming, rape and other forms of
sexual violence, enforced disappearance, torture and
the forced recruitment of children by armed groups. It
exacerbates inter-community violence and organized
crime. And it undermines our work for social justice,
the rule of law and the Millennium Development Goals.
The world is over-armed and peace is underfunded.
Earlier this year, States took a historic step forward
by adopting the Arms Trade Treaty, which fully includes
small arms and ammunition in its scope. That landmark
measure obligates States to regulate international
arms transfers, including prohibiting shipments to
Governments that fail to use them in conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations. The Treaty will also
help address weapons diversion from Government
stockpiles — a growing and disturbing source of arms
for pirates, rebels and warlords. The Arms Trade Treaty
will complement and strengthen a number of existing
international instruments. I urge all States to sign and
ratify it without delay. Already more than half of all
Member States have signed. I want to thank members of
the Security Council that have helped to lead the way.
(spoke in French)
As I mentioned in detail in my report (S/2013/503)
presented recently to the Security Council, the absence
of regulation, the ease of access to arms and the great
profitability of the illicit trade in weapons constitute
an explosive cocktail. By way of proof, the pillage
of Libyan arms depots was one of the factors that
contributed to the instability of the Sahel. Similar proof
is evident from the lawlessness that currently prevails
in Guinea-Bissau, the Central African Republic, Iraq
and even on the high seas. Moreover, poor management
of munitions stocks multiplies the risk of explosions,
which would then endanger the lives of people and the
environment.
(spoke in English)
I am pleased that the Council has recognized
that States require additional support in weapons
management. The standards on weapons and
ammunition management developed by the United
Nations can be of great assistance. Innovations such as

S/PV.7036

weapon-tracking technologies and the personalization
of firearms can help. Arms embargoes are also vital.
Yet unscrupulous brokers are adept at evading such
strictures.
The various monitoring groups of Security
Council Sanctions Committees need more and
better information. My report includes a number of
recommendations that the Security Council may wish
to consider when mandating peacekeeping operations
and special political missions.
In the past year alone, more than a dozen peacekeepers
in Darfur, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have been killed in action by small arms.
Peacekeeping missions are addressing the challenge in
a number of ways, including assistance with stockpile
management and the collection and destruction of
weapons. United Nations police observers in Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire, for example, have developed a guide
to record arms and ammunition. And an embargomonitoring capacity has been effectively established by
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
Small arms remain a big concern. The challenge
lies at the intersection of human rights, security,
development, crime, international trade, public health
and counter-terrorism. Small arms are a source of
crises, conflict and criminality. Member States, the
United Nations system, regional organizations and civil
society have made progress, but much remains to be
done.
I want once again to commend the Security
Council for taking up vital issues of disarmament
and non-proliferation. I urge that to continue. Let us
commit to advance our work together and build a safer
more secure world for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Beerli.
Ms. Beerli: I am honoured to address the Security
Council on the impact of the illicit transfer, accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons.
In its operations to protect and assist the victims
of armed conflicts and other situations of violence
worldwide, the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) is a first-hand witness to the devastating
costs to civilians of the easy access to, and misuse of,
small arms and light weapons. Those are the weapons of
choice when men, women and children are deliberately

13-486743/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

26/09/2013

targeted, raped or forced out of their homes and their
property is destroyed.

law and human rights law for weapon-bearers, and
violence-prevention strategies specific to the context.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
prolongs conflicts, facilitates violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and puts
civilians at high risk of death or injury from weaponsrelated violence. The threat to civilians remains even
after armed conflicts have ended. The indirect impact
includes disease, starvation and abuse, which increase
when humanitarian organizations are the object of attack
and are forced to suspend operations or leave a country.
Human suffering continues, often for years, after
hostilities are over, as the widespread availability of
these arms engenders a culture of violence, undermines
the rule of law and threatens efforts at reconciliation.

Within this approach, effective protection from
the misuse of arms requires improved respect for
the law, including international humanitarian law,
in situations of armed conflict. Enhanced respect
for the law can increase people’s safety and security
and thereby contribute to reducing the demand for
weapons in response to danger. In the light of this,
continuous capacity-building efforts are required to
ensure that military police and security forces and
other weapon-bearers use weapons in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In this regard, the ICRC can provide practical support
to States in the training of Government forces. It also
promotes respect for international humanitarian law by
non-State armed groups.

It is imperative that States do much more to
address the impact of the poorly controlled availability
and misuse of small arms and light weapons. At three
international conferences of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent over the past 10 years, States party to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 have recognized that
their obligation to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law requires adequate measures to control
the availability of weapons. To uphold that obligation,
we call upon the Security Council to ensure that small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition do not
end up in the hands of those who may be expected to
use them in violation of international humanitarian law
or human rights law.
In particular, we urge the Council to call upon all
United Nations States Members to promptly sign, ratify
and implement the Arms Trade Treaty. The Treaty is
a historic achievement. It establishes a global norm to
prevent arms transfers when there is a manifest risk
that war crimes or serious violations of human rights
will be committed. In parallel, States must continue
to comply with similar or stricter rules under regional
instruments regulating arms transfers to which they
are party. Unfortunately, a look at a number of current
armed conflicts reveals an evident gap between the
transfer criteria expressed in those instruments and the
practice of some States.
The problem of small arms and light weapons
must be addressed in a holistic manner. This requires
developing a comprehensive strategy that includes
reducing the vulnerability of people and communities
at risk from small arms violence, helping victims,
providing training in international humanitarian

4/20

It is crucial for the international community to do
far more to address in a comprehensive manner the
terrible and long-lasting human costs of the widespread
availability and misuse of small arms and light weapons.
The safety and well-being of millions of people around
the world depend on this
The President: I thank Ms. Beerli for her briefing.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make a statement before the voting.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, let me express our condolences
to the Government and people of the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan with respect to the heavy human loss
arising from the destructive earthquake in the province
of Beluchistan. We ask the representative of Pakistan to
convey our condolences and our support to the bereaved
families and we wish the victims a speedy recovery.
We thank the Australian presidency for bringing to
the consideration of the Security Council the important
topic as small arms and light weapons. However, we
cannot support the draft resolution prepared on this
subject since it lacks an important and urgent provision
advanced by Russia on the unacceptable nature of the
supply of small arms and light weapons to non-State
actors. We believe that the root of the problem of small
arms and light weapons is illicit trafficking. Russia has
consistently advocated the adoption of measures aimed
at preventing illicit weapons trafficking.

13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

In this context, of particular importance is the issue
of imposing universal prohibitions on the transfer of
small arms and light weapons to non-State actors and
unauthorized State recipients and users. Weapons in
the hands of illegal militias most frequently become
instruments for the violation of the fundamental human
rights and the source of suffering for the civilian
population. A salient example of that is the recent events
in Mali, where weapons were used that had initially
been transferred to Libyan groups for humanitarian
reasons.
The black and grey markets for small and light
weapons fuel terrorists, extremists, illegal militias,
organized and street crime, and varying kinds of
conflicts. Therefore, any document devoted to this
subject must address such a critical aspect as preventing
the illicit traficking of small arms and light weapons. It
is far easier to prevent the flow of weapons into the
wrong hands and much more complex to later take them
out of those hands.
In advancing our proposal, we took into account the
current lack of any universal agreement establishing a
ban on the transfer of small arms and light weapons to
non-State actors. This lacuna must be removed as soon
as possible We are certain that a universal ban on the
delivery of small arms and light weapons to non-State
actors would shut off one of the channels through which
weapons are illicitly trafficked and as a result would
be in the interest of the national security of essentially
any State.
The negotiating process on the draft text for the
international Arms Trade Treaty demonstrated that the
Russian approach to non-State actors is supported by a
considerable number of States. It was opposed only by
those countries that believe that it is justified to arm
non-State militias, rebel movements and groups that use
violent force to seize power under the banner of fighting
totalitarian regimes, tyranny, and so on. Depending
on the region or the relation to the Government of the
country on whose territories militias are operating, they
may be seen as terrorist or extremists, while others,
similar in most respects, are provided with weapons to
carry out their so-called just struggle. This sounds as if
there were bad terrorists and extremists and good ones,
which in our view is something unacceptable.
Banning the delivery of small arms and light
weapons to non-authorized State structures is one way
to counter the uncontrolled disssemination of weapons,

S/PV.7036

which Russia has for many years consistently advanced
in many multilateral formats, including when drafting
the recently Arms Trade Treaty. Among other similar
measures is a ban on the unauthorized re-export of
weapons, enhanced State control over the end use
of supplied weapons, controls over the activities of
arms brokers, and preventing the transfer of weapons
and piracy — that is, activities without appropriate
licensing. These measures are not financially costly
and do not require additional financial support.
We believe that the draft resolution could have
focused greater attention on the limitations of the
United Nations Programme of Action on the Prevention
and the Eradication of the Illicit Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects. That is
only existing global document in the area of fighting
the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons. It
provides for a broad complex range of meaures that
States must adopt at the global, regional and national
levels in order to fight illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons and to prevent them from falling into
the illicit hands of terrorist organizations, organized
crime and States that are subject to sanctions of the
Security Council.
The support of the members of the Security Council
for the implementation of the Programme of Action is
extremely useful in strenghtening its authority. The
potential of the Programme has not yet been exhausted.
Much remains to be done to implement it, above all at
the national and regional levels. We are certain that
the practical implementation of the comprehensive
approach proposed by Russia to enhance national
controls over transfers of small arms and light weapons
would make it possible to strengthen the security of
individual countries and regions that face the difficult
consequences of the use of ilicit small arms and light
weapons. In light of all this, the Russian Federation will
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Azerbaijan Australia, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Togo, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America

13-486745/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

Abstaining:
Russian Federation
The President: There were 14 votes in favour, none
against and one abstention. The draft resolution has
been adopted as resolution 2117 (2013).
I shall now make a statement in my a capacity as
the Foreign Minister of Australia.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
report (S/2013/503), which have laid the foundation for
today’s discussion. I also thank the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for her
briefing and for the invaluable work her organization
is undertaking.
Australia’s region, the Indo-Pacific has experienced
the devastating effects of the illicit transfer of small
arms and light weapons. Thirteen years ago, our friends
in Solomon Islands faced the very real prospect of
becoming a failed State after long-simmering tensions
boiled over into ethnic conflict. Militants raided
police armouries, high-powered firearms — coupled
with other weapons that flowed across porous
borders — exacerbated the conflict. The results were
devastating — a coup, widespread killings, breakdown
in governance, law and order, and years of economic
contraction.
Australia led the Regional Assistance Mission
to Solomon Islands (RAMSI) with fellow Pacific
Islands Forum members, at Solomon Islands’ request,
to restore law and order. That meant getting guns
out of the community quickly. During a three-week
amnesty, more than 4,000 firearms were surrendered or
confiscated by RAMSI. This early and decisive action
underpinned the peace that was built and maintained
over the next 10 years.
Small arms and light weapons have had similar
effects elsewhere in our region — in Timor-Leste and
in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea. As a member of
the Council, we are reminded all too frequently of the
threat that the proliferation and misuse of these weapons
can pose to civilians, to States and to international
peace and security, including in Mali and the Sahel, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. These weapons pose a grave threat
to civilians, to peacekeepers, to humanitarian workers
and to civil society organizations. Their proliferation
and misuse can undermine the rule of law and human
rights, and destroy efforts to rebuild broken societies.

6/20

26/09/2013

We have all learned valuable lessons on how this
threat can be overcome. While States have the primary
responsibility to prevent the illicit transfer and misuse
of these weapons, many will need support to do so.
Peacekeeping and political missions can play a key
role, as we saw in Solomon Islands. This has also been
the experience in Côte d’Ivoire, where a small but
dedicated arms-embargo monitoring unit in the United
Nations mission has made a real impact in supporting
the government to combat illicit arms flows.
Assistance to States in managing their own
weapons — those held by their security forces — will
often be the starting point. For States emerging from
conflict, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for former combatants must be carefully
designed and implemented, and weapons accounted
for. Security sector reform must include effective
weapons management. Such transition processes must
be inclusive, with women’s participation being crucial.
Existing controls, including national regulations and
arms embargoes, must be fully implemented. Regional
organizations will often be able to play a pivotal role.
The international community has demonstrated
renewed resolve to combat the threat posed by small
arms and light weapons. The adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty this year was a landmark achievement
that will help stop destabilizing arms flows to conflict
regions and to illicit users. It will prevent human rights
abusers and those who violate the laws of war from
being supplied with arms.
The Council, by adopting resolution 2117 (2013)
today, is demonstrating that it has an important role to
play in addressing these challenges. The resolution will
strengthen the implementation of the Council’s arms
embargoes. It supports peacekeepers’ efforts to limit
the impact of these weapons on post-conflict societies.
Most importantly, the resolution demonstrates the
fundamental importance that the Council places on
protecting civilians and of full respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.
This international momentum must be maintained.
The Council has taken too long to adopt its first resolution
on small arms. And I should note that Australia has built
on the earlier work of others — including Argentina
some years ago — to get to this point. The Council
should consider these issues more systematically, return
to this subject with greater frequency, and ensure that
our commitments today are not forgotten tomorrow.

13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the members of the Council.
President Pérez Molina (spoke in Spanish):
Just two hours ago, I had the opportunity to address
the General Assembly in the general debate that has
brought us all together in New York. This also provided
me with the opportunity to attend this meeting, which is
of particular satisfaction to me. Some present here may
recall that my intention to preside over the last open
debate of the Security Council during Guatemala’s
presidency in October 2012 was thwarted by storm
Sandy, and it is only now that I have the opportunity
to personally take part in this forum in order to bear
witness to the support of my Government to its work,
which is so crucial to humanity.
We thank your Government, Madam President,
for having organized this high-level meeting, as well
as for having elaborated the concept note that guides
our debate (S/2013/536). At the same time, I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Ms. Beerli, for their respective presentations.
The issue of small arms and light weapons has been
addressed more broadly within the General Assembly,
the leadership of which on the subject should be
recognized. However, we believe that this should not
prevent the Security Council from playing an active
and complementary role in the specific areas of its
competence. These have been the subject of several
reports of the Secretary-General and of numerous
presidential statements. That is why we commend
the delegation of Australia for having taken up this
initiative, and of course support the text of resolution
2117 (2013), which the Council adopted as few moments
ago. This is a historic event, taking into account that
the Council has never before adopted a resolution that
specifically addresses small arms and light weapons.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/503)
underlines the scourge of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, and its potential serious
consequences for international peace and security — in
particular, its impact on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Despite the efforts of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and mechanisms to assist States
in complying with arms embargoes, the unregulated
circulation of small arms continues to proliferate at
an alarming rate. This phenomenon persists due to the

S/PV.7036

lucrative nature of illicit trade, poor regulation and lack
of controls, including poorly or unsecured Government
stockpiles. It is worth noting that women and children
are often those who most suffer the consequences.
In addressing this phenomenon, we agree with
the Secretary-General’s recommendation concerning
the importance of focusing on a comprehensive policy
approach, highlighting the role of international,
regional and subregional organizations. In particular,
we welcome the partnerships that the United Nations
has built in this area. Moreover, regarding the role of
the arms industry, although the report of the SecretaryGeneral recommends considering the use of new
technologies to improve stockpile management and
reduce the diversion of arms to illicit use, it would not
be remiss to encourage producing States to promote
accountability and the full implementation of existing
laws and regulations in that sector. Our common goal
should be to stop the overproduction of weapons.
We must support the existing regulatory
framework and formulate concrete steps to strengthen
and maximize the impact of the Council’s responses to
threats to peace and security caused by the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. In particular, I would
like to highlight the recognition of the responsibility
of States themselves to protect their civilians — most
of all women and children — and to emphasize that
preventing the proliferation of small arms must be part
of that commitment.
Furthermore, although the responsibility for
establishing effective firearms controls and regulations
lies with the State, account should be taken of the
challenges that States in conflict or States emerging
from conflict must face, which often reveal serious
deficiencies at the institutional level and render them
especially vulnerable to arms trafficking, which is
often linked to drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime.
Our own internal conflict was resolved 17 years ago,
but we still suffer the violence, insecurity, criminality
and organized crime associated, in part, with illicit
weapons that are often purchased legally before being
diverted to the illicit market. Our Government has
striven to combat that phenomenon at the domestic,
regional and international levels. At the national level,
without providing an exhaustive list, I would like to
mention some areas of progress, which include the
renewal of the National Commission for the Prevention

13-486747/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

of Armed Violence and the creation of the Centre for
Arms and Ammunitions Control within the judicial
branch. We are also developing a national policy for
the prevention of violence, and we have signed several
cooperation agreements with civil society.
At the international level, we actively participated
in the negotiation of the Arms Trade Treaty, which
we acceded to on 24 June, proving once again the
commitment of my country to general and complete
disarmament and strengthening the international
security system. We are currently engaging in
consultations prior to remitting the Treaty to our
Congress for its approval and subsequent ratification.
The Council, more than any other international forum,
has witnessed the high cost in human lives that the lack
of a universal instrument of that kind entails, hence the
importance of ensuring its early entry into force and
universality.
In conclusion, we are fully committed to the
implementation of the outcomes of the second United
Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Australian presidency for
having taken the initiative of convening this high-level
meeting on the issue of small arms. I also wish the
President every success in her new functions.
The impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons on international peace and security can be felt
in a number of the geographic situations and thematic
issues of which the Security Council is seized. I strongly
welcome resolution 2117 (2013), which we have just
adopted, the first of its kind, in order to counter the
phenomenon.
I
thank
the
Secretary-General
for
his
presentation and his report (S/2013/503). We support
his recommendations. My thanks also go to the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for her very enlightening briefing about a sad
reality. It is estimated that, each year, small arms claim
the lives of more than 500,000 people. The majority of

8/20

26/09/2013

the victims — 300,000 persons — die in situations of
armed conflict. The uncontrolled proliferation of small
arms and light weapons undermines peace and security,
particularly in Africa, and it has a devastating impact
on civilians in armed conflict. Women and children
often bear the brunt of that impact. The President of
Nigeria recalled that fact last Tuesday, 24 September,
during his address to the General Assembly (see A/68/
PV.5) : for Africa, those small arms are the weapons of
mass destruction.
Over the course of the past year, several countries
in the Sahel have become more vulnerable as a result
of the proliferation of weapons from within and outside
the region, a lack of governmental control over army
and police stockpiles, terrorist activities and related
organized crime. To counter that threat in Mali, the
Security Council established the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). On 25 April we gave MINUSMA
the mandate to assist the Malian authorities in weapons
and ammunition management, notably through training.
At the regional level, we have high expectations for
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, which has to be carried out in close
coordination with the relevant regional organizations.
For its part, Luxembourg is committed to working
alongside its African partners, notably by supporting
the activities of the African Francophone Network on
Small Arms, a non-governmental organization and
think-tank network whose objective is to improve
shared knowledge on small arms proliferation, security
and disarmament with a view to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.
The illicit transfer and destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons are often
done in violation of embargoes imposed by Security
Council resolutions. It is therefore the responsibility of
our Council, through the various Sanctions Committees
and with the assistance of the associated panels of
experts as well as the United Nations missions deployed
on the ground, to ensure the effective implementation
of sanctions decided by the Council. All the States
Members of the United Nations need to lend their
support to the task. Our credibility is at stake.
On 2 April, the General Assembly adopted the
Arms Trade Treaty, which more than 100 Member
States, including Luxembourg, have already signed.
The majority of the members of the Security Council,

13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

including now the majority of its permanent members,
have signed it. My country resolutely supports that
historic instrument and will continue to work towards
its rapid entry into force and its full implementation.
By setting norms for the responsible transfer of all
conventional arms, the Treaty will have a positive
impact on international law, international humanitarian
law and human rights. By prohibiting arms transfers
in certain cases and by imposing the obligation on
exporting States to assess whether the arms could be
used to commit or facilitate serious acts of violence
against women or children, the Treaty will contribute
in a concrete manner to reducing human suffering and
ensuring peace, security and stability.
With the growing number of signatures and
ratifications of the Arms Trade Treaty, the commitment
by the whole international community and the
momentum generated by today’s meeting at the level
of the Security Council, I trust that we will be able to
decisively stem the scourge of the illicit trade in small
arms.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Nick Clegg, Deputy Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
Mr. Clegg (United Kingdom): None of us here
today can fail to be concerned about the damage caused
by the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We
all know the statistics. For every minute of our debate,
a man, woman or child will die as a result of armed
violence. We also know the facts. The only way we can
tackle the issue seriously is by working together as an
international community.
First, let me be clear. Tougher regulation is not
about restricting the legitimate trade and use of small
arms, such as in peacekeeping operations around the
world. We do, however, have a duty to uphold human
rights. Without tough global rules in place to govern
the sale and availability of those weapons, too often
they end up in the hands of criminals, terrorists and
insurgents who use them to destabilize societies, fuel
conflicts, prop up rogue regimes and commit atrocious
acts.
As we saw during the tragic events in Kenya
recently, those people did not confine their bullets
to the battlefield. They use them across the world to
terrorize and harm ordinary people.

S/PV.7036

Resolution 2117 (2013) gives us the chance to
strengthen our joint efforts to tackle the issue and help
secure peace and stability. A key part of that work, as
the resolution recognizes, is the Arms Trade Treaty. The
Treaty sets outs, for the first time in history, a global set
of legally binding rules to stop small arms and light
weapons being sold, without concern for their ultimate
use. Just yesterday, another 18 countries committed
to the Treaty. We need just 50 States in total to ratify
the Treaty so that it may enter into force. The United
Kingdom is committed to ratifying it before the end of
the year, because unless we put it into practice and start
making it work on the ground, it will remain no more
than a paper commitment. So I call on all of those States
that have not yet done so to make the commitment to act
as soon as possible.
The resolution is also a reminder that when it
comes to arms embargoes, words are not enough. It is
our collective responsibility to actively enforce them.
That means we need to empower countries that need
extra support to enforce embargoes. We need to turn up
the pressure on countries that willfully allow or support
their violation and bring such cases to the attention of
the Council. We should not hesitate to prosecute those
individuals and organizations breaking export controls
within their own borders.
Finally, we cannot forget that those weapons are
often used to intimidate women, children and men
caught up in conflict through rape and other acts of
sexual violence. Preventing the proliferation of small
weapons is one important way that we can help to stop
such horrendous acts. Over 115 States have endorsed the
Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict.
I would encourage all other States yet to do so, to join
us in pledging their commitment to that initiative, in
order to strengthen United Nations efforts and help
organizations on the ground to support victims and
their families.
In conclusion, I wish to thank you again, Madam
President, for raising the issue and giving us the
opportunity to renew our efforts to tackle the illicit
transfer of small arms and light weapons.
Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): I wish you,
Madam President, every success in your new position.
As has been clearly stated by others before me, small
arms and light weapons are responsible for 300,000
to 500,000 deaths each year. My British colleague
mentioned one death each minute. They threaten States

13-486749/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

and social structures. It is therefore essential that the
United Nations continue to take action against the
major scourge. As far as France and many present here
are concerned, we committed early on to the fight
against the proliferation of those weapons. We favoured
the establishment of an international instrument.
Following the adoption in 2001 of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects we continued to work to strengthen it.
Our efforts contributed to the adoption in 2005 of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. We have also worked
in a number of international forums to combat the illicit
trafficking of such weapons by air.
This year, we adopted the first Arms Trade Treaty.
France signed the document on 3 June and we intend
to ratify it in the coming weeks; it is only through
ratification that it will enter into force. Naturally, it will
influence the proliferation of weapons and strengthen
security. Like many here, I encourage all States
Members of the United Nations that have not yet done
so to sign the document in order that it may enter into
force as quickly as possible.
With respect to resolution 2117 (2013), drafted by
the Australian presidency, France believes that it is
excellent and has supported it.
There is no single solution. In addition to the
ongoing mobilization efforts of States, which remain
essential, we must leverage all available tools to tackle
the issue of small arms and light weapons, including
international instruments, ad hoc measures, and
specific actions and cooperation in the field, including
the proposal of our Russian colleague. All of that must
be coordinated based on local conditions and mutually
defined goals.
I wish to conclude by stating the United Nations is
an Organization that sometimes faces difficulties — as
can be seen right now. But when we adopt a resolution
of this nature and take a stand on a matter of such great
magnitude, we see that the Organization, despite its
limits, is absolutely indispensible to world peace.
Mr. Yun Byung-se (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by thanking you, Madam President, for convening
today’s important discussion. My appreciation also goes
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Vice-President
Christine Beerli for their informative briefings. I am

10/20

26/09/2013

also grateful to the Secretary-General for the valuable
recommendations presented in his biennial report
(S/2013/503).
Today’s discussion and the adoption of resolution
2117 (2013) reflect the unswerving commitment of
the international community to addressing the illicit
transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons. I believe that this
meeting offers an excellent opportunity for us to work
together in strengthening the Security Council’s role on
the issue, given the lengthy absence of a relevant highlevel discussion in the Council.
The cross-cutting and adverse consequences of the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons are well documented in
numerous Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements. It clearly demonstrates that no one country
or institution can solve the problem alone. It requires
continued commitment on the part of all sides, including
by the Security Council.
First of all, each and every State is primarily
responsible for preventing the proliferation and
diversion of illicit small arms. Therefore, each State
should ensure the highest degree of accountability in
order to prevent its weapons from flowing into regions
or countries of concern and falling into the wrong
hands. In that regard, I believe that the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT), which was adopted in April, marked
an important milestone in our efforts to prevent the
illicit transfer and diversion of conventional arms. We
appreciate the leadership of Australia and Argentina
in bringing the ATT negotiations to fruition. The
Republic of Korea, one of the original signatory States
to the Treaty, will play its part in bringing the Treaty
into force at an early date. I would also like to welcome
the United States as a new signatory to that important
treaty.
In addition, the Republic of Korea will also
continue to lead efforts, along with Australia, in
advancing the biennial General Assembly resolution
on illicit brokering. I have every confidence that the
resolution will be instrumental in creating yet another
international norm against the merchants of death who
profit from the world’s deadliest conflicts and destroy
fragile peace in recovering States.
Along with the efforts of each Member State, the
Security Council must play a vital and increased role,
given the multifaceted impact of small arms on its

13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

country-specific and thematic agendas. Let me share a
couple of ideas in that regard.
First, the Security Council’s arms embargoes have
acted as an effective line of defense against the illicit
transfer of small arms. The Security Council therefore
needs to exert greater efforts to ensure that the arms
embargoes are more workable and to further assist
Member States in their implementation. As rightly
recommended by the Secretary-General, it will be a
step in the right direction for the Council to mandate
peacekeeping operations and political missions to assist
in monitoring and implementing arms embargoes,
including the collection of prohibited arms and the
management of Government stockpiles, as appropriate.
Furthermore, it is equally important that the
Council provide practical support to Member States in
the implementation of arms embargoes. As the recent
case of Panama’s interdiction of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea vessel Chong Chon Gang clearly
demonstrates, strict arms embargo measures imposed by
Member States can make a real difference in combating
arms proliferation. With effective and timely support
from the Panel of Experts of the Sanctions Committees,
for example, Member States will be able to implement
arms embargoes with increased confidence.
Secondly, in order to better protect civilians,
particularly women and children, in armed conflicts,
the Council’s post-conflict peacebuilding efforts,
such as programmes for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform, require
further improvement. Peacekeeping, peacebuilding
missions and special political missions should be given
effective mandates and sufficient resources to enable
them to fully support their host Governments. As the
Secretary-General points out in his report, support
actions for arms control and regulation should be
considered in the planning of integrated peace missions.
Reinforced border controls can also contribute to
making disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes more sustainable.
Thirdly, enhanced coordination and information
sharing across the United Nations system would create
synergy in better combating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. In that vein, we support the
enhanced role of the Coordinating Action on Small
Arms, which is the United Nations inter-agency task
force on small arms.

S/PV.7036

Finally, the Security Council needs to establish
a follow-up mechanism to the Secretary-General’s
biennial reports. To maintain that momentum and move
a step forward, we need to continually assess where
we are and where we are heading through such an
established process.
Many conflicts and much post-conflict violence
throughout the world are fuelled and exacerbated by
small arms and light weapons. The scale of the associated
human suffering is immense; women and children are
particularly vulnerable. Inaction and procrastination
today will result in a high cost tomorrow.
As the Korean Government pursues the goal of
well-being for all global citizens, it will continue to
exert its sincere efforts in combating the illicit use and
trade in small arms and light weapons, while providing
effective assistance for ongoing global peacebuilding
efforts, in particular in the development of fragile
States.
The Security Council must take the lead in restoring
peace and stability and ensure that the security and wellbeing of civilians are key elements of its considerations.
We must work together to maintain the valuable and
long-awaited momentum created by the adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty and today’s high-level meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Saad-Eddine El Othmani, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Kingdom of
Morocco.
Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, let me congratulate Australia for its
outstanding presidency of the Security Council this
month, and we commend your excellent choice, Madam,
of the subject for this high-level meeting. I also express
my gratitude to the Secretary-General for the excellent
report (S/2013/503) he presented to the Council and the
recommendations contained therein.
The concept note (S/2013/536, annex) circulated by
the Australian presidency has raised relevant questions
related to the mechanisms for coordinating international
efforts to ensure an effective fight against the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and to seek
better ways to address the challenges related to it. The
world is unanimous with respect to the repercussions
of that scourge — loss of human life, the destruction
of economic capacities and threats to the peace and
security of States and their territorial integrity. It

13-4867411/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

also prolongs conflict, worsens armed violence and
undermines humanitarian, international and human
rights law. Furthermore, the close nexus between
terrorism, organized crime, human trafficking, drug
trafficking and trafficking in certain national resources
is clear.
Unfortunately, Africa bears the brunt of the
disastrous effects of that scourge. In that regard, the
Sahel region and the region of the Sahara are testimonies
to the link between illicit arms trafficking, terrorist
separatist groups and organized crime. Security
risks extending beyond the borders of the Sahel have
worsened because of the increase in arms flows in recent
years, particularly those originating from the Libyan
stockpiles of the previous regime. That threatens the
region with more instability and reinforces the arsenals
of terrorist groups.
Addressing those challenges requires international
cooperation to support, in particular, the capacities
of States in the region. Therefore, the initiative of
the Secretary-General to hold a high-level meeting
on counter-terrorism strategies in the Sahel and the
region and the special meeting organized by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, which Morocco had the
honour to chair, are of particular importance within
the framework of the cooperation and assistance to
be provided to the Sahel region to bolster its counterterrorism capacities.
The Kingdom of Morocco would like to reaffirm
the great importance of the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. We reaffirm our support to the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, as well as the international follow-up
Small Arms Review Conference. Morocco calls for the
effective implementation of the Programme of Action by
national and regional authorities within the framework
of the work plan adopted by the second Small Arms
Review Conference. Furthermore, we welcome the
opening for signature of the Arms Trade Treaty and the
holding of the United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty, which was presided over by the excellent
Australian diplomat Mr. Woolcott. Morocco hopes that
this instrument will help to strengthen international
efforts to eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons.

12/20

26/09/2013

For the same reasons, the Kingdom of Morocco,
since 2006, has taken part in the Geneva Declaration
on Armed Violence and Development. We contributed
to launching the Declaration together with Switzerland
and 41 other States, the United Nations Development
Programme and non-governmental organizations
active in the area of development. That initiative,
which now has 109 countries signatories, is working to
assist the countries that suffer from armed violence to
help them put an end to that scourge and to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. That is done
by integrating disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in their national development policies.
Morocco would like to call for international efforts to
be taken. However, in fighting illicit trafficking we
need to count international law and the Charter with
respect to the right of each State to import small arms
and light weapons and manufacture them for their
legitimate needs with respect to national defence and to
ensure territorial integrity.
In conclusion, we hope that this meeting and
resolution 2117 (2013), which was just adopted, will
strengthen cooperation internationally, regionally and
subregionally. We reaffirm that we need to step up our
efforts at cooperation to implement the programme
of work and all of the commitments pertaining to
international instruments. We commend civil society
and the role that it plays in dealing with this scourge.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of
Rwanda.
Ms. Mushikiwabo (Rwanda): I wish to begin
by congratulating you, Madam President, on your
recent appointment as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia. I personally look forward to working with
you. Also, thank you, Madam President, for choosing
the topic of small arms and light weapons for this
high-level meeting of your presidency. We are all fully
aware that the last time this threat was considered
by the Security Council (see S/PV.5881) makes this
meeting long overdue. I would also like to express
my sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General and the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
As we contemplate the danger caused by arms
and weapons in the wrong hands, I would also like to
express my sympathy and solidarity with the people

13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

S/PV.7036

of Kenya, neighbours of Rwanda, many of whom only
days ago experienced a heinous crime made possible,
in great part, by the accessibility of the weapons we
are talking about today. As the Secretary-General says
in his report (S/2013/503), it is an indisputable fact that
the excessive, cruel and uncontrolled spread of small
arms and light weapons poses a substantial threat to
international peace and security, human rights and
social development in many countries, including on our
own continent, Africa.

We would like to recognize the efforts of the
Regional Centre on Small Arms based in Nairobi
and the East African community’s small arms and
light weapons programmes, as well as other regional
organizations, in their work in combating the illicit
use and transfer of small arms and light weapons. We
remain convinced that such regional efforts will help to
ensure cooperation in addressing the illicit transfer and
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of such arms
and weapons.

It is a reality that the African continent, particularly
the Great Lakes region, where Rwanda is located,
continues to be engulfed by internal armed conflicts
facilitated by such easily accessible weapons. We know
from experience that small arms and light weapons
have neither a small nor a light impact on communities
devastated by conflict, and we should therefore not be
fooled by those adjectives. It is in recognition of the
grave harm caused by the illicit manufacture, transfer,
circulation, excessive accumulation and uncontrolled
spread of small arms and light weapons that we
emphasize the importance of regional and subregional
cooperation, in regard to which Rwanda has subscribed
to and ratified the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention,
Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of
Africa. Rwanda has also been party to a number of
initiatives, taken at international, regional and local
levels, that have culminated in lifesaving commitments.

In conclusion, Rwanda would like to call on all
members of the Security Council to work closely
and support regional initiatives in a true spirit of
partnership, remembering that we have not just an
individual but a collective obligation and responsibility
to avert and combat the destabilizing accumulation and
illicit manufacture, trade and circulation of small arms
and light weapons.

Rwanda has established and implemented a policy
on firearms and ammunition that provides for measures
regulating the import, transfer, brokering, marking and
licensing of firearms, ammunition and munitions. As
a result, so far 42,266 arms and 52 tons of unexploded
ordinance have been destroyed in the last several years.
Reports to the Regional Centre on Small Arms have
shown that Rwanda is ahead in the subregion in the
management of stockpiles of arms and ammunition.
We take this opportunity to applaud United Nations
States Members that have signed the Arms Trade
Treaty, adopted by the General Assembly on 2 April.
My country was among the many that signed the
Treaty when it was first opened for signature here at
Headquarters. We are proud to be associated with the
Treaty, which includes small arms in its scope and backs
up prevailing international and regional instruments for
the control and regulation of conventional small arms
and light weapons.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Sartaj Aziz, Adviser on National
Security and Foreign Affairs to the Prime Minister of
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
Mr. Aziz (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
thanking Australia for convening this meeting, and the
Secretary-General for presenting his comprehensive
report on small arms (S/2013/503).
As my colleagues have pointed out, the illicit trade
in arms and light weapons is causing havoc around the
world. Terrorists and rebels are targeting peacekeepers,
police and security forces. Civilians bear the brunt of
armed conflict, which is fuelled by the proliferation,
accumulation and use of such arms. The illicit trade in
these weapons abets crimes and contributes to narcotic
drug trafficking. In our region, we have first-hand
experience of the lethal nature of such arms. Every day,
innocent people fall victim to the murderous designs of
terrorists, criminals and zealots using such weapons,
which are cheap, easy to transport and easy to conceal.
We agree with the United Nations that such arms are
dominant tools of criminal violence and warfare.
Small arms also have huge social and economic
costs. Instability created by the use of illicit light
weapons drives away investment, slows human
development and impedes economic growth. Terrorists
and criminals do not manufacture those arms. They
buy them in illicit arms markets or receive them from
forces and entities that want to destabilize particular
regions. It is therefore the responsibility of all States,

13-4867413/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

the Council and the United Nations to take measures to
prevent the illicit trade in such arms and their transfer,
diversion and misuse. We must show strong resolve in
opposing the criminals who use small arms and the
networks that supply them with these killing machines.
The Security Council has done a commendable
job in reducing the adverse consequences of the
illicit trade in these weapons, even as new flows and
hotspots keep emerging. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations for using new technologies
for stockpile management, making national systems
for marking and tracing weapons more efficient, and
monitoring the activities of traders and brokers more
closely.
To stem the illicit trade in and proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, we need a comprehensive and
integrated approach. The existing mechanisms have
mainly focused on regulating the supply side of this
complex issue. In our view, greater attention must be
paid to addressing the issues related to the demand side.
Unresolved disputes, the growth in terrorist activities
and the rise in illicit narcotics and organized crime are
the driving forces behind the demand for the illegal
small arms trade. The Security Council can address
that aspect by playing a more active role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflicts.
The Government of Pakistan has taken several steps
to regulate the sale, supply, import and transfer of small
arms. We have regularly filed national implementation
reports under the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
outlining the national measures taken over the years.
Pakistan has developed the necessary legislative,
regulatory, enforcement and institutional mechanisms
to address the range of issues relating to small arms and
light weapons. An inter-ministerial group addresses
those issues in an integrated manner. We have adopted
policy guidelines on the export of conventional arms
and established a national evaluation mechanism to
regulate their trade. We now plan to take additional
measures to strengthen the enforcement regime, which
covers imports and licences.
The success last year of the second Review
Conference of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
and the adoption this year of the Arms Trade Treaty

14/20

26/09/2013

are important milestones in advancing our shared
objective of preventing the proliferation of those arms.
National ownership, I believe, is a key tool for spurring
international efforts to deal effectively with small arms.
For developing countries, particularly in Africa,
as pointed out by other colleagues, the role of
international assistance and cooperation is critical.
It is the main enabler of global, regional and national
efforts to regulate and prevent the use of those arms.
We therefore call for stronger commitment from the
international community to mobilize resources in that
regard in order to help smaller countries deal with the
devastation caused by the illegal trade in arms.
One of the main objectives of the resolution
adopted today (resolution 2117 (2013)) is to protect
innocent human lives. In that context, we agree with
the Secretary-General’s observation that drone strikes
result in child casualties and have had a serious impact
on their psychosocial health. In Pakistan, we frequently
experience casualties of civilians, including women and
children, inflicted by armed drones. We call for an end
to the use of drone strikes, as they violate international
law, including international humanitarian law, and are
also detrimental to our efforts to fight terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Elmar Maharram oglu Mammadyarov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): I would like
to start by expressing my profound gratitude to the
Australian presidency of the Security Council for
having convened today’s meeting on the very important
issue of small arms and light weapons.
The high-level participation today attests to the
importance accorded by the members of the Security
Council to an acute problem being faced in many parts
of the world, including our own. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their informative and insightful
presentations.
The holding of today’s meeting is timely. It provides
us with an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the
Council’s decisions on the small arms and light weapons
problem in conflict and post-conflict situations in
its purview, consider practical steps to strengthen its
responses and give impetus to the implementation of
relevant international obligations in that sphere.

13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

The consequences of the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons are grave and immeasurable. Yet
the worldwide negative effects are more than evident.
In a sense, small arms and light weapons may not
trigger conflicts but their excessive accumulation and
wide availability beyond control heighten tensions,
exacerbate armed violence, prolong conflicts and fuel
terrorism and criminal activities.
Domestically and in a wider context, the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons circulation
has similar security, political and socioeconomic
dimensions. Its repercussions often become serious
impediments to the democratic and economic
development of countries and whole regions. The
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/503)
aptly defines the scope, gravity and magnitude of the
undermining impact of small arms and light weapons
on international peace and security in several regions.
Most importantly, it offers a number of pertinent
recommendations and observations on some aspects
of the problem. We believe that the recommendations
related to the Security Council engagement on the
issue should receive due consideration and be properly
reflected in its future decisions.
More generally, we emphasize the utmost
importance of continued and full implementation
of the 2001 Programme of Action on Small Arms as
the main international framework to prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects, as well as the 2005
International Tracing Instrument.
Building strong national capacities is pivotal for
the effective implementation by States of their relevant
obligations. Various multilateral mechanisms and
processes should aim to foster international cooperation
and assistance for States and complement national and
regional efforts.
Azerbaijan fully supports international initiatives
and instruments on the prevention and eradication
of the illicit manufacture, transfer and circulation
of small arms and light weapons and their excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled proliferation. The
same position concerns first and foremost the 2001
Programme of Action on Small Arms. At the regional
level, we stress the relevance of the Document on
Small Arms and Light Weapons of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and

S/PV.7036

its important contribution to addressing the problems
in the OSCE area. Azerbaijan takes all the appropriate
measures at the national, regional and global levels to
implement its commitments and meet the objectives
of those instruments. We have established efficient
inter-agency cooperation and information sharing as
well as a robust national export control system that
involves best practices. Azerbaijan stands for increased
transparency and responsible behaviour in the global
trade in small arms and light weapons and conventional
weapons.
However, our efforts taken at the national and
international levels are being seriously hampered by
the continued occupation of Azerbaijani territories
by neighbouring Armenia. In gross violation of
international law and the relevant regional documents
to which it is a party, Armenia continues its military
build-up in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
Large quantities of small arms and light weapons and
conventional weaponry are being channelled to that
territory beyond international control. Azerbaijan has
repeatedly drawn the attention of the international
community to the illegal transfer of small arms and
light weapons and other conventional weaponry by
Armenia to the occupied territories of my country. We
urge all States to refrain from, condemn and prevent
such illegal activities, which violate Azerbaijan’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and, more broadly,
prevent the establishment of peace and prosperity in the
region.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the
adoption of resolution 2117 (2013) as an outcome of
our deliberations today. Not only does the resolution
provide an important basis for reinforcing the Council’s
engagement on small arms and light weapons but it also
effectively guides the efforts of the States Members
of the United Nations and the relevant entities in the
implementation of the Council’s decisions on that crosscutting problem. I commend Australia for its hard work
in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Samantha Power, Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations and a
member of President Obama’s Cabinet.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Madam
President, you should know that your Ambassador,
Mr. Gary Quinlan, and his team have done a magnificent

13-4867415/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

26/09/2013

job this month in the presidency of the Security Council.
We are all very grateful to them.

lawless activity, deadly weapons fall into the wrong
hands.

My Government welcomes today’s ministerial
meeting and is pleased that greater attention is being
paid to the danger posed to international stability and
human life by the illicit trafficking, stockpiling and use
of small arms and light weapons.

Every State has an obligation to prevent the illegal
transfer and accumulation of weapons, and in particular
to abide by Security Council resolutions pertaining to
the flow or arms into countries in conflict. We each
have a responsibility to work as partners in seeking to
improve border controls, support United Nations peace
operations, promote the sharing of information among
law enforcement agencies, and comply with relevant
international treaties and agreements.

On behalf of the United States, I congratulate our
friends from Australia for their leadership in bringing
this subject to the attention of the Security Council and
for promoting action that reaffirms the commitment of
the international community to addressing the problem
in a consistent, persistent and coordinated way. I also
commend the Secretary-General for his recent report
on small arms (S/2013/503), which includes a wealth
of insights and observations that have informed the
Council’s unprecedented action this afternoon. I thank
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
Vice-President Beerli for her briefing and for the
valuable work that ICRC does each and every day, often
at grave risk, around the world.
The urgency and timeliness of the resolution
adopted today (resolution 2117 (2013)) is reflected in
the recent terrorist attack in Kenya, ongoing violence
in the Central African Republic, the devastation caused
by recent fighting Mali and the daily toll of suffering
caused by armed criminals, illegal militias, drug
cartels, pirates and others with illegitimate access to
such weapons. The resolution highlights the special
risks that illicit weapons pose to vulnerable groups,
including refugees, the internally displaced, women
and children and members of civil society, including
those who deliver humanitarian assistance to families
in desperate need. We are also reminded on a daily basis
that the availability of illicit arms is both a cause and
the result of violence, as rival groups arm themselves
in response to the growing arsenals of the other. Our
task, and it is a fully appropriate one for the Security
Council, is to encourage States to act together to reverse
those cycles of destruction and to invest our energy and
resources on behalf of the rule of law.
Of course, we recognize that nations have the
right to defend themselves and their citizens and that
small arms and light weapons are manufactured legally
and traded and retained for legitimate purposes, and
we would strongly oppose any effort impinge on the
constitutional rights of our citizens to bear arms. Our
concerns arise when legal controls break down and,
through weakness of governance, corruption or other
16/20

The many dimensions of that task as reflected in
the programmes and policies of my own Government,
which has worked for many years to assist States in
developing better law-enforcement capabilities and
stockpile-management systems, while also discouraging
irresponsible and indiscriminate arms exports. Last
year alone, we contributed more than $149 million to
some 35 countries to safely destroy surplus conventional
weapons and inform area residents of potential risks
from unexploded munitions.
Looking ahead, I urge the Council to maintain its
focus on this challenge and to make creative use of
the full range of available options, including quickresponse mechanisms, in order to save lives by reducing
dramatically and permanently the illicit flow of light
weapons and small arms.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, Madam, I wish to welcome your presence leading
this meeting of the Security Council. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Beerli, Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, for
their briefings. I wish to express my appreciation and
thanks to Australia for the preparations it made for this
meeting.
The illicit trade in and excessive accumulation and
proliferation of small arms and light weapons have posed
a major challenge to the international community. The
international security station is complex and volatile
and rife with both traditional and non-traditional
security threats, such as regional unrest, terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Globalization, IT
applications and new technological revolutions have
added complexity to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons.
All of this poses new challenges to many countries,
in particular developing countries in Africa and Latin
America. The Security Council should continue to play
13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

a positive role and urge the international community to
redouble its efforts in the fight against the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.
In that regard, I wish to make the following
proposals. First, we should take a holistic approach
in addressing both the symptoms and the root causes.
The international community should commit itself to
resolving disputes through political and diplomatic
means and to safeguarding regional and international
peace. At the same time, we should enhance
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and help
the relevant countries to achieve economic development
and social stability in an effort to eliminate the root
causes of wars, conflict, terrorism and organized crime.
This would pave the way for a fundamental solution to
the issue of small arms and light weapons.
Secondly, we should bring into full play the role
of the United Nations as the major actor. We should
comprehensively and effectively implement the
outcomes reached under the framework of the United
Nations, work for steady progress in the relevant
processes, and intensify the fight against the illicit
trade in arms at the national, regional and international
levels. The United Nations should play an even greater
role in promoting international cooperation and
assistance in that regard.
Thirdly, we should strengthen international
cooperation. The law-enforcement bodies of all countries
should enhance their coordination and maintain closer
links with multilateral institutions, such as INTERPOL,
with a view to increasing information exchange and
practical cooperation through bilateral and multilateral
channels. Different regions can establish their own
priorities and develop effective measures in the light
of their specific situations. Developed countries should
provide greater assistance to developing countries in
the areas of institution-building, personnel training,
capital and technology.
Fourthly, Governments need to enhance their
capacity-building. National Governments bear the
primary responsibility to fight the illicit trade in arms.
All countries should comply with Security Council
resolutions involving arms embargoes, improve their
domestic legislation in the light of national conditions,
and tighten control on small arms and light weapons so
as to cut off the source of their illicit trade.
The Chinese Government has been consistently
and firmly against the illicit trade in small arms and

S/PV.7036

light weapons. We fully understand the concerns of the
relevant countries and regions and deeply sympathize
with them. Over the years, China has taken an active
part in international cooperation in this area and
improved its domestic management of the small arms
trade, thereby contributing to efforts to combat the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
First, we have enhanced legislation, law
enforcement and capacity-building. The Chinese
Government has exerted strict controls over small arms
and light weapons in accordance with the law of the
People’s Republic of China on the control of firearms
and other laws and regulations. We have promulgated
precise regulations for small-arms marking that
provide for the detailed marking of small arms and
light weapons, and put in place an information system
for the management of guns used for official purposes.
Chinese law enforcement departments have carried
out several special campaigns to confiscate guns and
combat violence. As a result, the gun-related crime
rate has gone down year after year, contributing to
continued social stability and the safety of people and
their property.
We have actively engaged I bilateral and multilateral
exchanges and cooperation and in providing foreign
assistance. The competent departments in China have
played an active role in international exchanges and
practical cooperation. We have provided assistance to
other countries and multilateral organizations in the
form of capital, technology and personnel training
within the frameworks of the United Nations, the
Organization of American States, the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
In addition, China has provided assistance in various
forms to approximately 40 countries in Asia, Africa
and Latin America in order to help them address
humanitarian crises that have been triggered by mines
and explosive remnants of war.
Thirdly, China has adopted a prudent and
responsible approach towards the export of small arms
and light weapons. Acting in strict compliance with
the principles of never impairing regional peace and
security and of non-interference in the internal affairs
of recipient countries, China has exported no small
arms and light weapons to countries or regions that
are subject to Security Council arms embargoes or to
non-State entities and individuals.

13-4867417/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

The Chinese Government has put in place a sound
arms-export control system that includes end-user
certification and export licensing, among other things.
In particular, China has established a record-keeping
system for the export of small arms and light weapons.
Building a peaceful and prosperous world free from
gun violence is an aspiration shared by the Chinese
people and the people of all countries alike. China will
work with the international community and continue
to strive tirelessly to find a solution to the issue of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like thank you, Madam, for the initiative of
organizing this meeting on the issue of the consequences
of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons for
international peace and security. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
presentations on the issue.
The most widespread and easily accessible
instruments of violence are small arms and light
weapons. Their proliferation and accumulation pose a
genuine threat to international peace and security and
to the development of many countries. These weapons
are light in name only, because in countries in conflict
and even those at peace, they are often the leading cause
of violence, suffering, loss of human life, unspeakable
misfortune and turmoil for families and societies.
The disturbing ease with which such weapons can be
acquired is a result of the illegal trade going on around
the world. There is also a direct link between the illicit
trade in small arms and the activities of armed groups,
rebels and terrorists, as well as the illegal exploitation
of natural resources.
Africa, like other continents, has not been spared
the uncontrolled circulation and use of small arms.
Because of weaknesses of every kind and vulnerability
of its States, Africa remains, unfortunately, the most
profitable market for arms dealers and thus has the
highest number of victims. Given this situation, it is
imperative that effective measures be taken against
their proliferation and illegal use in order to prevent
conflicts and ensure States’ stability and the success of
peacebuilding processes.
We welcome the fact that the international
community is now involved in the process of

18/20

26/09/2013

negotiating the limitation, control and reduction of
weapons systems. The Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, which entered
into force in 2005, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, is
one of many examples of the United Nations response
to this scourge. Even more important were the adoption
and opening for signature by the General Assembly of
the Arms Trade Treaty (see resolution 67/234 B). These
positive actions by the United Nations complement the
many national, subregional and regional initiatives on
the African continent.
Despite all these initiatives, the existence of
uncontrolled weapons remains a multidimensional
problem that is deeply interlinked with other,
broader security issues and that has implications for
development. The biggest problem is the coordination
of the various national and subregional initiatives, given
limited resources and legal systems and institutional
and technical capacities that vary so greatly. All that
is against the backdrop of porous borders and the
risk of national efforts losing their relevance. It goes
without saying that no State can fight alone against this
phenomenon.
The nature of the problem caused by small arms
therefore requires coordinated and complementary
efforts among the various organs of the United Nations
system.
Mainly, it is important that Security Council fulfil
its mandate to ensure peace and security in the world
by giving increased attention to two fundamental
issues: respect for arms embargoes, and participation
in the disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration of ex-combatants. Indeed, arms embargoes
must be respected in order to prevent arms from falling
into unsuitable hands. In view of this, the Council must
take, as necessary, sanctions against those who violate
embargoes.
Similarly, the management of post-conflict
situations is a very important element. Thus, it is
imperative to collect weapons from ex-combatants and
neutralize and destroy them. Such programmes should
be systematically included in peace agreements ending
internal conflicts and in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. These actions should go hand in hand
with the demobilization of ex-combatants and their

13-48674

26/09/2013

Small arms

integration into civilian life, with particular attention
to the plight of child soldiers.
The work of the Security Council would be more
effective if it were accompanied by support from
the international community. Certainly, the General
Assembly adopted, on 2 April 2013, the Arms Trade
Treaty, which Togo welcomed and proceeded to sign the
first day of its opening for signature. The international
community should work for the ratification and rapid
entry into force of the Treaty and ensure its effective
and practical implementation. Togo is preparing to
carry out this formality within the next few weeks.
However, in the meantime, the international
community and the United Nations should help
countries strengthen arms control and facilitate the
harmonization of national legislation and regional
and subregional coordination. A special focus by
the Security Council on this issue will allow us to
effectively address the security and humanitarian
dimensions of the phenomenon, as the resolution just
adopted (resolution 2117 (2013)) urges us to do.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
are pleased to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia presiding over this debate on small arms.
The importance and significance of this discussion
are highlighted by the presence of dignitaries, foreign
ministers and other high-level individuals here today.
We also note the participation of the Secretary-General
and welcome his report (S/2013/503). We thank the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for her statement.
Argentina welcomes the adoption of the first
resolution on small arms (resolution 2117 (2013)), which
crystalizes the objectives promoted by my country
during its former presidency of the Security Council, in
March 2006, as you so generously mentioned, Madam
President. The fact that Australia has undertaken
this initiative speaks to the shared convictions and
the fact that there is no room in this Organization for
monopolized agendas or privileged positions for anyone.
It is obvious that the essence of true multilateralism is
working together. It is a shared responsibility, one that
has to do with solidarity, that is strategic: to build, for
everyone, a more just, secure and peaceful word.
It is the duty and responsibility of the international
community to intensify and multiply the efforts to
eradicate the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, as they pose a challenge to the maintenance

S/PV.7036

of international peace and security. It is important
that the measures taken are aimed at more control and
transparency in the stockpiling and transfer of weapons,
an improvement of international cooperation, including
the exchange of information and confidence-building
measures, and capacity-building assistance to States
in order to establish effective arms control and
regulatory measures and to enable them to implement
their commitments under the relevant instruments,
both regionally and internationally, including the arms
embargoes established by the Security Council.
The stockpiling and uncontrolled spread of small
arms and ammunition have severe implications for
human development, sustainable economic growth
and peace. As mentioned previously, armed violence
erodes the fabric of society; diverts investments in
infrastructure, health and education; promotes political
insecurity; increases crime; and foments political
instability and a climate of impunity.
We know that throughout the world violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations is carried out
mostly with conventional weapons, especially small
arms and light weapons, which are available because
of the very lucrative business of smuggling, as well as
regulations and controls that are really insufficient or
nonexistent. It should be clear that the uncontrolled
proliferation of these weapons has a devastating impact
on civilians, especially women and children. That
is why Argentina believes it a priority to strengthen
existing mechanisms to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Argentina approaches the problems arising from
small arms in the context of a comprehensive strategy
that includes elements related to international security,
defence, non-proliferation and domestic security.
This strategy includes both domestic and foreign
policy actions through our participation in efforts
at the international and regional level. The premise
on which we base ourselves is that the fight against
the proliferation and illicit trafficking of small arms
depends largely on the policies that countries are
willing to adopt in the domestic arena, such as periodic
reviews of control measures for arms exports. However,
efforts to prevent and combat the illicit trafficking in
and irresponsible transfers of arms will be effective
only if appropriate regulation and controls exist at the
regional and international level.

13-4867419/20

S/PV.7036

Small arms

In that conviction, Argentina participated actively
alongside other countries in the negotiation of the Arms
Trade Treaty, in the establishment of the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms, and in the meetings of
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, among others.
The Southern Common Market has been working to the
same end.
It is estimated that the worldwide traffic in
small arms and light weapons amounts to more than
650 million, that 1,500 people die every day as a result
of armed violence, and that 60 per cent of all human
rights violations are committed with small arms. In
Syria, to cite but one instance, the horror of chemical
weapons, whose use is a war crime and a crime against
humanity, should not overshadow the need to remember
that 99 per cent of victims have been claimed by
conventional weapons, including small arms and light
weapons.
We emphasize that resolution 2117 (2013), which
we have just adopted, recognizes the link between the
unregulated circulation of small arms, on the one hand,
and sexual violence and violence against children, on the
other, in situations of armed conflict, although examples
of this link also abound in peacetime. Various studies
show that in any region of the world the possession of a
small arm in the family space increases by 41 per cent
the risk of a family member being murdered, while for
women this risk increases threefold. The danger is only
heightened in situations of armed conflict.

20/20

26/09/2013

We note that, in the context of measures to
prevent the proliferation of weapons, the effective
implementation without double standards of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council is essential.
Sanctions are not an end in themselves, but strict
compliance with them — on the part not only of those
against whom they are addressed, but also the rest of
the membership, especially the producers and exporters
of weapons — is a significant factor in reducing the
availability of weapons and conflict. At the same time,
it is necessary to prevent targeted transfers to a country
in conflict or where they can be used to commit
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights and disrupt communal security.
Through you, Madam President, we commend the
focused and committed work of the Australian Mission,
led by Ambassador Gary Quinlan. As is emphasized in
the concept note drawn up for this meeting (S/2013/536),
armed violence is not only a cause of endemic poverty but
also a consequence thereof. We hope that the resolution
which the Security Council has adopted today, based on
the broad agreement that the international community
achieved in adopting the Arms Trade Treaty, will open
a new phase in which, to paraphrase the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, the merchants
of death will be displaced by the peacemakers.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

13-48674
