A/68/878–S/2014/339

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
15 May 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 65
Promotion and protection of the rights of children

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2013,
is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2068 (2012), by which the
Council requested me to continue to submit annual reports on the implementation of
its resolutions and presidential statements on children and armed conflict.
2.
The report highlights global trends regarding the impact of armed conflict on
children in 2013 and the main activities and initiatives with regard to the
implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions and the conclusions of its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. In follow-up to the previous report
(A/67/845-S/2013/245), it provides an update on the cooperation among partners to
the children and armed conflict agenda, including within the United Nations system.
3.
In line with the resolutions of the Security Council on children and armed
conflict, the present report includes in its annexes a list of parties that engage in the
recruitment and use of children, sexual violence against children, the killing and
maiming of children, recurrent attacks on schools and/or hospitals and recurrent
attacks or threats of attacks against protected personnel, in contravention of
international law.
4.
All information presented in this report has been documented, vetted, and
verified for accuracy by the United Nations. In situations where the ability to obtain
or independently verify information is hampered by factors such as insecurity or
access restrictions, it is qualified as such. The preparation of the report involved
broad consultations within the United Nations, at Headquarters and in the field, and
with relevant Member States.
5.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), and in identifying
situations that fall within the scope of her mandate, my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict is guided by the criteria found in international
14-03673 (E)

010714

*1403673*

A/68/878
S/2014/339

humanitarian law and international jurisprudence for determining the existence of an
armed conflict. In the implementation of her mandate, my Special Representative
has adopted a pragmatic and cooperative approach on the issue, with an emphasis on
humanitarian principles, aimed at ensuring broad and effective protection for
children affected by conflict in situations of concern. Reference to a situation is not
a legal determination, and reference to a non-State party does not affect its legal
status.

II. The impact of armed conflict on children
Trends and developments
6.
Armed conflict continued to have a disproportionate impact on children.
Indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas or attacks directly targeting civilians,
through explosive weapons, air strikes or the use of terror tactics, took a worrisome
toll on children. In 2013, the United Nations observed a significant spike in the
killing and maiming of children in several situations, including in Afghanistan and
Iraq.
7.
The reporting period witnessed a deepening of the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic, where intensifying hostilities led to widespread grave violations against
children and a worsening humanitarian crisis. In the Central African Republic, the
recruitment and use of children became endemic throughout 2013 and increased
with the surge in violence that has plagued the country since mid-September. With
the resumption of conflict in South Sudan, pro-Government and opposition forces
reportedly used children on a large scale and committed other grave violations.
8.
The situation in northern Nigeria became of grave concern. While the
humanitarian situation affecting at least half of the population living in northeastern Nigeria remained critical, the extremist group known as Boko Haram
intensified attacks on schools, resulting in the killing and maiming of children and
other grave violations.
9.
The recruitment and use of children in conflict remained prevalent. More than
4,000 cases were documented by the United Nations in 2013, but thousands more
children are estimated to have been recruited and used. Impunity for grave violations
against children, in particular sexual violence, is common to several situations and
exacerbates even further the vulnerability of children. The detention of children for
alleged association with armed groups or on security charges, highlighted as a concern
in my previous annual report, continued in 17 of the 23 situations considered in the
present report.
10. These and other worrisome trends during the reporting period call for a
redoubling of efforts to better implement available tools to address the plight of
children affected by armed conflict. Concrete and pragmatic measures must lead the
way. The United Nations, and in particular my Special Representative, have sent a
strong message in 2013 that efforts are being made to step up to the challenge.

2/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

“Children, Not Soldiers”
11. On 6 March 2014, my Special Representative and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) launched the United Nations global campaign entitled
“Children, Not Soldiers” to end the recruitment and use of children by Government
security forces in conflict by the end of 2016. On 7 March, the Security Council
endorsed the campaign’s objectives in its resolution 2143 (2014).
12. The campaign will be implemented in close cooperation with the eight
Governments listed in the annexes to the present report for recruitment and use of
children, all of which have signed or committed to an action plan and endorsed the
campaign. The campaign aims at expediting the implementation of commitments to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children through the development of
road maps identifying gaps and outstanding measures to be adopted by the
Governments concerned, with the support of the United Nations and partners.
Progress will be assessed against regular, joint reviews by the United Nations and
Governments concerned.
13. Enhanced coordination between the United Nations country task forces and
Governments concerned ensures that road maps identify remaining gaps and set
priority activities, benchmarks and detailed deadlines. Such efforts will allow for
expedited, yet context-specific and sustainable implementation of action plans. A
clear sequencing of activities and measures provides the basis for step-by-step
compliance assessments, reflecting the remaining challenges identified by both
signatories to action plans, thus ensuring a structured path to delisting for all parties
concerned. In that regard, the establishment of interministerial committees,
facilitating an all-inclusive government approach, is critical. I note with satisfaction
that the existing tools incorporated into this campaign, at this initial stage, have
already yielded results. For example, in Chad, through the joint efforts of the
Government and the United Nations system, 2013 marked a year of positive
progress. Since May 2013, based on a mutually agreed set of priority measures, the
Government and military authorities have intensified their efforts to reach
compliance with the engagements undertaken in the action plan signed with the
United Nations in 2011.

Engaging armed groups
14. As I emphasized in my message for the launch of the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign, the ultimate goal is to ensure that no child is associated with parties to
conflict — ever, anywhere. In that regard, it is important to note that the campaign,
while focusing on State actors, does not diminish the attention paid to non-State
actors. On the contrary, as described in the present report, and despite the ongoing
challenges in respect of access to and dialogue with non-State armed groups to end
grave violations against children, the number of public statements and command
orders issued by armed groups prohibiting the recruitment and use of children has
increased. That trend was observed in nine situations described in the report and
provides a basis for building momentum to address grave violations against children
by armed groups.
15. Fifty-one armed groups are included in the lists annexed to the present report.
Those parties are very diverse in nature and require different strategies of

14-03673

3/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

engagement, and the implementation of child protection commitments may vary
considerably. Advocacy strategies require the identification of specific incentives
based on the military structure, size, modus operandi and other characteristics of
armed groups. Taking those aspects into account, concrete commitments are then
identified by the United Nations and translated into activities and measures with the
armed group concerned, culminating in an action plan agreed on by both signatories.
16. Entry points for initial contact are chosen strategically in close cooperation
with all pertinent actors in a given situation. Peace processes, for example, have
provided strategic opportunities to reach armed groups that have already showed a
willingness to discuss political commitments. It is also crucial to mainstream the
children and armed conflict agenda into other forms and venues of engagement with
armed groups. Sensitization on the consequences of the military use of schools may
lead to a dialogue on how to end the use of children and the use of schools.
17. The Arms Trade Treaty adopted by the General Assembly in April 2013 is a
significant new instrument. Keeping armed groups from acquiring arms and
ammunition contributes to the protection of children in conflict situations.

Protecting education and health care in conflict
18. Attacks on schools and hospitals are a common feature in the majority of
situations covered in the present report. I welcome the guidance note on Security
Council resolution 1998 (2011) issued jointly by my Special Representative,
UNICEF, the World Health Organization and the United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organization. Its timeliness was further underlined by
Security Council resolution 2143 (2014), in which the Council reiterated its concern
regarding attacks on schools and hospitals and requested enhanced monitoring of the
military use of schools. That practice, which deprives children of their basic right to
access to education and puts them at risk, was documented in 15 of 23 situations.
19. The guidance note provides conceptual clarity and technical advice, including
advocacy tools and an action plan template to end and prevent attacks on schools
and hospitals and protected personnel, as well as an operational strategy to deter the
use of schools. Therefore, it is not only a crucial tool for United Nations child
protection, education and health practitioners on the ground. It may also serve
Member States, regional and subregional organizations, or other pertinent actors as
guidance for advocacy with third parties, or may serve to develop additional binding
measures to better prevent attacks on schools and hospitals and to deter the military
use of schools in accordance with international law in that regard. As for other child
protection concerns, the protection of schools and hospitals should be introduced in
military planning and operating procedures at all times. Creating awareness and
mainstreaming at peacetime — setting in motion a cultural change — is crucial to
preventing violations in times of conflict.

Mainstreaming of the children and armed conflict agenda
20. I welcome the continued support and attention of the Security Council to the
children and armed conflict agenda in its thematic resolutions. I commend the
Council for mainstreaming that agenda in many of its country-specific and thematic
resolutions. It is also thanks to the Council’s initiative that the plight of children in

4/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

conflict is better recognized today than ever before. Cooperation among United
Nations entities as well as with other partners from diverse thematic backgrounds
continues to be strengthened, for example, through the above-mentioned guidance
note on resolution 1998 (2011), as does the expertise of actors working for the
well-being and protection of children. In view of the latter, I welcome the Council’s
appraisal of the importance of training, in particular in view of the predeployment
child protection training for peacekeepers launched on 8 April 2014 by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and the strengthening of the child
protection adviser capacity.
21. The present report could not have been produced without the Council’s
groundbreaking resolutions on children and armed conflict. In that regard, my
“Rights up front” initiative, which ensures that the mandated human rights
responsibilities of the Organization are fully integrated across its peace and security
work, also supports strengthened action on grave violations against children.
22. The United Nations continued to work with regional and subregional
organizations in the light of their increasing role in mediation, peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding missions, as well as in the development of child
protection standards and best practices. On 17 September 2013, my Special
Representative signed a declaration of intent with the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union Commission, which is being implemented in
partnership with UNICEF. Through the expert advice of a child protection specialist,
the Peace and Security Department, with the support of the Office of my Special
Representative and UNICEF, is working to develop guidance and mainstream child
protection in the policies and activities of the African Union. I also welcome the
continued role of the European Union in addressing the impact of armed conflict on
children, including its outspoken support for and advocacy of the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign. The Office of my Special Representative continued to work
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) with regard to the
mainstreaming of child protection standards among the forces of its member States.

III. Information on grave violations committed against children
during armed conflict and progress made by parties on
dialogue, action plans and other measures to halt and
prevent violations against children
A.

Situations on the agenda of the Security Council
Afghanistan
23. Although the recruitment and use of children remained underreported owing to
security constraints, the United Nations documented the recruitment and use of
97 children (all boys), as young as eight years of age. The majority of the children (72)
were reportedly recruited and used by armed opposition groups, including the
Taliban and the Haqqani Network. Nine of the children were recruited to conduct
suicide attacks. In one incident, in May 2013, a 15-year-old boy conducted a suicide
attack against an Afghan Local Police commander in Muqur district, Gazhni
Province, killing three local police officers and two civilians, and injuring
16 civilians. Children were also recruited to manufacture and plant improvised

14-03673

5/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

explosive devices, as combatants and for other roles, including as sex slaves. In one
particular case in Laghman Province, State authorities arrested 21 children, as
young as seven years of age, allegedly on their way to Pakistan for suicide attack
training by the Taliban. The Taliban rejected the allegations. According to the
Government, all the children were released and reunited with their families. The
recruitment and use of 25 children was attributed to the Afghan national security
forces, including 14 by the local police, 5 by the national police and 1 by the Afghan
national army. For example, a 12-year-old boy was killed when national police
elements forced him to check a suspicious looking object. One boy associated with
the Afghan national army in Kunar Province was used as a porter and was injured by
an improvised explosive device. In a positive trend, child protection units within
national police recruitment centres in the western region rejected 132 boys from
voluntary enlistment.
24. According to the Ministry of Justice, 196 boys were held in juvenile
rehabilitation centres across the country on national security-related charges,
including for alleged association with armed opposition groups as of December
2013. The United Nations remained concerned regarding several reports of alleged
ill-treatment and sexual abuse of child detainees. On 31 July 2013, the United
Nations was granted access to the Parwan Detention Facility to meet with 2 of the
70 boys who had been arrested by international military forces between December
2009 and May 2013 and had been detained in the facility under the authority of the
Government of Afghanistan at the time of the visit. Most of the children are
believed to be in detention without charges and without the opportunity to have
access to a court to assess the lawfulness of their detention.
25. At least 545 children were killed and 1,149 injured in 790 documented
incidents. Child casualties increased by 30 per cent in 2013 compared with 2012.
Armed opposition groups, including the Taliban and Hezb-e-Islami, were
responsible for a majority (889) of the recorded child casualties. The use of
improvised explosive devices and suicide attacks, including by boys in at least two
instances, resulted in the killing of 229 children and in injury to 396 others. On
17 May, for example, two improvised explosive devices were detonated in Kandahar
city, killing a six-year-old boy and injuring 18 boys and a girl, as young as four. ProGovernment forces, including international military forces, were responsible for the
killing of at least 81 children and injury to 125 others, mainly resulting from clashes
with armed groups. At least 120 of those casualties were caused by Afghan national
security forces, which, as part of the handover and transition of security
responsibilities to Afghan forces, has taken the lead in all operations since 18 June.
Thirty-seven children were killed and 19 others were injured in international
military air strikes. In addition, clashes between pro-Government forces and armed
groups resulted in 167 children killed and 432 injured, including by gun shots and
artillery and mortar shelling, for which it was not possible to verify a perpetrator.
Some incidents were acknowledged by international security forces. Finally, civilian
casualties resulting from drone strikes increased from 16 in 2012 to 59 in 2013,
including the killing of 2 children. For example, on 27 November, in Mohammad
Aqa district, Logar Province, a 10-year-old boy was killed in a reported drone strike
on the premises of Shahid Ghulam Sakhi High School.
26. Twelve incidents of sexual violence against 11 boys and five girls were
verified during the reporting period, including by the Taliban, the Haqqani Network,
and the national police. Sexual violence against children remains a feature of the

6/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

conflict but continues to be underreported owing to a climate of impunity as well as
fear of reprisals and stigmatization. At least 15 boys detained by Afghan national
security forces on national security-related charges claimed to having been raped or
received threats of sexual violence upon arrest or in detention. Several reports on
the sexual abuse of boys by Taliban and Haqqani Network commanders were also
received, including from a 16-year-old boy formerly associated with the Haqqani
Network and arrested by the national police in December 2013. The practice of
bacha-bazi, the use of boys as sex slaves by men in positions of power, remained a
serious concern. The Government stated that any act of sexual violence against
children by elements of the Afghan national security forces was subject to criminal
investigation, and an educational programme to prevent the practice of bacha-bazi
was prepared in 2013 with the assistance of the national police.
27. Schools continued to be attacked by parties to conflict or indirectly damaged
in clashes. In at least 73 incidents, schools were attacked, resulting in the killing of
at least 11 children and in injury to 46 others. In some incidents, improvised
explosive devices were planted inside school premises by armed opposition groups.
Schools were also damaged by nearby suicide and improvised explosive device
attacks targeting public areas or Government and international military forces,
resulting in the killing of children. The Taliban also continued to issue threats
against girls’ schools and other schools. For instance, in May 2013, local Taliban
members in Nangarhar Province, issued a letter in which they threatened teachers
and children at a girls’ school with acid attacks if they continued to attend school.
Also in May, in Zabul Province, the Taliban forced the closure of 40 schools in
retaliation for Government action against the groups. At least 13 teachers were
killed or injured in 2013 and eight teachers were abducted by armed opposition
groups.
28. According to the Afghan Ministry of Education, approximately 115,000
children were affected by the temporary or permanent closure of 539 schools owing to
the security situation in the southern (482 cases), south-eastern (39) and western (18)
regions. In addition, the military use of schools by the Afghan national security
forces continued to put children at risk of attacks by armed groups and affect their
access to education in at least 15 documented incidents. For example, in October, in
Warduj district of Badakhshan Province, the Afghan national security forces
temporarily closed down three schools for use as forward bases and installed
artillery on the roofs. The Government states that orders have been disseminated to
all Afghan national security forces units to refrain from using schools or health
clinics as bases.
29. Incidents affecting access by children to health care included damage to
health-care facilities, the placement of improvised explosive devices within the
premises of clinics and hospitals, and forced entry into and looting of health-care
facilities. In addition, at least 39 health-care personnel were killed or injured,
abducted or intimidated. All the incidents were attributed to armed opposition
groups, except one incident of forced entry into a health-care facility and its
temporary use by international military forces and two incidents involving the
intimidation of health-care personnel and forced entry by Afghan national security
forces. The remaining incidents were attributed to armed opposition groups,
including the Taliban. Although the Taliban publicly supported polio vaccination
efforts in 2013, local factions in several provinces continued to restrict access for
vaccination campaigns.

14-03673

7/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

30. At least 30 children were abducted in 17 verified incidents, including 16
attributed to the Taliban and other armed opposition groups. Children were abducted
for their alleged involvement in spying on behalf of the Government or international
forces, for recruitment, sexual abuse and as reprisal against family members
working or allegedly supporting the Government or international forces. At least
10 boys abducted by the Taliban were executed, including 2 who were abducted on
23 May for alleged spying for the Afghan national security forces in Bati Kot
district of Nangarhar Province, as stated in a letter issued by the Taliban. Both boys
were tortured before they were killed. On 19 October, in Bala Buluk district, Farah
Province, in the only documented incident perpetrated by the local police, four boys
were summarily executed after being abducted and blamed for planting improvised
explosive devices for armed opposition groups.
31. At least 83 humanitarian staff were abducted and 35 were killed or injured by
armed opposition groups during the reporting period. Humanitarian access was also
affected by at least 23 incidents of attacks on or looting of humanitarian convoys
and facilities of humanitarian agencies.
32. I welcome the progress made regarding compliance with the action plan to end
and prevent the recruitment and use of children, including owing to the unimpeded
access granted to the United Nations for screening purposes and the continuing
build-up of child protection units within national and local police recruitment
centres. I encourage the Government of Afghanistan to redouble its efforts and
expedite the implementation of the action plan in line with the 15-point “road map
towards compliance”, drafted in August 2013 with the United Nations and the
assistance of the Office of my Special Representative. I note that the Government
submitted its third progress report in March 2014, in which it detailed the steps
taken towards the implementation of the action plan, and that international
organizations have offered to assist the Government in its obligations in that regard.
Central African Republic
33. Throughout 2013, the human rights situation worsened dramatically, with a
multiplication and shifting of alliances of armed groups: on the one hand, the
Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix (CPJP), the CPJP fondamentale,
the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain (FDPC) and the Union des forces
démocratiques pour le rassemblement (UFDR), which came to form, or were
associated in varying degrees with, the Séléka coalition; and the anti-Balaka, a local
defence militia, which emerged in the second half of the year in response to the
systematic attacks against the civilian population by the ex-Séléka coalition.
Starting in December 2012, the Séléka coalition advanced towards Bangui, seizing
the capital on 24 March 2013 and ousting President François Bozizé. Michel
Djotodia, one of Séléka’s leaders, declared himself the new Head of State.
34. On 13 September, Michel Djotodia dismantled the Séléka1 by presidential
decree. However, widespread abuses continued to be perpetrated between September
and December 2013 by ex-Séléka units that refused to disband and continued to
engage in systematic killings, rape and torture, and the looting and destruction of
villages.
__________________
1 Reference will be made to Séléka when the incidents took place prior to the dismantlement

(January to September) and ex-Séléka when incidents occurred after September.

8/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

35. In response to the systematic exactions and attacks against civilians by
the ex-Séléka between September and November 2013, the anti-Balaka became
increasingly organized in different parts of the country. In some cases, the militias
were associated with elements of the former Central African Armed Forces.
Tensions between the Muslim and Christian communities were exacerbated by
increasing clashes between the ex-Séléka and the anti-Balaka.
36. On 5 December, anti-Balaka elements launched a coordinated attack against
ex-Séléka positions in Bangui, which triggered a wave of violence with grave
violations being committed by both sides.
37. Access by the United Nations remained severely restricted throughout 2013,
significantly disrupting the monitoring and reporting of grave violations against
children. Documented cases of grave violations are only indicative, therefore, of the
actual scale of violations that has occurred.
38. Both the anti-Balaka and the Séléka coalition, prior and after its
dismantlement, systematically recruited and used children. The United Nations
documented the recruitment and use of 171 boys and 17 girls, and estimates that
several thousand children have been and remain associated with the ex-Séléka and
the anti-Balaka. The progressive deterioration of the security environment also led
to the re-recruitment of children. For example, on 1 April, 41 children (36 boys and
5 girls), separated from CPJP in August 2012, were re-recruited by Séléka elements
in the north-eastern towns of Ndélé and Bria from a Transit and Orientation Centre.
In December, five boys previously separated from the ex-Séléka were re-recruited
by the anti-Balaka in Bangui.
39. Hundreds of children are estimated to have been killed or maimed by
machetes, firearms and other weaponry. The United Nations verified the killing of
27 children and the maiming of 115 others. Most documented incidents occurred in
the context of the unconstitutional change of power on 24 March 2013 and the
December attacks by the anti-Balaka on ex-Séléka positions in Bangui. The latter
resulted in the death of an estimated 1,000 civilians, including many children.
40. While the majority of the children were killed or maimed in the context of
clashes between the ex-Séléka and the anti-Balaka, targeted attacks against children
were also documented. In two separate incidents, in December 2013 and early
January 2014, six boys were beheaded by Muslim civilians in retaliation for attacks
by the anti-Balaka. On 2 December, 10 children were wounded in an anti-Balaka
attack against civilians in the town of Boali. In early 2014, grave violations
continued to be committed by both sides.
41. The United Nations has documented sexual violence against 20 girls, mainly
by the Séléka. For instance, on 29 July, an 11-year-old girl was raped by a Séléka
combatant in the town of Bossangoa. Weak monitoring capacity, fear of
stigmatization and a climate of impunity continue to heavily affect reporting on
sexual violence. Nonetheless, credible reports suggest that sexual violence by
Séléka combatants was part of a larger pattern of systematic violations committed
against civilians in areas under their control throughout 2013.
42. At least 36 schools and five hospitals were attacked by ex-Séléka. For
example, on 24 August, the Séléka burned down a school in Nana Gribizi Province
after school authorities refused to hand over their archives. On 5 December,
ex-Séléka combatants attacked the “Hôpital de l’amitié” in Bangui and summarily

14-03673

9/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

executed 10 patients. The hospital remained closed until 4 January 2014 and after
security provisions by the African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic (MISCA) were put in place. In addition, at least 20 schools were
reportedly used as bases and barracks by the ex-Séléka throughout the Central
African Republic. Many schools remained closed throughout the Central African
Republic, after having been looted or used by armed groups, damaged by shelling or
destroyed by fire, causing a heavy impact on the right of children to education. A
group of anti-Balaka and former elements of the national armed forces were
observed using a school in Bangui following the 5 December attacks. The ex-Séléka
also used and looted health facilities in at least seven documented cases. For
example, from July to September, a Séléka unit established its base at the Ouandago
health-care centre in Nana Gribizi before leaving the centre as a result of
humanitarian advocacy efforts.
43. Owing to the security situation, humanitarian access was limited in large areas
of the Central African Republic. The United Nations documented specific cases of
denial of humanitarian access by the national armed forces in two incidents and by
the ex-Séléka in 22 incidents. For example, in February, the national armed forces
prevented international humanitarian non-governmental organizations from leaving
Bangui because of their alleged support of the Séléka. On 11 February 2013, the
Séléka prevented a United Nations plane from landing in Bria, preventing the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The compounds of many international
non-governmental organizations were looted throughout the year.
44. On 26 November, the Ministry of Defence granted the United Nations
unconditional screening access to military barracks and cantonment sites in view of
the separation and reintegration of children associated with armed groups. The
transitional authorities reiterated such commitments following a visit by my Special
Representative in December. A total of 149 children were separated from the
ex-Séléka. The fluid command structure of the anti-Balaka, among other challenges,
was an obstacle to opening a structured dialogue. The United Nations continued to
engage with international forces, including Operation Sangaris and MISCA, on the
development of standard operating procedures for the separation and referral of
children associated with armed groups. In early 2014, a national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration strategy was under revision by the transitional
Government. At the time of reporting, the United Nations was working closely with
the transitional authorities in that regard to ensure that the national strategy included
adequate provisions on the release and reintegration of children.
45. The abominable atrocities committed against children by armed groups and in
the context of the ongoing violence must stop and perpetrators must be held
accountable. I am deeply concerned about the ongoing humanitarian crisis and the
continued climate of lawlessness and impunity. In view of the re-establishment of
national security forces, the ongoing disarmament of the ex-Séléka and the
anti-Balaka must be accompanied by a thorough investigation of operational and
political chains of command responsible for grave violations against children.
Chad
46. The deployment of Chadian troops to the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA) prompted renewed momentum to accelerate the
implementation of the action plan signed in June 2011 to end and prevent under-age

10/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

recruitment in the Armée nationale tchadienne. My Special Representative, jointly
with UNICEF, visited Chad in May 2013. On that occasion, the Chadian authorities
renewed their commitment to engage constructively with the United Nations to
expedite the implementation of the action plan, appointed a high-level focal point in
that regard and adopted a road map detailing 10 specific and time-bound measures
to be implemented in the short and long term to achieve compliance with the action
plan.
47. Since then, the Government of Chad, in cooperation with the United Nations
and other partners, has taken significant steps to fulfil its obligations. A central child
protection unit in the Ministry of Defence and one in each of the eight “defence and
security zones” were established to coordinate the monitoring and protection of
children’s rights and to implement awareness-raising activities. Between August and
October 2013, the Government and the United Nations jointly conducted screening
and age verification of approximately 3,800 troops of the armée nationale
tchadienne in all eight zones. Age verification standards had been previously
developed during a workshop organized by the United Nations in July. In addition,
between August and September 2013, a training-the-trainers programme on child
protection was attended by 346 members of the armée nationale tchadienne. A child
protection training module to be integrated in the curricula of the police and
gendarmerie and of the senior military school in N’Djamena was under development
at the time of reporting.
48. Since July 2013, troops of the armée nationale tchadienne to be deployed in
Mali started to receive predeployment training on child protection and international
humanitarian law, including 864 troops of the armée nationale tchadienne attending
child protection training at the Loumia training centre in December. The United
Nations stands ready to support further training initiatives for the troops, including
the systematic training of troops for international peacekeeping operations.
49. In October 2013, a presidential directive was adopted to confirm 18 years as
the minimum age for recruitment into the armed and security forces. It also
established age verification procedures and instructed that “penal and disciplinary
sanctions” would be taken against those violating the orders. The directive was
disseminated among the commanders of all eight “defence and security zones”,
including in the context of several training and verification missions. On 4 February
2014, the recruitment and use of children was explicitly criminalized through the
adoption of a presidential decree. I encourage the National Assembly to expedite the
consideration and adoption of the Child Protection Code, which will further
strengthen the protection of children in Chad. Finally, following the adoption in
May 2013 of the Law on the Organization of the Civil Registry, the United Nations,
in collaboration with the Government, undertook the late registration of 100,000
births in N’Djamena and is developing a two-year strategy for capacity-building in
civil registration.
50. While the efforts made by the Government to meet all obligations under the
action plan resulted in significant progress, a number of challenges remained to
ensure sustainability and the effective prevention of violations against children.
Chad should pursue comprehensive and thorough screening and training of its
armed and security forces to continue to prevent the presence of children, including
in the light of Chad’s growing involvement in peacekeeping operations. While no
new cases of recruitment of children were documented by the United Nations in

14-03673

11/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

2013 and no children were found during the joint screening exercises, interviews
confirmed that soldiers had been integrated in the past into the armée nationale
tchadienne from armed groups while still under the age of 18. Moreover, the
strengthening of operating procedures, such as those for age verification, which
ensure the accountability of perpetrators, and free and accessible birth registration,
should remain a priority for the Chadian authorities.
51. The security situation in neighbouring countries continued to affect children in
Chad. At the time of reporting, the crisis in the Central African Republic, border
porosity and weak State authority in the country had resulted in the inflow of
approximately 80,000 refugees, including unaccompanied children into Chad. In
May 2013, the United Nations received allegations of cross-border recruitment of
Chadian children by the Séléka. A significant number of children associated with the
ex-Séléka were reportedly crossing the border into the Central African Republic in
Tissi area. In June, five Chadian children separated from the Séléka were re-recruited
from a transit centre in Bangui, where they awaited repatriation to Chad and family
reunification. In addition, a significant influx of refugees from Darfur, the Sudan,
into areas contaminated with explosive remnants of war in Chad was recorded. On
28 June and 5 July, eight refugee children from Darfur, between 8 and 14 years of
age, were killed (two boys) or maimed (six girls) in two incidents involving
explosive remnants of war in Amboukoun, Tissi. I encourage the Chadian authorities
to continue to work closely with the United Nations to provide refugee children with
adequate protection and care.
Côte d’Ivoire
52. Despite the ongoing peace and reconciliation process and ongoing efforts
regarding the reintegration of ex-combatants, the overall child protection situation
remains of concern in the light of insecurity in some areas and a lack of accountability
for grave violations against children.
53. In 2013, the United Nations documented a total of 30 grave violations against
children perpetrated by the Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI). Four
cases of recruitment and use of children by FRCI were documented. The children,
between 13 and 17 years of age, were manning FRCI checkpoints in Mankono and
M’bahiakro and, in one case, served as a cook.
54. Sexual violence against children remained the most recurrent violation. At
least 23 girls, between 11 and 17 years of age, were raped by FRCI elements (20)
and unknown armed elements (3) in the northern and western parts of the country.
Following advocacy by the United Nations, five FRCI elements were arrested, but
charges were reclassified to indecent assault. At the time of reporting, one of the
arrested FRCI elements had been prosecuted, and condemned to five years of
imprisonment and fined. The impunity and weak capacity of the national judicial
system to address sexual violence have hindered access to justice for victims across
the country, including in Abidjan. As a result of such gaps in institutional capacity,
but also owing to the fear of retaliation and stigmatization, out-of-court settlements
of rape cases remain frequent and to the detriment of the victims’ rights to access
justice and compensation.
55. The United Nations also verified five cases of military use of schools and
hospitals by FRCI. For example, a primary school in Dja-Kouakoukro was used by
FRCI for military purposes, preventing children from attending classes for two

12/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

months. In addition, a health centre in Ranouinke had been used by FRCI since
2011. Following advocacy efforts, check points in the vicinity of three schools in
Touba were dismantled in March 2013.
56. My Special Representative visited Côte d’Ivoire from 26 to 30 October 2013.
During that occasion, she discussed with the national authorities the issue of
impunity for sexual violence against children and advocated for the removal of the
victim’s obligation to produce a medical certificate as a requirement for filing a
complaint and pressing charges against perpetrators.
57. A series of training and capacity-building sessions on child protection were
organized by the United Nations for the defence and security forces. In November, a
child protection cell was re-established within FRCI to liaise with child protection
actors and deal with child protection concerns. The draft national child protection
policy to address violence against children, assistance to child victims and the issue
of impunity was pending adoption by the Government at the time of reporting.
Furthermore, on 5 December, the Government adopted guidelines and procedures
for service providers for the prevention, referral of and response to grave violations
committed against children. Accountability for sexual violence against children and
improved access to justice and adequate services should be the priorities for
improved protection of children in Côte d’Ivoire.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
58. On 24 February 2013, as a result of international and regional mediation
efforts, the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region was signed in Addis Ababa by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 10 regional countries as well as four
international organizations. However, hostilities between the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M23) continued until the military defeat of M23 in November. In the northern part
of North Kivu, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) intensified attacks on FARDC
and the civilian population, prompting FARDC to respond with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) in early 2014. In addition, the security situation in Katanga
Province also deteriorated in the last months of 2013, with systematic attacks on
villages by Mayi Mayi Kata Katanga.
59. The United Nations documented 910 children (783 boys and 127 girls), who
had been newly recruited and used by armed groups. Among them, 609 were
Congolese, 28 Rwandan, and 5 Ugandan, while the nationality of 268 children
remained undetermined. Almost half of the children were reportedly used as
combatants, but children were also used as porters, cooks, informants and in other
support roles. Most of the girls were subjected to sexual slavery. Armed groups
recruiting children included the Mayi Mayi Kata Katanga, Mayi Mayi Simba
“Morgan” and other Mayi Mayi groups (297 children), Nyatura (338), the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) (47), M23 (38), Raïa Mutomboki (37),
Forces populaires congolais-Armée Populaire (FPC/AP) (ex-PARECO) (24), Forces
de résistance patriotique en Ituri (FRPI) (22), Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo
libre et souverain (APCLS) (18), Union des patriotes congolais pour la paix (16),
Nduma défense du Congo (NDC)/Cheka (15) and other armed groups (58).

14-03673

13/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

60. With regard to preventing new child recruits into FARDC during the
comprehensive recruitment campaign in 2013, the United Nations separated
113 children, including 79 from training centres to which the United Nations was
granted unimpeded access under the action plan process.
61. At least 136 children were arrested and detained by FARDC for alleged
association with armed groups. Of these, 21 children formerly associated with M23
(13 Congolese and 8 claiming to be Rwandan) were arrested in North and South
Kivu and transferred to FARDC military intelligence headquarters in Kinshasa. All
children except for one were released following advocacy by MONUSCO.
62. At least 68 children were killed in 2013, compared with 154 documented cases
in 2012; and at least 96 were maimed, compared with 113 documented cases in
2012. Most casualties were attributed to Mayi Mayi groups. For instance, on
25 September 2013, in Bulende, North Kivu, NDC/Cheka elements killed six
children. In February 2013, Mayi Mayi Kata Katanga killed at least seven children
and maimed four others during an attack on Kabwele village, Katanga. Two fouryear-old girls were locked into a hut and burned alive, while other children were
killed or maimed by arrows and bullets. M23 was responsible for 24 child
casualties, mainly during clashes with FARDC. On 11 December 2013, in an attack
by ADF in Beni Territory, 11 children, including a two-month-old girl, were
severely mutilated and killed with machetes. Finally, FARDC was involved in the
killing and maiming of 36 children, predominantly during clashes with armed
groups. For example, on 24 July 2013, three children were killed and four maimed
when FARDC launched rockets on M23 positions in Rumangabo, North Kivu.
63. The United Nations verified 209 cases of conflict-related sexual violence
against girls, some as young as 4 years of age. Mayi Mayi groups and FARDC were
identified as the main perpetrators with 91 and 43 verified cases, respectively. Mayi
Mayi Simba “Morgan” elements in Orientale Province raped 59 girls in 2013. For
instance, following the rape of 19 girls during an attack on 6 January 2013 in
Mambasa territory, 25 girls were raped on 5 February during an attack on
Bafwambaya village, Haut-Uélé territory.
64. Impunity for the perpetrators of sexual violence remained a concern. Of the
209 perpetrators identified, 66 were arrested and 36 were sentenced. Thirty-nine
FARDC elements and seven high-ranking officers were also accused of mass rapes
and other human rights violations committed in and around Minova, South Kivu, in
late November and early December 2012 and are currently undergoing trial before
the Operational Military Court of North Kivu Province.
65. The United Nations verified 95 attacks on schools. ADF were the most
recurrent perpetrators, looting 21 schools in Beni territory, North Kivu, followed by
FRPI, which looted and damaged 10 schools in Irumu territory, Ituri district. Other
incidents were attributed to FARDC, Mayi Mayi groups, including APCLS,
Yakutumba, and LaFontaine, FDLR, Raïa Mutomboki, Nyatura and M23. In
addition, 25 incidents of military use of schools were reported, including 13 cases
by FARDC. Forty-two attacks on hospitals were also documented, including the
looting of medical supplies and equipment, affecting the health care of at least 5,000
children in North Kivu and Orientale Province. Seventeen cases were attributed to
ADF, nine to FARDC, three to FRPI and two to M23. FARDC were urged by the
United Nations to take disciplinary measures against FARDC elements that attacked
or used schools or hospitals, as stipulated in the respective directive of 3 May 2013.

14/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

66. Parties to the conflict abducted 147 children (70 girls and 77 boys) in 2013.
The abductees were mainly recruited as combatants, or subjected to sexual slavery
or forced labour in mining sites controlled by armed groups. The vast majority of
abductions occurred in Orientale Province (79) and in North Kivu (77). The most
notorious perpetrators were Mayi Mayi Simba “Morgan”, abducting 39 children
(27 girls and 12 boys), mainly for sexual slavery, followed by ADF (12 girls and
16 boys) and the FRPI (19 boys and 3 girls). FARDC reportedly abducted nine girls
and one boy, as young as six. FARDC elements in Bweremana, North Kivu, and a
group of presumed deserters from the same regiment were involved in two separate
cases involving the abduction and rape of a total of nine girls.
67. The United Nations documented 109 security incidents affecting humanitarian
access, of which 104 took place in the Kivus, attributed to the Raïa Mutomboki (16),
FARDC (14), M23 (4) and the Police nationale congolaise (4) as well as Mayi Mayi
and unknown armed groups. In 39 of these incidents, FARDC (12) or armed groups
(27) elements physically assaulted humanitarian workers on duty.
68. A total of 1,722 children (210 girls and 1,512 boys), recruited both in 2013 and
previous years, were separated from armed groups and armed forces in 2013. They
escaped or were released mainly from Mayi Mayi groups (635), Nyatura (354),
FDLR (140), Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) (19), M23 (83) and FARDC (10 in
addition to the 113 mentioned above). The United Nations, in close cooperation with
the Government of Uganda, was also following up on the status of 96 unaccompanied
children among M23 elements who fled to Uganda. Throughout 2013, UNICEF
partners have provided assistance to a total of 4,804 children (738 girls and 4,083
boys) formerly associated with armed groups and armed forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
69. In November, my Special Representative visited the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to assess the Government’s progress in the implementation of the action
plan. On 3 May, the Ministry of Defence issued a directive prohibiting the killing,
maiming and, recruitment of, and sexual violence against, children as well as the
military use of schools and hospitals, foreseeing disciplinary measures or military
prosecution. The same day, the Agence nationale de renseignement issued a
directive for children in detention for alleged association with armed groups to be
handed over to the United Nations. FARDC has designated child protection focal
points to work with the United Nations country task force in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Since its establishment in December 2012, the joint
technical working group in Kinshasa held 17 meetings and started a national
prevention campaign.
Iraq
70. 2013 was marked by a significant increase in the number of security incidents,
resulting in the killing of 7,818 civilians, including at least 248 children. This is the
highest number of casualties reported since 2008. The most affected governorates
were Baghdad, Kirkuk, Ninewa, Diyala, Anbar, Wassit and Salahaddin. The Islamic
State of Iraq (ISI) and Al-Qaida in Iraq (AQ-I) were allegedly responsible for most
of the documented incidents.
71. Reports from the governorates of Anbar, Ninewa and Salahaddin indicated the
continued association of children with various armed groups, including AQ-I. In
addition, continued reports were received on boys manning the checkpoints of the

14-03673

15/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

Awakening Councils under the control of the Ministry of Defence after having been
recruited locally with falsified identification papers. Reporting is limited due to
issues of access, insecurity in relevant areas, and the reluctance of authorities to
release information on perpetrators. I note that Iraqi law prohibits the recruitment of
children into Government forces and encourages its criminalization, in line with
obligations under the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
72. As at December 2013, according to the Government, at least 391 children,
including 18 girls, were being held in juvenile reformatory detention facilities (237),
prisons or police stations under indictment or conviction for terrorism-related
charges under article 4 of the Anti-Terrorism Act (2005). The children had been
detained for periods ranging from two months to more than three years. Schools and
learning programmes were established in four juvenile detention centres in the
governorates of Baghdad, Thi-Qar and Basra with the support of the Ministry of
Education and UNICEF.
73. According to the Government, 335 children were killed and 1,326 others
injured in 2013. The United Nations, in 167 verified incidents, recorded 248 children
killed and 665 others injured, including as a result of improvised explosive devices
and in complex attacks. AQ-I was reportedly responsible for most of the incidents.
On 11 March 2013, in Dibis district, Kirkuk governorate, the explosion of a vehicleborne improvised explosive device caused substantial damage to an adjacent
secondary school and injured 106 students (70 boys and 36 girls, between 13 and
17 years of age). Assassinations and raids targeting members of the Awakening
Council, police officers or military personnel and their families were also on the
rise, resulting in the killing of 13 children and the injuring of 18 others in direct or
indirect fire.
74. Twenty-seven attacks on schools and hospitals/medical facilities were
reported, of which five were verified. Most were a result of improvised explosive
devices placed inside or in the vicinity of schools and hospitals in the governorates
of Baghdad, Anbar, Diyala and Ninewa. On 6 October, in Qabak village (Ninewa
governorate), 15 children were killed and at least 112 injured by a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device detonated in the playground of the primary school. The
head of the school and an unknown number of teachers were also killed. On
27 June, in Baquba district (Diyala governorate), five ambulances were destroyed in
the explosion of a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device as they arrived to a
scene where many civilians, including children, had been killed and injured in a
previous improvised explosive devise attack on a popular café. No one claimed
responsibility for any of those incidents.
75. The United Nations also verified the killing or injuring of 13 education
personnel and 16 medical staff. In an incident in Diyala governorate, on 1 August, a
medical doctor was killed and his two children wounded in an improvised explosive
device attack against their house by AQ-I, reportedly because he refused to issue
falsified death certificates for the armed group. Threats against teachers, particularly
in Diyala governorate, are a growing source of concern. For example, in December,
flyers were spread in Diyala threatening English language teachers in primary and
secondary schools. No one claimed responsibility for the incident. At the same time,
a threat was publicized in social media targeting medical personnel and medical
facilities.

16/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

76. On 28 November, in Wassit governorate, the 10-year-old son of a member of
the local human rights committee was abducted and found dead, with apparent signs
of torture. Owing to the sensitivity and suspicion involved in collecting information
on abduction cases from communities or authorities and the reluctance of families to
report to the police, abductions are believed to be underreported.
77. Interaction on child protection between the United Nations and the Iraqi
authorities continued at the national and local levels throughout 2013. However, it
remains a serious source of concern that the Government of Iraq is not adequately
addressing the impact of the ongoing conflict on children. I urge the Government to
take all measures to ensure an adequate response to the plight of children, including
through the adoption of laws criminalizing violations committed against children by
parties to the conflict. The United Nations in Iraq stands ready to further engage
with the Government in tackling the issue. Due attention must be given to the
detention of children under security charges. Legislative reform and appropriate
policies and programmes for the overall protection of children in armed conflict,
including the engagement of community, religious and tribal leaders, should also be
addressed. The implementation of a high-level Government interministerial
committee on children and armed conflict, as advocated for by my Special
Representative during her meetings with Government representatives during her
visit to Iraq in July 2013, would facilitate regular information-sharing on and
response to grave violations against children, as well as collaboration with the
United Nations in Iraq.
Israel and the State of Palestine
78. Palestinian and Israeli children continued to be affected by the prevailing
situation of military occupation, conflict and closure. Eight Palestinian children
(six boys and two girls) were killed and 1,265 were injured in the occupied
Palestinian territories in 2013. In the West Bank, an upsurge was observed in the
number of Palestinian children killed and injured by Israeli security forces during
clashes and as a result of violence by Israeli settlers. Eight Israeli children were
injured in the West Bank in incidents related to the presence of Israeli settlements,
while no Israeli children were killed in 2013.
79. In the West Bank, four Palestinian boys were killed by live ammunition,
including three during incursions by Israeli security forces into the Al Jalazun, Jenin
and Ayda refugee camps. Incursions into camps have increased by 60 per cent
compared with 2012. For example, on 7 December 2013, a 14-year-old Palestinian
boy was shot and killed by the Israel Defense Forces near Al Jalazun, allegedly
while throwing stones at the soldiers. The Israeli authorities under the Military
Advocate General opened investigations in all four cases, which were under review
at the time of reporting. The 1,235 children injured in the West Bank constitute more
than double the number injured in 2012 (552). Of the 1,235, 961 were injured during
clashes between Israeli security forces and Palestinians during demonstrations,
183 during military operations, including search and arrest operations in villages or
camps, four as a result of unexploded ordnances, and 86 as a result of settler
violence, which saw a significant increase during 2013. During settler-related
incidents, 49 children were injured directly by Israeli settlers by physical assault and
stones or glass bottles thrown against Palestinian houses or cars. Of the
1,235 children injured in the West Bank, 155 were under the age of 12. Eight Israeli
children were injured in Israeli settlements in the West Bank, including as a result of

14-03673

17/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

stone throwing by Palestinians (seven) and, in one incident, live ammunition shot
towards the Psagot settlement.
80. In Gaza, most cases of killing and maiming Palestinian children occurred
between January and March 2013, following the November 2012 Israeli military
offensive “Pillar of Defence”. Three Palestinian children were killed, including two
boys in unexploded ordnance-related incidents and, on 24 December 2013, a threeyear-old girl in a shelling by Israeli security forces of a building in Al Maghazi
refugee camp. Ten children were injured during military operations in Gaza,
including by live ammunition gun shots and tear gas canisters, and 20 others as a
result of unexploded ordnance incidents.
81. In 2013, Palestinian children continued to be arrested and detained by Israeli
security forces and prosecuted in juvenile military courts. By the end of December,
154 boys, between 14 and 17 years of age (including 14 under the age of 16) were
held in Israeli military detention for alleged security violations, including in pretrial
detention (106) and serving a sentence (48). The Government of Israel reported that
1,004 children were arrested by Israeli security forces in 2013; 349 were released
the same day and 655 were referred to the Military Advocate General. The United
Nations documented 107 cases of ill-treatment during arrest, transfer, interrogation
and detention, including against children below the age of 12 in five cases. All of
the 107 boys reported having been subjected to cruel and degrading ill-treatment by
the Israel Defense Forces and the Israeli police, including painful restraint,
blindfolding, strip-searching, verbal and physical abuse, solitary confinement and
threats of violence. This number represents an estimated 15 per cent of the total
number of Palestinian children arrested and detained in the West Bank by Israeli
security forces in 2013. Fifty-one children reported being arrested at night and
45 children reported being arrested during clashes, demonstrations and at other
friction points. Reported use of physical violence against children, including with
sticks, increased with a majority of the cases reported in the first half of 2013. The
Israeli authorities received 15 formal complaints in 2013 related to the reported
abuse of Palestinian children during arrest, interrogation and detention. No cases
have resulted in dismissal, indictment or arrest to date. In addition, five cases of
threats of sexual violence were reported, compared with two cases in 2012. A higher
percentage of children were detained in prison facilities inside Israel (76 per cent,
compared with 63 in 2012) with at least three out of four children being transferred
outside the occupied Palestinian territory in contravention of the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
82. A regular bilateral dialogue between the United Nations at the field level and
the Military Prosecutor for the West Bank was ongoing at the time of reporting and
has produced a number of results, including an Israel Defense Forces agreement to
pilot test the use of summonses in lieu of night arrests. However, incidents have
occurred where children were threatened while being summoned, and other
summons were presented during night raids. I remain hopeful that the pilot process
will be fully implemented and provide adequate protection for children. In addition,
two Military Orders were issued in relation to children arrested and detained for
alleged security violations. The orders reduced the time a Palestinian child could be
detained prior to appearing before a military court judge for the first time; however,
the time periods provided in military law are still longer than what is provided to
Israeli children under Israeli law.

18/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

83. Fifty-eight education-related incidents affecting 11,935 children were reported
in the West Bank, resulting in damage to school facilities, interruption of classes and
injury to children. Forty-one incidents involved Israeli security forces operations
near or inside schools, forced entry without forewarning, the firing of tear gas
canisters and sound bombs into school yards and, in some cases, structural damage
to schools. In 15 of the incidents, Israeli security forces fired tear gas canisters into
schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), some during class hours, without forewarning. In a
majority of instances, schoolchildren and teachers were delayed or prevented from
going to school owing to checkpoints, areas closed for military operations or
exercises, military patrols in front of schools and preventive closures by the Israel
Defense Forces. In 32 cases, teachers and children were arrested inside the school,
at checkpoints or on their way to school. A further 15 incidents were related to
settler violence in the areas of Nablus, Qalqiliya, Jerusalem and Hebron. This
included physical assault of schoolchildren by settlers, absent or interrupted Israeli
security forces escorts to schools in areas prone to settler violence, the evacuation of
schools owing to the threat of settler attacks and sewage from Israeli settlements
intentionally flooding school grounds. According to the Government of Israel,
63 rockets were fired from Gaza into Israel during 2013, resulting in school
interferences for 12,229 Israeli children. The ceasefire understanding between the
Government of Israel and Hamas resulted in a marked reduction of attacks on
schools in Gaza. One incident was reported on 25 December, when Israeli security
forces fired rockets damaging two schools. Shortages of construction materials in
September 2013 owing to Israeli restrictions halted the construction of
13 Government schools, postponed the construction of another 26 and, in
November, forced UNRWA to suspend the construction of 22 schools.
84. The Israeli blockade of Gaza since June 2007 continued to take a heavy toll on
the more than 80 per cent of Gazan families dependent on humanitarian assistance.
In 2013, 4,059 of 4,470 medical applications for children were approved; however,
409 applications, including for 215 boys and 194 girls, were delayed, usually as a
result of the denial or delay of a permit for the child’s parent. In one incident, the
application of a 16-year-old girl scheduled to receive cancer treatment in Israel was
delayed for 73 days. The recent movement restrictions imposed by the Government
of Egypt have also affected the access to medical referrals.
85. I commend the State of Palestine for acceding to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict.
Lebanon
86. 2013 was marked by a significant increase in violence as a result of explosions
inside Lebanon and along its borders, as well as sectarian violence between factions
and communities, further exacerbated by the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
87. The United Nations continued to receive allegations of use of children in
sectarian clashes, specifically in the Tripoli neighbourhoods of Jabal Mohsen and
Bab al-Tebbaneh, and on children in Lebanon being pressured into joining armed
groups in the Syrian Arab Republic. The majority of allegations received concerned
Lebanese sectarian groups aligned with armed groups in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Regarding the allegations of the involvement of children in armed violence in

14-03673

19/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

Lebanon, I note the joint declaration by representatives of factions of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization and of the forces of the Palestinian National Coalition in
Lebanon, prohibiting the recruitment and use of children within their organizations.
88. Despite restricted monitoring access owing to the security situation, the United
Nations documented 56 incidents of violations against children, including the killing
of 11 children and injury caused to 21 others by landmines, unexploded ordnance,
cross-border shelling from the Syrian Arab Republic, sectarian armed clashes and
sniper fire.
89. The United Nations received confirmed information on 24 school buildings
sustaining damage during clashes between sectarian groups as well as between
sectarian groups and Government forces, specifically in Tripoli and in Sidon
between the Sunni radical faction of Sheikh Ahmad al-Asir and the Lebanese Armed
Forces in June. A total of 36 schools, namely in Sidon (20); Ein el-Helweh
Palestinian Camp (9); Nahr el-Bared Palestinian Camp (5); and el Beddawi
Palestinian Camp (2), were temporarily closed due to security threats and nearby
clashes, affecting more than 40,000 students.
90. With the large influx of refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon,
I thank the Government’s efforts to enrol more than 102,000 Syrian children in the
public school system. Moreover, UNRWA ensured access to education for more than
7,000 Palestinian refugee children from the Syrian Arab Republic in Lebanon.
However, up to 300,000 refugee children remain without access to education.
91. During her visit to Lebanon in July 2013, my Special Representative met with
senior members of the Government of Lebanon who committed to finalizing the
ratification process of the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, which was pending in parliament. In late 2013, the Minister of
Social Affairs publically called on all concerned actors in Lebanon to take concrete
steps to end and prevent all violations against children in armed conflict. In view of
the impact of armed conflict, including the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, on
Lebanese children and refugee children in Lebanon, I urge the Government of
Lebanon to follow up on the commitment made to my Special Representative and
the call by the Minister for ratification of the Optional Protocol.
Libya
92. The situation for children in Libya remained precarious in 2013, with political
tensions escalating into armed confrontations in al-Ajailat, al-Shagiga, Ghadamis,
Tripoli, Benghazi and Sabha, sometimes involving the use of heavy weapons. The
United Nations continued to experience difficulty in gathering information owing to
lack of security and a full monitoring mandate. Notwithstanding attempts by the
Government to increase its control, many armed brigades under the nominal control
of the Government continued to display a lack of discipline and command and
control, leading in some instances to grave violations against children.
93. The United Nations documented the killing of 14 children (12 boys and
2 girls) between 4 and 17 years of age, and the injury of five others (four boys and
one girl) in crossfire and improvised explosive device incidents or as a result of
heavy weaponry. For example, in April in al-Shagiga, Nafousa Mountains, a fouryear-old boy from the Mashashiya tribe was killed by a rocket hitting the family
home during a clash between the Mashashiya and Zintan tribes. In three separate

20/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

incidents in Benghazi on 30 July, 3 August and 3 November, four boys, between
2 and 15 years of age, were killed in improvised explosive device attacks against
their fathers, who were security officers. In Tripoli on 15 November, members of a
Misratah brigade stationed in the Ghargour neighbourhood of Tripoli opened fire on
protestors. During the ensuing clashes in Tripoli, at least 46 people were killed,
including a 15-year-old girl and a 17-year-old boy, and 516 others were injured,
including an unknown number of children.
94. Seven incidents of attacks on hospitals were recorded by the United Nations in
Benghazi and Sabha, including explosions, the targeting of medical staff and
shooting inside medical facilities by armed militias. For example, on 30 July, in
Benghazi, armed men broke into a secure ward in the city’s Al-Hawri hospital to
carry out a revenge killing, shooting one man dead. In Benghazi, on 13 May, an
improvised explosive device exploded in front of Al-Jalaa hospital, killing a
14-year-old boy and two adults as well as wounding up to 30 others. On 27 August,
two out of three hospitals in Benghazi closed down owing to staff protesting against
violence, following the beating of nurses, stabbing of doctors and smashing of
equipment by armed elements. In addition, in May 2013, a device was detonated
inside a school in the al-Salmani neighbourhood of Benghazi by unknown
perpetrators without casualty. In October 2013, also in Banghazi, another explosion
took place in al-Alwiya al-Hura school.
95. The United Nations continued to visit detention facilities where children were
held, including six Tawergha boys 16 years of age in al-Wihda prison in Misrata,
held since 2011 without charges. I call upon the Government of Libya to expedite
the review of such cases by the competent judicial authorities as a priority.
Lord’s Resistance Army (Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan)
96. Despite continuing reports of sporadic attacks and abductions of children by
LRA across the LRA-affected region, LRA has morphed into smaller cells and appears
to have changed its modus operandi owing to the military pressure of the African
Union regional task force. However, the instability in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan could heighten the risk of an LRA resurgence in those areas. Attacks
by LRA in 2013 largely took place in remote areas in the north-eastern region of HautKotto prefecture of the Central African Republic, and in the Uélé districts of Orientale
Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United Nations recorded 353,000
persons, among them many children, displaced in areas affected by LRA.
97. During the reporting period, four boys were reportedly recruited by LRA in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, marking a
drastic decrease in reported cases compared to previous years. In addition, two girls
were killed by LRA elements in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
98. Abductions of children by LRA remained stable with 65 cases reported from
the south-eastern region of the Central African Republic (47) and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s Haut-Uélé district (18). The children were used for looting
and the transport of pillaged goods and released within a short period of time. It is
important to note that children, in particular girls, abducted or recruited by LRA are
regularly subjected to sexual violence.

14-03673

21/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

99. In 2013, 177 children were separated from LRA, including 121 Congolese,
47 Central Africans, 8 Ugandans and 1 South Sudanese. UNICEF and partners were
supporting a transit centre in Yambio, South Sudan, where children received
psychosocial counselling and medical services together with ongoing family tracing.
Mali
100. In 2013, the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children was established in Mali following the listing of Ansar
Dine, the Mouvement national pour la liberation de l’Azawad (MNLA), and the
Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest (MUJAO) in the annexes
of my previous annual report. Favourable political and security developments
occurred in Mali during the second half of 2013, including the signing of the
Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement and the successful holding of presidential and
legislative elections, which contributed to a significant decrease in the cases of
grave violations recorded. However, armed incursions by MUJAO into the northern
regions of Kidal and Gao continued, putting children formerly associated with
armed groups at risk of re-recruitment. Humanitarian and monitoring access to
northern Mali remained severely limited due to security and capacity constraints.
101. All armed groups in the North, including Al-Qaida au Maghreb Islamique,
Ansar Dine, MNLA and MUJAO perpetrated grave violations against children. The
United Nations verified the recruitment and use of 57 children, all boys as young as
11 years of age. Most of the boys were recruited in the first half of 2013 by MUJAO
and the MNLA and were used in combat, to man checkpoints and in support roles.
Reportedly, families, imams and community leaders have facilitated the recruitment
of children into armed groups. Children entrusted by their parents to marabouts
were particularly vulnerable, and religious schools often served as places for
indoctrination and recruitment.
102. The detention of children formerly associated with parties to conflict remained
a concern. By December, the United Nations had verified the detention of
24 children under security charges after separation from armed groups by the Forces
armées et de sécuritées du Mali during military operations. Despite the signing of a
protocol on the release and handover of children between the Government of Mali
and the United Nations on 1 July, nine boys remained detained in Bamako under
security charges at the time of reporting. The United Nations continued to follow up
on this issue, in particular on children detained before the signing of the protocol.
103. Children constitute more than half of the documented casualties of explosive
remnants of war in Mali with at least six killed and 51 others injured in 2013. In
addition, children were killed and maimed in attacks by armed groups, including
through the use of terror tactics. For example, on 23 October, a six-year-old boy was
killed in a suicide attack on a checkpoint of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
104. As of December, 147,425 students returned to 769 reopened schools in Gao,
Kidal and Timbuktu; the regions that were most affected by the conflict. During the
height of the conflict in 2013, all 1,418 schools in northern Mali were closed for an
extended period. Access to education was also restricted owing to the use of schools
by the military. For instance, on 14 November, 30 MNLA elements established a
front post in a high school in Kidal town.

22/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

105. On 7 February 2013, an interministerial circular was signed by relevant
ministers, outlining their commitment to end and prevent the recruitment of children
and to ensure appropriate reintegration provisions. In addition, an initial 600 MSDF
elements were trained on child protection by the United Nations. On 7 August 2013,
the Government of Mali accepted the joint verification mechanism proposed by
MINUSMA to conduct physical and administrative screening of elements of the
Forces armées et de sécuritées du Mali .
106. I encourage the Malian authorities to swiftly operationalize this joint
mechanism and to ensure that specific procedures for the separation and
reintegration of children associated with armed groups and forces are included in the
development of the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
Myanmar
107. The recruitment and use of children by parties to conflict continued to be a
concern in 2013. The United Nations received complaints of 37 children newly
recruited into the Tatmadaw, including a 12-year-old boy, and 196 others previously
recruited. Children used by the Tatmadaw continued to be deployed to the frontline
as combatants and in other roles, in particular in Kachin State.
108. The number of reported arrests of children under charges of desertion from the
Tatmadaw increased in 2013. Of 98 boys associated with the Tatmadaw, who were
reported under the International Labour Organization (ILO) complaint mechanism,
40 were documented as absent without leave. Of the 40, 10 children were arrested
and detained for alleged desertion. Four of the children were released from
detention and discharged, including two in January 2014. In addition, children were
arrested because of their alleged association with armed groups. For example, in
Kachin State, a 16-year-old displaced boy was taken by the Tatmadaw on suspicion
of being a Kachin Independence Army (KIA) soldier. He was released after being
used as a porter for weapons for two days.
109. Armed groups also continued to recruit and use children, including the Karen
National Liberation Army (KNLA) and the Karen National Liberation Army Peace
Council. Several cases of children associated with KIA and KNLA were reported
and verified. One boy was separated from KNLA upon advocacy by ILO. In a single
incident in December 2013, the KIA forcibly recruited an unknown number of
children from among 50 people. Thirty-two people had been released by the end of
the reporting period. The remaining villagers, save one, were released in early
January. Lack of access prevented the verification of reported use of children by the
Shan State Army South, the Karenni National Progressive Party/Karenni Army
(KNPP/KA) and the Democratic Karen Benevolent Army (DKBA). Approximately
20 children suspected of association with the United Wa State Army (UWSA) were
observed by the United Nations in northern Shan State. On a positive note, the
United Nations began to re-engage with armed groups listed for recruitment and use,
including KNLA and KNPP/KA. KNPP proactively approached my Special
Representative and subsequently the United Nations in Myanmar with a letter to
renew previous engagements on the issue.
110. At least seven children were killed and six others injured in sporadic fighting
between the Tatmadaw and KIA in Kachin and northern Shan States, including air
strikes by the Tatmadaw. In addition, a two-month-old boy was injured by a grenade
during a clash between the Tatmadaw and the KNLA on 16 March in Papun district,

14-03673

23/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

Karen State. Also in Karen State, Hpa-an district, on 27 April, a newborn baby and
an 18-month-old girl were injured in shelling during a clash between the Tatmadaw
and the DKBA. Although it could not be verified whether parties to conflict
continued to use landmines, limited efforts at demining, marking and signing
continued to put children at risk. During the reporting period, four boys, between 13
and 17 years of age, were killed by landmines in Kayin and Kachin States and five
boys, between 10 and 16 years of age, were injured by landmines in Kachin and
Northern Shan State. In addition, the communal violence in Rakhine State continued
to preoccupy child protection actors.
111. During clashes between the Tatmadaw and KIA from October to November
2013, several schools were reportedly damaged in Kachin State and several others
were closed. From late December 2012 until mid-February 2013, schools in Laiza,
Kachin State, remained closed owing to fighting between KIA and the Tatmadaw.
Allegations of schools being damaged by the Tatmadaw in Shan State could not be
verified because of denial of access to the area. In November 2013, Tatmadaw
troops, reportedly to minimize civilian casualties, surrounded a Boarding School in
Mansi Township, Kachin State, forcing over 300 schoolchildren to flee. In addition,
in Kachin and northern Shan State, mine fields laid by the Tatmadaw and KIA in
close proximity to schools and hospitals remained a concern.
112. Several reports of sexual violence against children by Tatmadaw soldiers were
received in 2013, including the alleged gang-rape of a 14-year-old girl in northern
Kachin State. In February 2014, a Tatmadaw soldier was sentenced to life
imprisonment by a civilian court for the rape of a seven-year-old girl in northern
Shan State.
113. Humanitarian access to areas affected by armed conflict improved during the
reporting period but remained restricted in certain areas, including areas beyond
Government control in Kachin and Kayin States. Humanitarian access to such areas
was only granted in June, September and November, when seven humanitarian
cross-line missions assisted over 23,000 people.
114. Access for monitoring purposes covered under the action plan with the
Government of Myanmar improved during the reporting period but remained
limited. An initial eight monitoring visits were allowed to selected operational
Tatmadaw units in the second half of 2013. On 29 May, the United Nations and
representatives of the Government conducted a joint midterm review on progress
and challenges in the implementation of the action plan. In November, the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict conducted a field visit to
Myanmar, welcoming the Government’s respective progress and stressing the need
for continued efforts under the framework. In that regard, I welcome Myanmar’s
renewed commitment to the extended action plan in early 2014.
115. In 2013, 178 children, in one case as young as 12, were separated from the
Tatmadaw, including 134 under the framework of the action plan and 15 through the
ILO forced labour complaint mechanism. At the time of reporting, 197 other
complaints of child recruitment shared by the United Nations were under review by
the Government. Reports on the recruitment of children by the Tatmadaw received
through the action plan complaints mechanism established in November 2012
increased significantly towards the end of the reporting period owing to a
nationwide awareness campaign in consultation with the Government. I commend
the ratification of ILO convention 182 (1999), prohibiting the worst forms of child

24/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

labour, including the recruitment and use of children. The United Nations in
Myanmar stands ready to support the implementation of the action plan and to
further engage with armed groups to end and prevent child recruitment. In that
regard, I am encouraged by the ongoing peace talks between the Government and
several non-State parties listed for the recruitment and use of children.
Somalia
116. The United Nations documented the recruitment and use of 1,293 children,
including by Al-Shabaab (908), the Somali National Army and allied militia (209),
and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a (ASWJ) (111). The remaining cases were attributed to
the Somaliland Armed Forces (15) and to unknown armed elements (36).
Al-Shabaab continued its campaign for the recruitment of children and youth. For
instance, on 24 January, Al-Shabaab recruited six boys, as young as 12, in a Koranic
school in south-west Baidoa. In separate incidents, 19 children, as young as 15,
were recruited during dedicated campaigns in Bardhere district, Gedo region, and
Jilib district, Middle Juba region. Al-Shabaab uses children in various roles,
including as combatants and to gather intelligence. Of particular concern are
14 cases of association of children with the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in various capacities, including to man checkpoints and as cooks. The
United Nations has been regularly engaging with AMISOM leadership with a view
to addressing these cases and enhancing the mainstreaming of child protection.
117. The arbitrary arrest and detention of 1,009 children by the national army,
including during operations against Al-Shabaab, remained a grave concern in 2013.
In 11 cases, girls who had been arrested were also raped. Upon advocacy by the
United Nations, 41 children detained by the national army for alleged association
with Al-Shabaab were released in 2013.
118. At least 237 children were reportedly killed (179 boys and 58 girls) and
494 children were injured (383 boys and 111 girls) in 2013. The national army and
allied militias were reportedly responsible for 334 child casualties (98 killed and
236 injured), followed by unknown armed groups (83 killed, 174 injured),
Al-Shabaab (47 killed, 67 injured), AMISOM (7 killed, 14 injured), ASWJ (two
killed, one injured), and the Puntland and the Somaliland forces (one child each
injured). Child casualties mainly resulted from crossfire during clashes and
indiscriminate shelling. Thirty children were killed and 51 others injured in incidents
involving improvised explosive devices. In one incident, in December, a 16-year-old
boy was executed by the Al-Shabaab for attempted desertion.
119. In 154 incidents of sexual violence, 152 girls and 2 boys were raped, including
by unknown armed elements (65), members of the national army and allied
militias (49), Al-Shabaab (31), ASWJ (7) and the Somaliland forces (2). Twenty of
the girls were subjected to sexual violence in the context of forced marriages
following recruitment into Al-Shabaab. The rape of 21 children in 19 separate
incidents by national army and unknown armed elements inside internally displaced
persons camps was a particular concern since the camps were supposed to be a safe
place for displaced children.
120. Fifty-four attacks on schools and 11 attacks on hospitals by the national
army (28), Al-Shabaab (18), unknown armed groups (7) and ASWJ (1) were
documented. Four of the attacks on schools by Al-Shabaab and an unknown armed

14-03673

25/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

group resulted in the recruitment of 34 boys. In addition, Al-Shabaab used schools
for recruitment campaigns.
121. In 2013, 863 boys and 237 girls formerly associated with armed forces or
groups were enrolled in reintegration programmes in Mogadishu, Merka, Guriel,
Dhusamareb and Afgoye districts. The United Nations also continued to engage with
the Federal Government of Somalia to ensure the implementation of the two action
plans to end and prevent the recruitment and use and the killing and maiming of
children by the national army. With the establishment of the United Nations
Assistance Mission (UNSOM) in July, one Child Protection Adviser was deployed
to further support the process. In addition, a working group on children and armed
conflict, comprising representatives of the Government, the United Nations,
non-governmental organizations, and the donor community, was established in
Mogadishu and reviewed standard operating procedures for the handover of children
formerly associated with armed forces and groups before adoption by the
Government in March 2014. Furthermore, I welcome the commitment of the Federal
Government of Somalia to become party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocols, in particular in respect of the involvement of
children in armed conflict, and urge the Government to ratify them.
South Sudan
122. Before the most recent crisis, the Government of South Sudan had made
tangible progress in addressing grave violations against children and implementing
an action plan to end the recruitment and use of children. Such progress included
issuing command orders to stop recruitment and use of children within the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), undertaking joint verification visits with the
United Nations to SPLA barracks, and regular training of SPLA troops. On
15 December 2013, fighting erupted between factions of SPLA aligned with the
Government and former Vice-President Riek Machar Teny, reversing the initial
progress made under the action plan.
123. The United Nations received credible information on grave violations against
children by both pro-Government forces and opposition forces aligned with Riek
Machar Teny. Thousands of children were reportedly mobilized in Upper Nile and
Jonglei States by the Nuer ethnic group aligned with opposition forces, also known
as the “White Army”. Thousands of children were killed or maimed, raped,
displaced or orphaned. Attacks on schools and hospitals and their military use by all
parties were also widespread, depriving children of access to education and health
care and adding to the humanitarian crisis. Although the United Nations was able to
verify limited numbers of violations against children by all parties to conflict,
documented cases remained only indicative at the time of reporting and further
verification was ongoing. In the hospitals of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) in Juba and Malakal alone, 110 children received treatment for
conflict-related injuries. Since the United Nations was still verifying information
regarding ongoing violations at the time of reporting, the cases reported below are
limited to the period before the events following 15 December 2013.
124. Before the crisis, the United Nations verified the recruitment and use of
162 children, all boys and mostly between 14 and 17 years of age. Of the 162
children, 99 were associated with SPLA, 3 with South Sudan national police
services and 35 with militia allied to David Yau Yau in Jonglei, and 25 were

26/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

mobilized from Lou Nuer tribe to conduct community policing in Jonglei State.
Children associated with SPLA were identified in military barracks, wearing SPLA
uniforms as well as undergoing military training in conflict areas. In addition,
reports of the recruitment and use of 133 children were pending verification at the
time of reporting.
125. Sixty-three children were killed and 83 injured prior to the December crisis.
Child casualties resulted from clashes between SPLA and armed groups, from intercommunal conflict in Jonglei, and from five separate incidents involving explosive
remnants of war in Central Equatoria, Eastern Equatoria, Jonglei and Unity States.
126. The United Nations verified information of seven cases of sexual violence
affecting seven girls. Individual SPLA soldiers in Central Equatoria, Eastern
Equatoria, Jonglei, Lakes, Unity, Upper Nile and Western Bahr-el-Ghazal States
were allegedly responsible for the incidents.
127. During the reporting period, 26 new incidents of military use of schools and
hospitals by SPLA (19), South Sudan national police services (6) and non-State
actors (1) were documented, affecting the access to education of approximately
13,000 children. By 15 December, seven schools remained in use by SPLA, in
contravention of the military order of 14 August 2013. The increased use of schools
by SPLA also resulted from lessened cooperation with the United Nations following
changes in SPLA leadership in January 2013. In addition, the United Nations
verified the looting and burning of two hospitals located in Budi county, Eastern
Equatoria State, resulting from clashes between cattle rustlers and Government
forces. Militias allied with David Yau Yau allegedly burned another health centre in
Pochalla County, Jonglei State.
128. As a result of inter-communal conflict, the United Nations received reports of
250 children abducted during the reporting period. The abduction of children
continues to take place during cattle raiding and attacks at night where the sole aim
is to abduct children.
129. The United Nations also received reports of at least 24 incidents of denial of
humanitarian access, including forceful entry into humanitarian compounds,
harassment and physical assault of humanitarian workers that hampered the ability
of humanitarian actors to access the population in dire need of assistance.
130. As far as the latest crisis is concerned, the United Nations repeatedly
advocated against the involvement of children in the ongoing conflict, and was in
the process of collecting and verifying information of violations against children
since the beginning of the crisis. Discussions between the United Nations and all
parties were ongoing in that regard. I commend all efforts taken by the Security
Council, the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other regional actors to address the renewed escalation of conflict in South Sudan. I
call upon all parties to immediately put an end to the unacceptable scale of violence
against children and to ensure that perpetrators will be held accountable.
Sudan
Three areas (South Kordofan, Blue Nile State and Abyei)
131. The security situation in Blue Nile and South Kordofan remained volatile
owing to continued fighting, primarily between Government forces and the Sudan

14-03673

27/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

People Liberation Movement North (SPLM-N). Grave violations against children
also resulted from fighting in West, South and North Kordofan between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Revolutionary Front (SRF), a coalition of
SPLM-N, the Justice Equality Movement (JEM) and the Sudan Liberation Army
factions of Minni Minawi, (SLA-MM) and Abdul Wahid (SLA-AW). The security
situation and access restrictions continued to have an impact on the ability of the
United Nations to verify information, although access to Government-controlled
areas slightly improved.
132. The United Nations recorded the recruitment and use of 42 children in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile, including 2 by the SAF. Both boys, 13 and 14 years of age,
were recruited in Blue Nile and remained associated with SAF at the time of
reporting. Of the 40 children recruited and used by armed groups, 14 children, all
boys, some as young as 12, were recruited by the Popular Defence Force (PDF) in
Blue Nile (5 boys) and South Kordofan (9). At least 26 children (19 boys and
7 girls) were recruited and used by SPLM-N, including 10 (5 boys and 5 girls), as
young as 12, escaping from an SPLM-N camp in Mandi, South Kordofan. Sixteen
children (14 boys and 2 girls) were recruited by SPLM-N in Upper Nile State, South
Sudan. Three of the children reported to have received military training in Blue Nile
after having been recruited in South Sudan in April. The cases confirm previous
allegations about the cross-border recruitment of children between South Sudan and
the Sudan.
133. At least six children were killed in clashes, including between SAF and SRF,
and between SPLM-N and the Central Reserve Police (CRP). In addition, 10 children
were injured in mortar attacks by CRP (3) and SPLM-N (7). Furthermore, unexploded
ordnance-related incidents resulted in at least six children being injured in Blue
Nile, and six children reportedly killed and nine others injured in a single incident in
Um Baraka, South Kordofan.
134. Sexual violence against children in the three areas continued to be
underreported in 2013 owing to limited monitoring capacity and victims’ fear of
stigmatization. The United Nations documented the rape of three girls, between
14 and 17 years of age, by pro-Government militias in two separate incidents in Abu
Zabad, South Kordofan, on 19 November.
135. In the only documented attack on a school, on 19 November 2013, a mortar
shell by SPLM-N hit the yard of El Manar primary school for boys in Kadugli,
South Kordofan, injuring a 10-year-old boy.
136. Access to Abyei via Kadugli, South Kordofan, was for the first time granted in
September, but was quickly disrupted owing to intensified fighting between SAF
and SPLM-N. No humanitarian access has been allowed in the non-Government
controlled areas of Blue Nile and South Kordofan since the conflict broke out in
2011.
137. The United Nations organized child protection training and orientation for
131 SAF and PDF officers. Nine children released by PDF in Abugibaiha, Talodi,
and Kalogi, South Kordofan, and the 10 children who fled from the SPLM-N camp
in Mandi, were reintegrated with support from the United Nations. Although the
SPLM-N had expressed its intention to enter into dialogue with the United Nations
to address grave violations against children in 2012, lack of access didn’t allow any
follow-up.

28/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

Darfur
138. The security situation in Darfur deteriorated owing to sporadic clashes
between Government forces and armed groups as well as due to inter-communal and
tribal clashes, including over natural resources. The increased mobilization and
arming of children by communities further exacerbated the risk of the re-recruitment
of demobilized children. The United Nations, in conducting monitoring in
conjunction with the African Union through the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Darfur (UNAMID), was able to verify four cases of recruitment by SAF and 14
by border guards, and received reports of 17 children allegedly recruited by SAF,
border guards and SLA-AW. Challenges in monitoring and reporting in areas
beyond Government control clearly limited the documentation and verification of
child recruitment in Darfur.
139. The United Nations documented the killing of 91 children (71 boys and
20 girls) and injury to 98 others (64 boys and 34 girls). Forty-three children were
shot and killed and 32 others injured during clashes between Government forces and
armed groups as well as during inter- and intra-ethnic fighting. At least 31 children
were killed and 14 others injured in SAF air strikes. Incidents involving explosive
remnants of war also continued to be a major concern, killing 17 children and
injuring 52 others.
140. At least 62 girls were raped in 40 separate incidents. Most cases were
perpetrated by unknown armed elements, some of whom were wearing military
uniforms. However, in three cases alleged perpetrators were identified as
Government forces and, in one case, elements of SLA-MM. Government Police
arrested a member of the Central Reserve Police for the rape of a 6-year-old girl on
17 October, and two Government Police officers were identified among the six men
raping a 16-year-old girl on 5 February near the Al Meglis area of El Geneina, West
Darfur. Sexual violence remained underreported owing to fear of stigmatization and
reprisals by perpetrators as well as out-of-court settlements.
141. In three SAF air strikes on three schools in Dursa village, Central Darfur, in
Um Dadeti, South Darfur, and in Tabit, North Darfur, all three schools sustained
major damage and six schoolchildren were injured. In addition, between 15 and
17 April, unknown armed elements looted schools in Labado, East Darfur, following
fighting between SAF and SLA-MM.
142. Fifteen cases of abduction of children were documented in Donkey Dreisa and
in Hamada forest, South Darfur (12 cases), Labado and Muhajeria, East Darfur (2),
and in Jabel Amer, West Darfur (1). For instance, in Labado and Muhajeria, a
15-year-old girl was abducted by pro-Government militia along with her 18-year-old
sister, was used as a porter and was raped before being released.
143. The Government of the Sudan took some positive steps to end the recruitment
and use of children. On 21 July, the Government enacted a law raising the age of
recruitment into PDF from 16 to 18 years and establishing 18 as the minimum age
for joining the national reserve service and the national service. I am encouraged by
the ongoing discussions between the United Nations and the Government of the
Sudan with a view of finalizing a draft action plan to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children. Progress was also made on dialogue with
JEM/Jibril Ibrahim, SLA-MM and SLA-AW, which issued command orders
prohibiting child recruitment within their ranks, and with Sheik Musa Hilal, who

14-03673

29/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

issued a similar order to nomadic communities under his leadership. Furthermore,
405 children formerly associated with armed groups and forces, including with the
disbanded SLA-Historical Leadership, received reintegration support.
Syrian Arab Republic
144. The conflict and violence in the Syrian Arab Republic reached unprecedented
levels during 2013. Intense bombardments by Government forces on oppositioncontrolled or disputed areas, increased operations by a growing number of armed
groups in constantly evolving coalitions as well as the expansion of the control of
Islamist groups in northern Syrian Arab Republic led to massive grave violations
against children. Hundreds of civilians, including many children, were killed during
the chemical attack on Damascus suburbs in August.
145. Numerous armed groups are reportedly recruiting and using children in the
Syrian Arab Republic, including several FSA-affiliated groups, the Kurdish People
Protection Units (YPG), Ahrar al-Sham, Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS),
Jhabat al-Nusra, and other armed groups. All of the groups actively recruit and use
children for logistics, handling ammunition, manning checkpoints and as
combatants. Reports indicated that the recruitment of children or pressure to join
armed groups also occur among refugee populations in neighbouring countries.
Most children associated with FSA-affiliated groups, as young as 14 years of age,
indicated that they had received weapons training and 4,000 to 8,000 Syrian pounds
pay per month. For instance, a 14-year-old boy who joined the al-Murabiteen
battalion of the Falloujat Houran FSA brigade in Bosra al-Sham, Dara’a
Governorate, reportedly received a 15 days of weapons training in al-Lajat valley
close to Bosra al-Sham. In June 2013, two brothers, 16 and 17 years old, joined the
FSA-affiliated Majd al-Islam brigade in Dara’a, where they cleaned weapons and
performed security duties. YPG reportedly trained children with adults near
Al-Qamishli, al-Hassakeh governorate and used them at checkpoints and in combat.
For instance, a 14-year-old boy reportedly recruited in September 2013 was trained
in Rassalein, al-Hassakeh governorate, and used in hostilities. Islamist groups such
as ISIS, Jabhat al-Nusra or Ahrar al-Sham also recruited and used children. A
15-year-old boy reportedly joined Ahrar al-Sham in Mayadin, Deir ez-Zor
governorate, in March 2013 and continued to be associated with the group at the
time of reporting. A 16-year-old boy reportedly joined Jabhat al-Nusra around April
2013 and stayed with the group for three months. ISIS reportedly used children as
young as eight in hostilities. Children fighting with ISIS are reportedly paid like
adults (35,000 Syrian pounds, approximately $200) and undergo both weapons and
jihadist indoctrination training.
146. Adults and children released from detention reported that children were still
present in detention facilities and suffered treatment tantamount to torture. For
instance, a 17-year-old boy accused of participating in anti-Government
demonstrations was arrested by Government forces in March 2013, detained in
Homs, and subsequently for three months in the Damascus Political Security
Detention Centre, where he was repeatedly beaten and forced to remain in stress
positions. The boy reported that other children were present in the detention centre.
Children were also reportedly arrested and detained in October 2013 during the
temporary evacuation of over 1,000 civilians from al-Moaddamiyeh besieged area in
Rif Damascus. The Government stated that no children were detained during the
evacuation. Several cases of arrest or detention may amount to enforced

30/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

disappearances. For instance, the whereabouts of two boys, 16 and 17 years old,
reportedly detained by the Syrian Air Force Intelligence in Aleppo in May and June
2013 for alleged cooperation with the opposition remained unknown at the time of
reporting. Approximately 1,500 detainees, including children, are reportedly held in
the ISIS main detention centre in al-Raqqah. No disaggregated data on children was
available. According to the Government, all detained children under 18 are
prosecuted in accordance with juvenile law. In addition, the Government states that
numerous amnesty decrees have been issued.
147. More than 10,000 children are estimated to have been killed since the outset of
the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and the killing and maiming of children has
increased exponentially in 2013. Government forces continued to indiscriminately
shell civilian-populated areas, in particular in Homs and Aleppo, but also in Deir
ez-Zor, Idlib, Damascus and Al-Raqqa governorates. The use of barrel bombs by
Government forces in Aleppo city in December alone led to hundreds of children
killed and injured. Children also continued to be killed in ground offensives by
Government forces. On 29 January, during the “Al-Queiq river” massacre in Bustan
al-Qasr district of Aleppo, at least 10 children were reportedly among those
summarily executed. Other massacres were reportedly committed by Government
forces in several villages in the Al-Sfera area, south of Aleppo, between April and
June. For instance, on 21 June, in Mazrat al Rahib village, at least three children
were reportedly summarily executed along with at least 58 men. In early May, a
high number of children were reportedly among the hundreds of civilians killed and
burned by Government forces in Ras al-Nabaa district of Baniyas town and
al-Bayda village.
148. Armed groups also continued to kill and maim children, including through the
use of terror tactics and during ground operations throughout the Syrian Arab
Republic. For instance, during Eid al-Fitr in July, at least 13 children were killed in
a mortar shelling on areas of Zahra, besieged by Jabhat al-Nusra, Ahrar al-Sham and
ISIS/Land Liwa al-Tawhid. On 4 August, the end of Ramadan, armed groups,
including Ahrar al-Sham, ISIS, Jabhat al-Nusra, Jaish al Muhajireen wal-Ansar and
Suquor al-izz, allegedly killed more than 200 persons, of whom at least 18 were
children, including during executions of entire families in Latakia governorate
during the “Barouda” offensive. On 10 September, Jabhat al-Nusra and Ahrar
al-Sham allegedly attacked villages in eastern Homs, killing more than 30 civilians
of which half were women and children.
149. While sexual violence against boys and girls in Government-controlled
detention facilities has been documented previously, an increasing number of
women and girls reported to the United Nations that they were subject to repeated
sexual harassment at Government checkpoints. Government forces also reportedly
abducted young women and girls in groups at checkpoints or in transport and
released them a few days later in their village, intentionally exposing them as
victims of rape and subjecting them to rejection by their families. Allegations of
sexual violence against boys and girls by Jabhat al-Nusra and other unidentified
armed groups were also received. For example, a boy of unknown age and his father
were allegedly raped by several members of Jabhat al-Nusra. In another incident, a
15-year-old girl in Al Qoseir was reportedly gang-raped by unidentified armed
elements and subsequently killed by family members for “having lost her sanity”
following the event. The general fear of sexual violence by parties to the conflict
continued to be stated as a reason for which Syrian families flee the country.

14-03673

31/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

150. An increasing number of mosques hosting schools have reportedly been
shelled during indiscriminate bombardments or directly targeted by missiles. For
instance, on 30 July, Government forces shelled the Hamza mosque, recognized as a
girls’ school, in Anadan area, north of Aleppo. Nine girls, all younger than 10 years
of age, and four female teachers were reportedly killed. ISIS control of school
curricula, forcing teachers to introduce their ideology, was a growing concern.
According to the Government, armed groups systematically targeted schools, with
more than 3,000 being partially or completely destroyed. Hospitals and field clinics
also continued to be damaged in targeted and indiscriminate shelling. For instance,
in early November, in al-Bab district of Aleppo, Government forces shelled an
opposition-run hospital twice, reportedly killing one doctor and two nurses. In
March, an FSA brigade attacked the national hospital in Dara’a. According to the
Government, 63 hospitals and 470 health centres have been targeted by armed
groups. Doctors and medical personnel have also been killed or abducted for ransom
by ISIS in northern Syrian Arab Republic. For instance, the whereabouts of two
doctors reportedly arrested by ISIS in mid-December 2013 remained unknown at the
time of reporting. As at March 2014, 68 of 118 UNRWA schools have been closed
owing to conflict. Of 67,000 Palestine refugee children registered in UNRWA
schools, 41,500 are currently attending classes. Fourteen UNRWA schools operated
as shelters for displaced Palestine refugees and Syrians.
151. The abduction of civilians, including children, became an increasingly
prevalent feature of the Syrian conflict, mainly committed by ISIS, Jabhat al-Nusra
or Ahrar al-Sham. Allegations of mass abductions, sometimes followed by summary
executions, including against minority communities, were also received. For
instance, a 16-year-old boy was reportedly executed after a month and a half in the
custody of Ahrar al-Sham. Approximately 50 children were also reportedly among
the 200 persons abducted by several armed groups during the “Barouda” offensive,
in August 2013 in Latakia governorate.
152. Active denial or intentional restriction of humanitarian access by all parties to
the conflict remained a serious concern. As at 9 January 2014, 242,000 people were
estimated to be living in besieged areas. Homs Old City, Darayya, al-Yarmouk
Palestinian camp, Moadamiya al-Sham, Eastern Ghouta, including Douma, Arbin,
Zamalka and Kafr Batna, were besieged by Government forces. Other localities, like
Zahra and Nubul, were besieged by a coalition of Liwa al Tawhid, Ahrar al-Sham,
ISIS and Jabhat al-Nusra. All besieged areas were cut off from all humanitarian
assistance for months in 2013. Increasing reports were received of civilians,
including children, dying in areas under siege. In addition, humanitarian access to
areas controlled by extremist groups, in particular by ISIS in northern Syrian Arab
Republic, was severely impeded and the seizure of goods, as well as abduction and
killing of humanitarian personnel was a repeated concern.
153. My Special Representative visited the Syrian Arab Republic and neighbouring
countries to assess the conflict’s impact on children and discuss the strengthening of
the monitoring of grave violations and measures to end and prevent violations by all
parties. In 2013, the Government criminalized the recruitment and use of children
by armed forces and groups, and on 23 September announced the establishment of
the Inter-ministerial Committee on Children and Armed Conflict. My Special
Representative also engaged with representatives of the Syrian National Coalition
on their commitments in relation to the protection of children in armed conflict. I

32/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

also note the command order issued by General Command for YPG on 4 October
2013 condemning and prohibiting the recruitment of children.
Yemen
154. The reporting period was marked by the beginning of the National Dialogue
Conference and by a decrease in hostilities between the Government and Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP)/Ansar al-Sharia. The security situation remained
volatile in the South, due to the activities of the secession movement led by
Al-Hirak, opposing the Transitional Government and the Conference. In August
2013, tensions resurfaced between the Salafists and the Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah in
the North, resulting in the siege of Dammaj, Sa’ada governorate, by Al-Houthi/
Ansar Allah.
155. The United Nations verified the recruitment of 106 children, all boys between
6 and 17 years of age. The Salafists recruited 57 boys to fight against the Al-Houthi/
Ansar Allah in Dammaj, Sa’ada governorate. Children were mainly recruited during
recruitment drives in mosques and marketplaces in the southern governorates of
Abyan, Aden, Al Dhale, Amran, and Lahj and, in a few cases, received military
training. While 22 of the 57 boys were pulled out by family members and returned
home, at least 2 were killed in combat and 2 remained in Dammaj at the time of
reporting. Thirty-two boys were observed manning Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah
checkpoints, carrying firearms and inspecting vehicles in Sa’ada and Amran
governorates. One boy, 11 years old, reported having received two months of
military and ideological training. Reluctance of victims’ families to expose
themselves by reporting on violations by the Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah remained a
challenge to monitoring. Finally, 14 children were recruited by AQAP/Ansar
al-Sharia in Abyan governorate and three boys were used by the Al-Islah party and
the Popular Committee, a locally rooted resistance group, which aligned with the
Government to fight AQAP/Ansar al-Sharia in Abyan. In addition, 10 children
recruited prior to the reporting period, including due to falsified identity documents,
continued to be used in support roles by the Yemeni Armed Forces in 2013.
156. Nine boys were arbitrarily detained by the Popular Committee for alleged
association with AQAP/Ansar al-Sharia in 2013. After the Government regained
control over Abyan in June 2012, the Popular Committee served as a de facto police
force, “arresting” and “rehabilitating” suspected AQAP/Ansar al-Sharia elements,
including children.
157. At least 36 children were killed and 154 others maimed. Child casualties
occurred mainly in the governorate of Sa’ada, but also in 12 other governorates
throughout Yemen. Most child casualties resulted from gunshots (17 killed and
63 injured) and shelling (10 killed and 56 injured) during clashes between armed
groups and between armed groups and Government forces. For example, since
August, the clashes in Dammaj between Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah and the Salafists
resulted in at least 20 child casualties. At least five children were injured in attacks
using terror tactics, including incidents involving improvised explosive devices and
one suicide attack. Another 20 child casualties were attributed to the “civil
disobedience movement” initiated by Al-Hirak in southern Yemen and at least
10 children were injured in clashes between armed tribes. Explosive remnants of
war continued to pose a threat to children, killing and maiming at least 28 in 2013,
including in Abyan, Sa’ada, and Aden governorates. Finally, on 9 June, one boy was
killed in a drone attack in Al-Jawf.

14-03673

33/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

158. Thirty-five attacks on schools, on protected personnel, or threats against
protected personnel were documented in 2013. For example, on 27 December, the
national armed forces shelled a school where a funeral was held, resulting in more
than 30 casualties, including 2 boys killed and 10 boys injured. Four attacks on
schools in Amran, for example the damage to Aisha primary school in crossfire,
resulted from clashes between Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah and the Salafists. Al-Hirak
was responsible for the majority of documented incidents, in particular threats
against protected personnel. For instance, Shamsan school, in Aden governorate,
was forcibly entered by Al-Hirak youth groups, destroying the gate, and demanding
closure of the school and support for the civil disobedience movement. In a separate
incident, in Sa’ada governorate, a timed improvised explosive device was detected
inside a school and detonated safely.
159. The United Nations documented the military use of four schools by both
Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah and the Salafists, including as military barracks and during
clashes in Sa’ada, Amran and Aden governorates, resulting in the closure of the
schools since October 2013. One school in Amran was used by the national armed
forces as barracks from 19 January to 1 March 2013. Also in Amran, four schools
were used and destroyed by armed elements of the Al-Osimat and Qaflat Uthar
tribes.
160. Six attacks on hospitals and protected personnel were documented, including
the partial destruction of four hospitals during a complex attack by AQAP/Ansar
al-Sharia on 5 December in Sana’a, resulting in the death of 57 people and injury to
186 others. Two hospitals were partially destroyed in crossfire between Al-Houthi/
Ansar Allah and the Salafists. Government forces were responsible for damage to a
hospital and attacks on protected personnel in the context of dispersing Al-Hirak
elements in Al Dhale’e and Hadramaut governorates.
161. Twenty-two incidents of denial of humanitarian access and attacks on
humanitarian personnel were verified, mainly attributed to unknown armed groups
and, in some cases, to Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah and Government forces. Of particular
concern was the abduction of 11 humanitarian personnel in seven incidents. Two
United Nations staff remained abducted at the time of reporting. From October to
November, humanitarian access to Dammaj and three IDP camps was denied by
Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah during clashes with the Salafists.
162. Following the visit of my Special Representative in November 2012 and the
Government’s commitment to address grave violations against children in Yemen,
dialogue on an action plan to end and prevent the recruitment of children by the
national armed forces continued in 2013. On 1 January, the Government established
an interministerial committee, which, by July, had developed and endorsed a draft
action plan. At the time of reporting, despite its adoption by the Cabinet on
4 September 2013, the action plan was pending signature owing to ongoing
discussions regarding monitoring access. Meanwhile, the United Nations continued
to promote relevant legal reforms and advocated, in the context of the National
Dialogue Conference, for 18 as the minimum age for recruitment. In October, an
implementation plan to accelerate birth registration was launched by the
Government, addressing an existing loophole in recruitment mechanisms.
Furthermore, the United Nations continued to engage in dialogue with Al-Houthi/
Ansar Allah at the time of reporting based on a draft action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children.

34/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

B.

Situations not on the agenda of the Security Council or
other situations
Colombia
163. Following the signing of the “General Agreement for the end of the conflict
and the construction of a stable and lasting peace” in August 2012, ongoing talks
between the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) and the Government of Colombia achieved important progress on the
issues of rural development and political participation. While the issue of children
and armed conflict was not included in the agenda, both the third item, on “End of
the conflict”, and the fifth item, on “Victims”, constitute opportunities to take into
account child protection concerns. This is a positive development, I commend the
ongoing efforts in the context of the peace talks and encourage the parties to
continue to work in this direction towards a political solution. Furthermore, in the
context of the peace talks, the Colombian Vice-President has specifically called on
FARC-EP to respect minimum humanitarian standards, including by releasing
children associated with them and by ending recruitment and use.
164. Hostilities between FARC-EP, the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN) and
the Colombian Armed Forces intensified in particular in the departments of Cauca,
Choco, Nariño, Antioquia, Arauca, Santander and Putumayo. Extensive
displacement triggered by such hostilities continued to increase children’s
vulnerability, especially those of Afro-Colombian and indigenous origin. At least
110,000 people suffered from severe mobility restrictions in 2013, mostly as a result
of hostilities but also confinement, contamination by explosive remnants of war, and
security restrictions imposed by armed groups having an impact on access to
humanitarian assistance and basic services. By the end of December, at least 24,862
people remained confined in 10 departments, with indigenous and Afro-Colombian
people affected disproportionally.
165. Although the recruitment and use of children remained underreported in
Colombia, the United Nations verified 81 cases of recruitment and use of children
by armed groups in 25 departments and in Bogotá, including 58 children by
FARC-EP and 17 by ELN. In July 2013, eight cases of recruitment of indigenous
children by FARC-EP were documented in the department of Cauca. In December,
in Antioquia, a 15-year-old boy was recruited by FARC-EP during a declared
ceasefire. Furthermore, the Colombian Family Welfare Institute documented
342 children (114 girls and 228 boys) separated from armed groups in 2013,
marking a significant increase, compared with 264 children separated in 2012.
Among these children, 261 had been recruited by FARC-EP, 65 by ELN, 15 by
armed groups that emerged after the demobilization of the paramilitary group
Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia, and 1 by the Ejército Popular de Liberación.
166. At least 43 children were killed and 83 maimed during attacks by armed
groups. Four children were killed and 10 maimed in clashes between armed groups
or between the national armed forces and armed groups. For example, in August, a
14-year-old boy was killed in crossfire when FARC-EP attacked a police station in
Putumayo. Furthermore, 11 children were killed and 28 maimed by anti-personnel
mines or explosive remnants of war.
167. While underreported, girls and boys continued to be victims of sexual violence
attributed to members of armed groups and in some cases by the national armed

14-03673

35/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

forces. Between January and October 2013, five cases of sexual violence against
children by armed groups and 17 cases (two boys and 15 girls) by the national
armed forces were referred to the National Institute of Forensics. Furthermore,
information gathered by the United Nations and the Colombian Ombudsman Office
indicate a pattern of sexual exploitation and abuse of girls and women in mining
zones where armed groups are operating. Sexual violence also continued to be
perpetrated by armed groups that emerged after the demobilization of the
paramilitary groups. Since these groups are not considered actors of the armed
conflict by the Government, and although children may also benefit from support by
the State’s Family Defenders as victims of violence, they continue to face obstacles
in exercising their rights as protected under the Victims Law.
168. During 2013, the United Nations identified 26 education-related incidents
resulting in damage to schools or suspension of classes. For example, in April 2013,
a school in Arauca used as shelter by FARC-EP was damaged during clashes
between the armed group and the national armed forces. In February 2013, the
national armed forces used a school for military purposes while fighting against
FARC-EP in Putumayo, putting school premises and children at risk often resulting
in the suspension of classes. In November, during an armed lockdown by FARC-EP
in Antioquia, at least six schools were closed, affecting approximately 3,000
children. Teachers continued to be targeted, with five teachers reportedly killed by
unidentified armed groups and others subject to threats by armed groups in six
different departments. The involvement of children in several civic-military
activities by the Ministry of Defense and the national armed forces, prohibited by
the Child Protection Code (Law 1098 of 2006), was reported in several departments.
169. The Government of Colombia has voluntarily accepted the monitoring and
reporting mechanism pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on the
condition that any dialogue between the United Nations and armed groups would
take place with its consent. Constructive dialogue between the Government and the
United Nations system, both at the political and technical levels, is ongoing. The
establishment and implementation of policies to protect children from recruitment
such as the Presidential Human Rights Programme is an encouraging development
to ensure the protection of children affected by the conflict in Colombia.
170. A total of 342 children who had been separated from armed groups were
referred to the Colombian Family Welfare Institute. Some children, in particular
those separated from the armed groups formed after the demobilization of paramilitary
organizations, were referred to the Attorney General’s Office for prosecution in
accordance with the Law on Childhood and Adolescence (8 November 2006)
(Codigo de la Infancia y Adolescencia, Ley 1098). However, the children continued
to face difficulties in benefitting from the same rights and protection as children
recruited by other armed groups. All children, as victims, should be accorded the
same benefits and protection, regardless of the group that recruited or used them.
171. The number of prosecutions for violations against children and information on
cases taken up by the Office of the Attorney General remained limited. While the
Colombian Family Welfare Institute attended to at least 5,417 children separated
since 1999 from armed groups, to date there have been 69 convictions for child
recruitment, including 5 under the Justice and Peace Law of 2005 (of which 2 in
2013), and 64 by the Human Rights Unit of the Office of the Attorney General (of
which 14 in 2013). Additionally, there have been convictions by regional offices of

36/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

the Attorney General. Despite such efforts, children continued to face difficulties in
gaining access to justice, and impunity for violations against children remains a
concern.
India
172. The recruitment and use of children, as young as 6 years of age, by Maoist
armed groups in India, also known as Naxalites, continued in 2013. Although no
disaggregated data on the number of children associated with armed groups in India
was available to the United Nations, independent estimates indicate that at least
2,500 children are associated with armed groups in Naxal-affected areas. Notably,
Naxalite recruitment also continued to affect girls and women. According to the
Ministry of Home Affairs, boys and girls between 6 and 12 years of age were
recruited into specific children’s units (called bal dasta and bal sangham) in Bihar,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Odisha States. The children were used as spies and for
fighting with crude weapons, such as sticks. At the age of 12, children associated
with Naxalites are reportedly transferred to age-specific units and receive military
training in weapons handling and the use of improvised explosive devices.
According to Government sources, children also continued to be placed in front of
combat units as human shields. In Naxalite recruitment campaigns, targeting poor
communities, parents are forced to offer boys and girls to the armed groups under
the threat of violence, including killing and torture. Similarly, children are
reportedly threatened with the killing of family members should they escape or
surrender to security forces.
173. The recruitment and use of children remains to be criminalized by law. Of
particular concern were several reports on the treatment of children allegedly
associated with armed groups. As the Indian National Commission for Protection of
Child Rights stated in its “Protocols for police and armed forces in contact with
children in areas of civil unrest”, children arrested under security legislation are
often detained with adults, not tried through the juvenile justice system and deprived
of their right to due process of law.
174. Although no disaggregated data on children killed or maimed in clashes
between Maoist armed groups and Government security forces were available, at
least 257 civilians, 101 security forces elements and 97 Naxalite members were
killed in 2013 in 998 incidents. Taking into account the use of children as human
shields by the Naxalites, the United Nations is concerned about the killing and
maiming of children in hostilities.
175. The reported presence of girls within Naxalite ranks also raises concerns
regarding sexual violence against children. According to the Government, based on
statements of several women formerly associated with Naxalite groups, sexual
violence, including rape and other forms of abuse, is a practice in some Naxalite
camps.
176. Attacks on schools by Naxalites have continued to affect access by children to
education in affected areas. Three schools were reportedly attacked by Naxalites in
2013. For example, on 15 June, up to 50 Naxalite fighters attacked and blew up a
middle school in Bhulsumia village, Bihar. In that regard, continued reports on the
military use of schools as barracks and bases or the deployment of Government
security forces in the vicinity of schools remained a concern. For example, in an
incident in Latehar district, Jharkhand, on 16 March, approximately 20 Naxalite

14-03673

37/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

fighters reportedly attacked a school, beat up teachers and destroyed a boundary
wall under construction. Last, according to some reports, schools in Chhattisgarh
were also used for the recruitment of schoolchildren by armed groups.
Nigeria
177. Conflict in the north-eastern region of Nigeria has resulted in serious
violations against children. Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’awati wal-Jihad, also
known as Boko Haram,2 was created in 2002 in Maiduguri, the capital of the northeastern Borno State. Its objective is to overthrow the Government and create an
Islamic State governed by sharia law. Since July 2009, the extremist group has been
carrying out targeted attacks against police, religious leaders, politicians, and public
and international institutions, including a suicide attack on a United Nations
building in Abuja in 2011, and indiscriminately killing civilians, including children.
178. The security and humanitarian situation in the north-eastern region
deteriorated throughout 2013. The activities of Boko Haram and the military
response have led to the displacement of hundreds of thousands of people within
Nigeria and to neighbouring Cameroon, Chad and the Niger. A joint humanitarian
assessment mission in September by the Nigerian authorities (National Emergency
Management Agency), the United Nations and the Nigerian Red Cross, estimates
that about 5.9 of the 11 million Nigerians who live in the north-eastern states have
been affected by the Boko Haram insurgency, including 4 million in Borno State.
179. Humanitarian access to affected communities and for monitoring and verifying
incidents of grave violations against children has become increasingly difficult, in
particular since the closure of Maiduguri airport following an attack by Boko Haram
in December 2013. Between May and December 2013 alone, at least 1,200 people
were killed in 48 Boko Haram-related attacks in the States of Adamawa, Borno and
Yobe.
180. The United Nations received reports of the recruitment and use of children as
young as 12 by Boko Haram. Children are allegedly used for intelligence purposes,
tracking movements of the security forces, transporting guns and taking part in
attacks, including the burning of schools and churches.
181. Hundreds of children were killed or maimed by Boko Haram in bomb and gun
attacks against anyone who supported democracy or so-called Western values. In
September alone, 491 persons were killed in nine attacks, including an unknown
number of children. For example, on 17 September 2013, Boko Haram attacked
Benisheikh, killing at least 161 people, mainly civilians.
182. Of particular concern were the targeted attacks on schools by Boko Haram,
which were on the increase in Yobe and Borno States since October 2012 and
throughout 2013, resulting in the killing of at least 100 children and 70 teachers. For
example, in March 2013, at least 11 schools in Borno State were attacked resulting
in the killing of at least seven teachers and three children. In June, two secondary
schools were attacked in Yobe and Borno States, resulting in the killing of seven
schoolchildren and two teachers in Yobe and eight boys and two girls in Borno. In
July, a Boko Haram leader, Abubakar Shekau, publicly stated that they would burn
__________________
2 Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’awati wal-Jihad in Arabic means “people committed to

propagating the Prophet’s teachings and jihad”. It is also known as Boko Haram, which means
“Western education is a sin” in local Hausa language.

38/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

schools and kill teachers and the group claimed responsibility for an attack on 6 July
on a secondary school in Mamudo, Yobe State, killing at least 29 children and one
teacher, some of them burned alive. Also in July, a government secondary school in
Yobe State was attacked by armed elements at night while the schoolchildren were
sleeping. Sections of the school and dormitory were set ablaze and escaping
students were shot. The reported number of casualties ranged between 18 and 42. In
the most fatal attack on children in 2013, on 29 September, Boko Haram elements
entered and opened fire in the male dormitory at the College of Agriculture in
Gujba, Yobe State, killing 65 students and wounding 18 others.
183. Boko Haram also targeted and killed education and medical personnel. For
example, on 9 April, suspected Boko Haram members killed four officials of the
Borno State Feeding Committee, which runs a primary and secondary school
feeding programme, while they were on an inspection tour of schools in Dikwa
town, Borno State. In February, three foreign doctors were reportedly killed in
Potiskum and 10 female health workers were killed in attacks on polio vaccination
centres in Kano.
184. The escalating violence and recurrent attacks on schools severely disrupted the
right of children to education, with 15,000 children in Borno State reportedly having
to stop attending schools between February and May 2013. The health-care system
in Borno State has also reportedly collapsed, with most medical personnel fleeing in
fear of being attacked by Boko Haram. These trends of attacks on schools and the
killing and maiming of children continued in early 2014. For instance, on
25 February 2014, 59 schoolchildren in the College of Buni Yadi, a secondary
school in Yobe State in north-east Nigeria, were reportedly shot or burned alive.
185. The Government of Nigeria responded to the threat posed by Boko Haram with
the deployment of a joint task force comprising military, police, immigration and
intelligence officers in June 2011. In May 2013, the Government declared a state of
emergency in Borno, Yobe and Adamawa States, following which armed clashes
between the joint task force and Boko Haram escalated in the context of the joint
task force counter-insurgency operations. The United Nations received reports of
14 children in Borno State, between 9 and 13 years of age, and 21 children in Yobe
State who had been reportedly arrested in the context of such operations. The United
Nations welcomes their release in May 2013 as part of the amnesty programme
announced by the Government and calls on the Government to do its utmost to
uphold its obligations to prevent the arbitrary arrest and detention of children and to
ensure respect for the fundamental principles of the right to a fair trial, including in
the context of a State emergency and of the ongoing counter-insurgency operations.
186. Furthermore, vigilante groups, commonly referred to as the “Civilian joint task
force”, which emerged to protect their communities from Boko Haram,
progressively armed themselves with machetes and guns, and were observed
manning checkpoints in support of the joint task force. According to the
Government, the “Civilian joint task force” is not part of the Government forces and
the activities of the groups are of concern since they operate outside of the rule of
law, chain of command and accountability of the security forces.
187. The United Nations has denounced the attacks in north-eastern Nigeria and has
called upon the authorities to launch prompt and thorough investigations to hold
perpetrators accountable. The United Nations also takes note of the commitment of
Nigeria to uphold international humanitarian and human rights law, to protect the

14-03673

39/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

rights of children and to protect children from conflict-related violence, including
through its existing national legislation and policies. I urge the Nigerian authorities
to continue to support the independent National Human Rights Commission to
implement its far-reaching and robust mandate to monitor and report on grave
violations in the affected areas. I welcome the Government’s commitment to help to
facilitate access for human rights monitors and humanitarian actors to the northeast.
Pakistan
188. The recruitment of children by armed groups in Pakistan, including reportedly
for use as suicide bombers and bomb planters, remained a grave concern in 2013.
For example, in March, the police arrested 11 children, between 10 and 17 years of
age, who were allegedly used by the United Baloch Army to plant improvised
explosive devices. All the children were held in the government of Balochistan
security facility awaiting trial at the time of reporting. No exact figures could be
established on the number of children used by armed groups, in particular in the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas. However, on 24 October, 21 children, between
7 and 12 years of age, allegedly proceeding to Pakistan for military training by the
Taliban were detained by Afghan security forces in Nuristan Province. The Taliban
rejected those allegations.
189. Although exact figures of child casualties were not always available in 2013,
improvised explosive device blasts were reported to have killed at least 18 children
and injured 76 others, particularly in the Provinces of Balochistan and Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa. For example, a twin suicide attack on 22 September at the All Saints
Church in Peshawar city, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province, killed 81 people, including
an unknown number of children. A splinter group of the Tehrik-i-Taliban, the
Tehrik-i-Taliban-Jandullah, claimed responsibility. In another attack, on 20 June
2013, a suicide bomber blew himself up at a Shia mosque in Quetta, Balochistan,
followed by a remote-controlled improvised explosive device explosion after
civilians and rescue workers had reached the site, killing at least 28 persons,
including 3 children, and injuring 65 others. Lashkar-e-Jhangvi claimed responsibility.
On 16 February, in a suicide attack by an unknown group in a marketplace near the
Hazara town of Quetta, 92 people were killed and 254 injured, including at least
45 women and 28 children. In addition, attacks by armed assailants, mainly in
Balochistan and the city of Karachi, caused the death of 7 children and injured 16.
Armed clashes between the security forces and armed groups and between armed
groups themselves in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas resulted in the death
of one child and the injury of four.
190. Targeted attacks on schools, teachers and schoolchildren have continued,
mainly carried out by the Tehrik-i-Taliban and aligned local groups, with 78 attacks
reported to the United Nations. The highest number of attacks on schools occurred
in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province (51), followed by the Federally Administered
Tribal Areas (19). In one incident, on 30 March, a school principal was killed and
eight students, between 5 and 10 years of age, were injured when two men on a
motorcycle hurled hand grenades and opened fire in a primary school in Karachi.
Twenty-six attacks targeted female educational institutions. In January 2013, armed
elements reportedly killed five female teachers and two health workers returning by
bus from a community project in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province. On 26 March, a
female teacher was executed in the presence of her 13-year-old son on her way to

40/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

school by two unidentified armed elements in Khyber Agency, Federally
Administered Tribal Areas. On 5 September, a bomb blast outside the Government
Girls’ Primary School in Bannu district, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province, allegedly
carried out by the local Taliban, injured 13 female students below the age of 10.
Several schools, in particular girls’ schools, also received threats by armed groups
resulting in closures. For example, on 15 April, a Taliban faction led by Hafiz Gul
Bahadur threatened boys and girls if they violated his ban on five schools in
Miranshah, North Waziristan. The United Nations also received reports that Pakistan
security forces were using Government school buildings in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Province and Federally Administered Tribal Areas to launch operations against
armed groups.
191. Attacks on polio workers continued, resulting in the killing of several polio
workers and eight police workers providing escort. On 21 November, 11 teachers
and local volunteers were abducted from a private school in Khyber Agency after
polio vaccinations had taken place in the school. The abduction was allegedly
carried out by the Lashkar-e-Islam group, and the victims were released after a few
days unharmed. Hospitals and medical clinics were also targeted. At least four
people were killed, including at least one hospital staff, and five injured in a suicide
bomb attack on a hospital in Bajaur tribal area on 20 April. On 15 June, at least
25 civilians were killed and many others wounded in a coordinated attack claimed
by Lashkar-e-Jhangvi on a bus with female university students and, subsequently,
the Medical Complex in Quetta, where casualties of the first attack received
treatment.
192. The Government took steps towards strengthening its child protection policy
and legislative framework, including the approval of a Balochistan child protection
policy and the vetting and submission to the Cabinet of a child protection act for
Balochistan; formulation of rules of business for the Child Protection and Welfare
Commission in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and for the Child Protection Authority in
Sindh; and the appointment of a Child Rights Commissioner at the federal level and
in all provinces of Pakistan. I encourage the Government of Pakistan to continue its
efforts to better protect children. My country team in Pakistan stands ready to
support the Government in this regard.
Philippines
193. Children continued to be used by all armed groups, including by the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), which signed an action plan with the United
Nations in 2009, the New People’s Party (NPA), the Moro National Liberation Front
(MNLF), Abu Sayyaf and the independent MILF splinter group Bangsamoro Islamic
Freedom Fighters (BIFF). The latter two increasingly engaged in fighting in 2013 in
opposition to the peace process between the Government and MILF. For instance, at
least seven boys between 14 and 17 years of age were used as combatants and
porters by MNLF in their attack on Zamboanga City in September, resulting in the
death of two boys. At least 150 civilians, including 13 girls and 19 boys were used
as human shields in the operation. With regard to Government forces, one case of
the use of a 12-year-old boy as an informant for the police was verified.
194. The United Nations remained concerned regarding the continued reports of
arrest, detention and public exposure of children by the Armed Forces of the
Philippines for alleged association with armed groups. In June, three internally

14-03673

41/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

displaced boys from Maguindanao Province, between 16 and 17 years of age, were
arrested, detained and ill-treated by elements of the national armed forces for
alleged membership with BIFF. The interrogation and reported abuse took place in a
nearby school building. In another case, a 14-year-old boy was arrested in
Zamboanga, detained and handcuffed for almost two weeks under the allegation of
being an MNLF member. Another two boys were arrested on 22 July by the national
armed forces in Loreto town of Agusan del Sur Province for alleged association with
NPA. Medical reports support that they were ill-treated in military custody.
195. At least 20 children (4 girls and 16 boys) were killed and 22 others injured
(6 girls and 16 boys) in 33 separate incidents. Most child casualties resulted from
clashes between the national armed forces and armed groups, including with MNLF
in Zamboanga City in September, as well as in factional fighting within armed groups.
For instance, in February and April, a series of clashes between two MILF factions
in North Cotabato and Maguindanao resulted in the death of at least three boys and
the injury of a 12-year-old girl. In another incident, on 3 April, an 8-year-old boy
died and two more boys, between 12 and 13 years of age, were wounded in
Compostela Valley Province in AFP gunfire. While the national armed forces
alleged that the casualties resulted from a clash with NPA, their families denied such
an incident and filed a murder case against the elements of the national armed
forces.
196. Armed clashes also continued to have an impact on access by children to
education in affected areas. For instance, in July, clashes between BIFF and the
national armed forces resulted in the suspension of classes for 5,883 children in
three municipalities of Maguindanao Province. Owing to tensions between MILF
and MNLF in June, schools were closed in two villages in Matalam municipality of
North Cotabato Province, affecting 398 students. In September, when MNLF
clashed with the AFP in Zamboanga City, three schools were completely destroyed
in fires.
197. Education and health-care personnel were also targeted by armed groups. For
instance, on 23 September in Midsayap Municipality of North Cotabato Province,
BIFF used the Malingao Elementary School as a defence posture, holding
approximately 1,500 adults and children hostage, and abducted nine teachers in the
course of their retreat. On 18 May, Abu Sayyaf abducted a medical worker from the
health centre in Jolo municipality, Sulu Province.
198. On 15 July, the national armed forces issued guidelines on the conduct of
activities in schools and hospitals. I am encouraged by the reported removal of some
national armed forces units from schools upon advocacy by the United Nations in
regular meetings with the Government’s monitoring, reporting and response
mechanism, and encourage continued implementation of the guidelines. Military
camps in or in the vicinity of schools and health clinics affect the right of children
to education and health care and put them at risk of attacks.
199. Peace talks between the Government and MILF were ongoing throughout
2013. A comprehensive peace pact towards the new Bangsamoro entity, including
provisions on the demobilization of MILF forces, was signed on 27 March 2014.
The United Nations continued to engage with MILF on the action plan, to which
MILF signed an addendum on extension on 29 April 2013. A technical support
mission conducted by the Office of my Special Representative and UNICEF in May
resulted in the development of an operational plan outlining practical steps towards

42/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

action plan implementation. However, MILF had not formally responded to
communications by the United Nations in the Philippines at the time of reporting. I
again urge MILF to continue its collaboration with the United Nations and
encourage the Government of the Philippines to continue to provide support in that
regard.
Southern border provinces of Thailand
200. Despite the unprecedented announcement of a “general consensus on the peace
dialogue process” between the Government of Thailand and “people who have
different opinions and ideologies from the State”, including the National
Revolutionary Front (BRN), on 28 February 2013, armed violence continued to
affect the southern border provinces of Thailand.
201. The United Nations received reports of the recruitment and use of both girls
and boys as young as 14 years of age by armed groups, including BRN. The children
are allegedly used mainly as informants and lookouts to track movement of the Thai
security forces. Concerns also persist over the informal association of children with
village defence groups (Chor Ror Bor). According to the Government, local
Government officers in relevant provinces were instructed to raise awareness and
monitor the implementation of regulations issued by the Government to address the
concern of the informal association of children with the Chor Ror Bor. The
involvement of children in armed forces and armed groups remains to be explicitly
criminalized by law. Furthermore, the United Nations continued to receive
worrisome information regarding the administrative detention of children for
alleged association with armed groups. According to the Government, the Criminal
Procedural Code and the Juvenile and Family Court and Juvenile and Family
Procedure Act of 2010 are applied to child suspects in order to protect their rights
and to assure orderly separation, reintegration and assistance. The United Nations
looks forward to an update on the implementation of those commitments.
202. Credible sources indicate that at least 316 improvised explosive device attacks
were reportedly carried out in Narathiwat, Pattani, Songkhla, and Yala Provinces,
including 35 improvised explosive device attacks during the last two weeks of
Ramadan. In April 2013 alone, 45 people were reportedly killed and 79 others
injured in 298 incidents, including bombings and drive-by shootings. Although
exact figures on child casualties were not always available, the United Nations
received reports of 7 children killed and 37 injured in such incidents. For example,
on 21 March 2013, a 9-year-old boy was killed and 14 people wounded when a
bomb was reportedly detonated in an ice cream shop in Pattani Province. Among
several reported child casualties resulting from drive-by shootings, a 2-year-old boy
was severely wounded when his father was killed on 11 December 2013.
203. Armed groups continued to target schools and teachers, although the United
Nations was not able to attribute them to specific parties. At least seven teachers and
three education-related personnel were killed, as confirmed by the Thailand
Ministry of Education. On 23 January, a teacher was executed by two gunmen in a
school cafeteria in front of dozens of children, including his 7-year-old daughter, in
Narathiwat Province. Classes were suspended for several days in 12 schools in
Pattani Province, after the killing of a teacher in a targeted drive-by shooting in
August. Schools were also affected by attacks, including by at least three
improvised explosive device attacks on Government security forces deployed to

14-03673

43/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

protect schools, putting schoolchildren and protected personnel further at risk. In
one attack in Yala Province, on 10 September, two soldiers were killed and a
12-year-old schoolboy injured on school premises.
204. In my previous annual report, I welcomed the fact that the Government and the
United Nations country team were engaging in dialogue on access to the southern
border provinces to conduct independent verification and report on alleged
violations against children, including through minimum operating modalities. While
the Government has continued to facilitate programmatic visits, I regret that no
progress has been achieved on the issue of access for monitoring and verification,
and I strongly urge the Government to move forward with the country team to
facilitate independent access in that regard.

IV. Recommendations
205. I am deeply concerned about the grave violations outlined in the present report
and call upon all parties to immediately cease to commit, and take all measures to
prevent, all grave violations against children, and to take all necessary measures to
make violators accountable.
206. I strongly urge all parties listed in the annexes to the present report engaged in
the recruitment and use of children, the killing and maiming of children, sexual
violence against children and/or attacks on schools and hospitals or protected
personnel to immediately cease all grave violations against children and to enter
into dialogue with the United Nations to develop and implement action plans.
207. I welcome the positive engagement of Member States within the scope of the
campaign “Children, Not Soldiers”, to end the recruitment and use of children by
Government security forces in conflict by 2016 and call on them to continue with
determined and tangible steps with a view to finalizing the development and
implementation of action plans. In that regard, I call upon the donor community to
assist in addressing funding gaps for the implementation of action plans and
associated activities.
208. I welcome the progress made by some non-State armed groups in releasing
children or issuing commitments to better protect children, including the prohibition
of child recruitment in command orders and declarations.
209. I call upon Member States to allow independent access to the United Nations
for the purposes of monitoring and reporting on grave violations against children
and to facilitate contact between the United Nations and non-State armed groups for
dialogue, conclusion and follow-up on action plans in order to bring an end to
violations, in accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council on children
and armed conflict. Such contact does not prejudge the political or legal status of
those non-State armed groups.
210. I note with deep concern the continued attacks on and the military use of
schools and the impact on children in that regard. In line with applicable
international humanitarian law, and in accordance with Security Council resolution
2143 (2014), I encourage Member States to consider adopting, as a priority,
additional concrete measures to deter the military use of schools.

44/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

211. I am also concerned about the detention of children in situations of armed
conflict, in particular in the context of counter-terrorism activities, and call for
urgent measures to address this growing and worrisome trend.
212. I welcome the leadership and important contribution of regional and
subregional organizations to conflict prevention, mediation and peace support
operations. I call on them to further mainstream child protection considerations in
their guidance and policy development, mission planning, training of personnel and
conduct of peace support operations.
213. I call upon the Council to continue to support the children and armed conflict
agenda by strengthening provisions for the protection of children in all relevant
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping, special political and peacebuilding
missions, including the deployment of child protection advisers.
214. I call upon all Member States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its three Optional Protocols. I also call
upon all States parties to these instruments to fully implement the recommendations
of the Committee on the Rights of the Child.

V. Lists in the annexes to the present report
215. Compared with the past year, eight new parties are included in the annexes to
the present report. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, ADF, NDC/Cheka and
the Mayi Mayi Kata Katanga are listed for the recruitment and use of children.
NDC/Cheka are also listed for the killing and maiming of children and ADF for
recurrent attacks on schools and hospitals. In South Sudan, SPLA in Opposition and
the White Army are identified as perpetrators of the recruitment and use of children
and the killing and maiming of children. Furthermore, SPLA has additionally been
listed for the killing and maiming of children. Nigeria was introduced as a situation
of concern in the present report owing to the continued, systematic attacks on
schools and the killing and maiming of children by Boko Haram, which is listed for
those violations. In the Central African Republic, local self-defence militias known
as the anti-Balaka are listed for their widespread involvement in the recruitment and
use and the killing and maiming of children. In addition to the new parties on the
lists, FRPI in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, already listed for the
recruitment and use of, and sexual violence against, children, is also listed for
recurrent attacks on schools and hospitals. The Mayi Mayi Simba “Morgan”, already
listed for sexual violence against children, are also listed for their recruitment and use.
216. Other changes in the list resulted from the fragmentation of previously listed
parties or other changes in the landscape of armed conflict in respective situations.
The following are separately listed in the present report for the recruitment and use
of children: BIFF, formerly part of MILF in the Philippines; pro-Government
militias in Yemen, including the Salafists and the popular committees; and ASWJ in
Somalia, whose factions continued to have varying degrees of relationships with the
Government forces. In the Syrian Arab Republic, armed opposition groups were
treated under the FSA umbrella in previous annual reports. Owing to continuously
shifting alliances, the emergence of new structures and strengthened reporting,
Jhabat al-Nusra, ISIS, Ahrar al-Sahm and YPG were identified as separate
perpetrators of the recruitment and use of children in 2013. Jhabat al-Nusra and ISIS
are also listed for the killing and maiming of children. In the Central African

14-03673

45/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

Republic, the ex-Séléka, already mentioned in the annexes of my previous report,
are now listed separately with associated armed groups for all four violations.
217. The Chadian armed forces were delisted from the annexes in the present report
in view of full compliance with the action plan. I am looking forward to reporting
on the sustainable efforts made by the Government in my report on children and
armed conflict in Chad and in my next annual report. Finally, armed groups that
were no longer active in 2013 and were removed from the annexes include the
SLA-Historical Leadership, SLA-Mother Wing (Abu Gasim), and SLA-Unity in the
Sudan; as the Mayi Mayi Tawimbi in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and,
the Convention patriotique pour le salut du Kodro, the Mouvement des libérateurs
centrafricain pour la justice and the Union des forces républicaines in the Central
African Republic.

46/50

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

Annex I
List of parties that recruit or use children, kill or maim
children, commit rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children, or engage in attacks on schools and/or
hospitals in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of the
Security Council*
Parties in Afghanistan
1.

Afghan National Police, including the Afghan Local Policea,•

2.

Haqqani Networka,b

3.

Hezb-e-Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyara,b

4.

Taliban forces, including the Tora Bora Front, the Jamat Sunat al-Dawa Salafia
and the Latif Mansur Networka,b,d

Parties in the Central African region (Central African Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan)
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)a,b,c
Parties in the Central African Republic
1.

2.

Ex-Séléka coalition and associated armed groupsa,b,c,d
a.

Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix (CPJP)•

b.

Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix fondamentale
(CPJP fondamentale)

c.

Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain (FDPC)

d.

Union des forces démocratiques pour le rassemblement (UFDR)•

Local defence militias known as the anti-Balakaa,b

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.

Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)a,d

2.

Forces armées de la République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC)a,c,•

3.

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)a,c,d

4.

Front de résistance patriotique en Ituri (FRPI)a,c,d

* The parties underlined have been in the annexes for at least five years and are therefore
considered persistent perpetrators.
a
Parties that recruit and use children.
b
Parties that kill and maim children.
c
Parties that commit rape and other forms of sexual violence against children.
d
Parties that engage in attacks on schools and/or hospitals.
•
This party has concluded an action plan with the United Nations in line with Security Council
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).

14-03673

47/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

5.

Mayi Mayi Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain (APCLS)
“Colonel Janvier”a

6.

Mayi Mayi “Lafontaine” and former elements of the Patriotes résistants
congolais (PARECO)a

7.

Mayi Mayi Simba “Morgan”a,c

8.

Mouvement du 23 mars (M23)a,c

9.

Mayi Mayi Kata Katangaa

10.

Nduma Defence Coalition (NDC)/Chekaa,b

11.

Mayi Mayi Nyaturaa

Parties in Iraq
Islamic State of Iraq (ISI)/Al-Qaida in Iraq (AQ-I)a,b,d
Parties in Mali
1.

Mouvement national de liberation de l’Azawad (MNLA)a,c

2.

Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest (MUJAO)a,c

3.

Ansar Dinea,c

Parties in Myanmar
1.

Democratic Karen Benevolent Army (DKBA)a

2.

Kachin Independence Army (KIA)a

3.

Karen National Liberation Army (KNU/KNLA)a

4.

Karen National Liberation Army Peace Councila

5.

Karenni Army (KNPP/KA)a

6.

Shan State Army South (SSA-S)a

7.

Tatmadaw Kyi, including integrated border guard forcesa,•

8.

United Wa State Army (UWSA)a

Parties in Somalia
1.

Al Shabaaba,b

2.

Ahlus Sunnah wal Jamaah (ASWJ)a

3.

Somali National Armya,b,•

Parties in South Sudan

48/50

1.

Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)a,b,•

2.

Opposition armed groups, including former SPLA in oppositiona,b

3.

White Armya

14-03673

A/68/878
S/2014/339

Parties in Sudan
1.

Government forces, including the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF), the Popular
Defense Forces (PDF) and the Sudan police forces (Border Intelligence Forces
and Central Reserve Police)a

2.

Justice and Equality Movement (JEM)a

3.

Pro-Government militiasa

4.

Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahida

5.

Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawia

6.

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement North (SPLM-N)a

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.

Ahrar al-Sham al-Islamia,b

2.

Free Syrian Army (FSA) — affiliated groupsa

3.

Government forces, including the National Defence Forces and the Shabbiha
militiab,c,d

4.

Islamic State of Iraq and Sham (ISIS)a,b

5.

Jhabat Al-Nusraa,b

6.

People Protection Units (YPG)a

Parties in Yemen

14-03673

1.

Al-Houthi/Ansar Allaha

2.

Al-Qaida in the Arab Peninsula (AQIP)/Ansar al-Shariaa

3.

Government forces, including the Yemeni Armed Forces, the First Armoured
Division, the Military Police, the special security forces and Republican
Guardsa

4.

Pro-Government militias, including the Salafists and Popular Committeesa

49/50

A/68/878
S/2014/339

Annex II
List of parties that recruit or use children, kill or maim
children, commit rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children, or engage in attacks on schools and/or
hospitals in situations of armed conflict not on the agenda of
the Security Council, or in other situations*
Parties in Colombia
1.

Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN)a

2.

Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP)a

Parties in Nigeria
1.

Boko Haramb,c

Parties in the Philippines
1.

Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG)a

2.

Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters (BIFF)a

3.

Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF)a,•

4.

New People’s Army (NPA)a

* The parties underlined have been in the annexes for at least five years and are therefore
considered persistent perpetrators.
a
Parties that recruit and use children.
b
Parties that kill and maim children.
c
Parties that engage in attacks on schools and/or hospitals.
•
This party has concluded an action plan with the United Nations in line with Security Council
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).

50/50

14-03673
