S/2008/319

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 May 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 12 May 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 7 May 2008
which I received from Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-33808 (E) 150508

*0833808*

S/2008/319

Annex
Letter dated 7 May 2008 from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from November 2007 to January 2008. I would appreciate your
making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

08-33808

S/2008/319

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report covers the period from 1 November 2007 to 31 January
2008. As at 28 January 2008, the total strength of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) stood at 47,710 personnel from 26 NATO countries and
2,258 from 13 non-NATO countries.
2.
Throughout the reporting period ISAF has continued to assist the Government
of Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. From
1 November 2007 to 31 January 2008, ISAF suffered 237 casualties in total:
31 killed in action, 179 wounded in action, 4 non-battle deaths and 23 non-battle
injuries.
3.
The operational focus has been to maintain pressure on opposing militant
forces while maturing partnered relationships with the Afghan National Security
Forces. The Afghan National Army has continued to grow in both size and
capability. Combined operations, specifically in the southern and eastern regions,
have served to challenge the intentions of the opposing militant forces and develop a
more competent Afghan Army.
4.
ISAF continued to build momentum by sustaining a high operational tempo in
the winter months. The Afghan National Security Forces were given greater
responsibility in the planning and execution of operations. ISAF, in partnership with
the security forces, will continue to conduct operations to expand the authority of
the Government and provide security in order to facilitate reconstruction and
development by the international community.
Security situation
5.
Over the reporting period activity of the opposing militant forces throughout
Afghanistan was influenced by severe winter weather conditions as well as
successful ISAF and coalition operations. Owing to those factors, the opposing
militant forces primarily concentrated on attacks using improvised explosive
devices. An exception to this pattern is the improvised explosive device suicide
attack on the Serena hotel in Kabul. The opposing militant forces are expected to
continue to attempt such attacks in the future. Regional security situations are as
follows:
(a) Regional Command Capital. Despite the attack on the Serena hotel,
Regional Command Capital witnessed a reduction in the number of attacks by the
opposing militant forces. Increased cooperation of the population with the
Government and ISAF resulted in the turnover of large weapon caches.
(b) Regional Command North. The situation in Regional Command North
remained stable, yet volatile. Key powerbrokers are critical contributors to the
stability of this area despite their continued opposition to the authority of the
Government. Their influence prevents significant consolidation of the opposing
militant forces in Regional Command North; however, any fluctuations in this

08-33808

3

S/2008/319

balance of power could cause an imbalance that may allow the opposing militant
forces to gain a stronger foothold.
(c) Regional Command West. Movements of the opposing military forces
from Regional Command South to the west into Farah Province have been reported.
Such activity has been focused in Farah and Badghis Provinces and directed at
softer targets and the Afghan National Police. Major portions of Regional Command
West remain stable, owing in part to successful regional control, as in Herat, and
development efforts by the international community.
(d) Regional Command South. The Afghan National Security Forces,
supported by ISAF, regained control of Musa Qala — a stronghold of the opposing
militant forces and drug trade centre. Continued ISAF pressure forced the opposing
militant forces to adjust their traditional winter patterns and caused significant
tension within the leadership hierarchy. Opposing militant forces remain present
throughout the region, although they are unlikely to seek direct contact with ISAF
and the Afghan National Security Forces, favouring instead asymmetric attacks.
(e) Regional Command East. The combined activities of ISAF, the
Government, and non-governmental organizations in parts of Regional Command
East produced positive results during the reporting period. The coordinated results
of security and development operations are gaining the support of local tribes. The
cooperation of the tribal leaders and their supporters allows sustainable progress in
governance and development and provides an encouraging blueprint for future
strategy in other areas of Afghanistan.
Afghan National Army
6.
Despite a high operational tempo and considerable rebuilding challenges, the
Afghan National Army continues to steadily improve. The army is becoming a more
confident and capable fighting force and with continued mentorship will grow into a
respected organization representative of the people of Afghanistan.
Capability. During the reporting period, Afghan army units continued to show
7
measurable improvement and an eagerness to assume more responsibility. Focused
efforts on improving the army’s ability to sustain combat operations, conduct
logistical planning and plan for and lead operations are developing the Afghan
National Army into a self-sufficient force. Over 50 per cent of the army’s combat
units were considered capable of performing security operations with external
support.
Manning. The Afghan National Army was authorized 70,000 personnel, and
8.
approximately 37,000 were assigned over the reporting period. As at 31 January
2008, present-for-duty rates in the combat units remained steady, with
approximately 22,000 available for operations.
Equipment. Gradual improvement in the overall equipment situation
9.
continued but severe shortages remained. Efforts by countries to equip the army
were gradually increasing.
10. Training. The continuing inability to adequately resource operational mentor
and liaison teams remained the most significant limiting factor to the development
of the Afghan army. These small teams of trainers play a critical role in the growth

4

08-33808

S/2008/319

of the army through their daily interaction with members of various units.
Generating the teams in sufficient numbers remains a matter of priority for NATO.
Afghan National Police
11. The Afghan National Police requires significant effort in development to meet
its desired level of capability. Underdevelopment of the police results in increased
reliance on ISAF and Afghan army forces to offer the Afghan population continuity
in security. Increased support and coordination from the international community is
urgently required for the training, equipping and development of the Afghan police.
12. To improve the development of the Afghan police, Combined Security
Transition Command-Afghanistan has developed a draft concept of operation for
international police mentor teams to provide the basis for ensuring standardized
training within the police. Fielding adequate numbers of mentor teams remains a
priority.
13. Focused District Development, the focal ongoing project of Combined
Security Transition Command-Afghanistan, has been initiated in several districts.
The programme aims at enhancing police capabilities; transforming the Afghan
uniformed police into a service loyal to the Afghan people and Afghan national
interests; building a “prosecutor-driven justice system”; strengthening the linkage of
the uniformed police to provincial, regional and national leaders and staff; and
developing Afghan Ministry of the Interior capabilities by mentoring its leadership.
Counter-narcotics
14. The link between the illicit narcotics industry and insurgency has been
apparent over the reporting period, further fuelling instability and the corruption that
threatens all levels of governance, including police authority and the wider rule of
law. Ultimately, this also prevents meaningful reconstruction and development.
15. The operation to retake Musa Qala proved that, with good cross-agency
coordination, disruption of the illegal narcotics industry can be achieved during
mainstream operations.
16. Within its mandate and resources, ISAF continued to support the
Government’s key counter-narcotics forces, both the Afghan Special Narcotics
Force and the National Interdiction Unit. The Government, supported by ISAF,
conducted a pre-planting information operations campaign that appears to have had
some good results. ISAF has also provided logistic support to a number of Afghan
interdiction operations.
Neighbouring countries
17. The security situation in Pakistan continues to influence the activities of the
opposing militant forces in Afghanistan. The situation became extremely volatile
during the reporting period as a result of the declared state of emergency
(2 November-15 December 2007). The Government of Pakistan moved swiftly to
increase Pakistani military operations in the Swat District and the federally
administered tribal areas. While those operations were not decisive, the increased
tempo of military operations forced the opposing militant forces to focus their
efforts in Pakistan rather than Afghanistan and reduced the flow of fighters from
Pakistan to Afghanistan. However, the various factions of opposing militant forces

08-33808

5

S/2008/319

in the federally administered tribal areas responded strongly to Pakistani military
operations and there were indications that more ruthless commanders had started to
supplant traditional tribal leaders in certain areas.
Programme Takhim-e-Sol
18. The Programme Takhim-e-Sol (Strengthening peace) is ongoing. As at
1 January 2008, nearly 5,000 people were reconciled via the programme. ISAF
remained committed to supporting the programme within means available. President
Karzai previously made reconciliation calls on the opposing militant forces.
Judicial reform and the rule of law
19. ISAF has a limited view of the Afghan judicial and penal system. Evidence
suggests that the penal system continues to suffer from overcrowding, corruption
and poor record-keeping. Widespread corruption and a general lack of awareness
and understanding of the rule of law cause additional problems. The use of tribal or
sharia law remains predominant.
20. During the reporting period, the Afghan Parliament’s adoption of legislation
continued at a slow pace. The absence of legislation minimized the ability of the
judicial institutions to enforce law.
21. Formal State institutions of justice required a renewed and more coherent
strengthening and restructuring effort. Several programmes were under way, with
international support for the development of infrastructure and training of judges
and prosecutors.
Disbandment of illegal armed groups
22. District implementation, which aims at implementing the disbandment of
illegal armed groups at a more practical level by addressing those districts that can
more easily be brought and held under compliance, is currently in its third
implementation round:
(a) When combined with rounds 1 and 2, 52 districts in 22 provinces will
have been affected by the implementation; 20 districts have already been declared
compliant, with an additional 11 districts showing progress. To assist with the
enforcement process, the Government is creating an enforcement unit. However, the
Government has put additional enforced compliance operations on hold at the
political level.
(b) The population in general does not support illegally armed groups, but in
some areas people are coerced into agreeing with their activities. However, it should
also be noted that the disbandment process is less effective in those areas of
Afghanistan that are struggling to cope with security and narcotics challenges, and
the process is further challenged where there is a lack of a sustained ISAF and/or
Afghan security force presence.
(c) ISAF support to the disbandment of illegal armed groups continues.
While the Government still sets the pace of the programme and establishes
programme direction, ISAF representatives attend weekly meetings of the joint
secretariat to ascertain the support and assistance required from ISAF. Such support
is offered within ISAF resource availability.

6

08-33808

S/2008/319

Governance
23. Lack of security, lack of human capacity, inadequate infrastructure and
widespread corruption continue to undermine the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan, and diminish the scope for the supporting role of ISAF and the wider
international community in this critical area.
24. The development of legitimate, fair, robust and sustainable government
institutions at national and subnational levels is a vital precursor to establishing the
legitimacy and credibility of the Government among the Afghan people. Given the
complex ethnic and tribal landscape and the legacy of the past, it must be expected
that progress in this area will be slow. Currently, it is assessed that there is a broad
degree of popular support for the Government. Given the slow progress, however,
there is a growing risk that the Afghan population, increasingly jaded and cynical
about the corruption, cronyism and partisan politics, may lose interest in the nascent
political process.
25. The establishment of the Independent Directorate of Local Government with a
mandate to develop clearer Government policy on subnational governance has been
a positive development. The Directorate has recognized the importance of
traditional tribal and family-based structures for local governance and is attempting
to create a district “shura” model of local governance which capitalizes on those
tribal and family linkages. The intention is that the shuras will provide
representative government at local level in a form that is understood and accepted
by locals and which interfaces with the national governance structures.
Development
26. Interaction between ISAF and the civilian environment is a key activity to
ensure successful operations in Afghanistan. Development of an integrated strategy
that optimizes support in line with the Afghanistan Compact would significantly
further the synchronization of the efforts of the Government and the international
community. Numerous difficulties persist with gaining the support of the average
Afghan citizen and security remains a concern while attempting to show positive
regional or countrywide effects.
27. Provincial Reconstruction Teams continue to play a key supportive role
throughout the majority of the provinces and remain a primary mechanism for
Afghan development and extending the reach of the Government and the
international community. Coherence of effort between lead nations and the
Government is essential in this respect.
28. An effective comprehensive approach by the international community aimed at
synchronizing the efforts of the major stakeholders within Afghanistan, coupled
with a decision to support all pillars of the Government’s development strategy, is
necessary to ensure a level of success and bring stabilization to Afghanistan. During
the reporting period, the Government was on track to meet the strategy deadline of
March 2008 for debt relief and preferential loan treatment set by the World Bank,
thereby reaching one of the major milestones for future poverty reduction within
Afghanistan.

08-33808

7
