V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

13. Decides to review, at its thirty-seventh session,
the follow-up of the Third General Conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
B
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT DECADE FOR AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 51 (XIV) adopted by the industrial Development Board at its fourteenth session on
19 May 1980,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/46 of 23 July 1980 on the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa,
Noting also the decisions adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its second extraordinary session held at
Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980, '" and by the Council of
Ministers of that organization at its thirty-fifth ordinary
session, held at Freetown from 18 to 28 June 1980, ' 7 to
take appropriate measures to implement the Monrovia
Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa,"
1. Proclaims the 1980s as the Industrial Development Decade for Africa;
2. Calls upon the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Economic Commission for Africa, in close co-operation with the Organization of African Unity, to formulate proposals to
implement the programme for the Industrial Development Decade for Africa and to monitor its progress;
3. Supports the establishment of a co-ordination
unit or group within the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization for the Industrial Development Decade for Africa and requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide appropriate resources to enable that
organization to perform its role in the preparation and
implementation of the activities of the Decade;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for
Africa to initiate appropriate contacts with the organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
in order to contribute to the success of the Industrial
Development Decade for Africa and to report on the
action taken, through the Industrial Development Board,
at its fifteenth session, and the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1981, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December J980
35/67.

Science and technology for development
A

REPORT OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
""SeeA/S-11/14.
"See A/35/463 and Corr. I, annex I.
"See A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.722 (XXXIII)

127

Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, which gave prominence
to the role of science and technology in promoting the
development of developing countries,
Recalling also its resolution 34/218 of 19 December
1979, in which it endorsed the Vienna Programme of
Action on Science and Technology for Development'"
and decided, inter alia, to establish the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development, the Centre for Science and Technology for
Development, as a new and organizationally distinct
entity within the Secretariat, and the United Nations
Financing System for Science and Technology for Development, including the United Nations Interim Fund
for Science and Technology for Development,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/48 of 23 July 1980,
Having heard the statement by the Executive Director
of the Centre for Science and Technology for Development,''0

Reaffirming the paramount need for and importance
of the application of science and technology to development in establishing a new international economic order
and in carrying out the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade,'' 1
Reaffirming also the need to strengthen the role of the
United Nations system in the field of science and technology,
Recognizing the role of the United Nations system in
assisting developing countries to promote their selfreliance in the field of science and technology,
1. Takes note of the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development on its first and second sessions,'" and endorses the
resolutions and decisions contained therein;
2. Endorses the broad framework of a study of the
system-wide efficiency of the United Nations system in
the field of science and technology for development,''' as
recommended by the Committee in its decision 4 (II) of
4June 1980;""
3. Recommends that all the organs, organizations
and bodies concerned in the United Nations system
should support fully the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation and the
Centre for Science and Technology for Development in
the formulation of the operational plan for the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development, as contained
in resolution I (II) adopted by the Committee on 4 June
1980;" 4
4. Decides that the Centre for Science and Technology for Development should be allocated the
necessary resources lo permit it to carry out its work
programme, as mandated by the General Assembly in
its resolution 34 /218 and by the Committee in its resolution 1 (11) and other relevant resolutions;""
"Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development. Vienna. 20-3/ August /979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda). chap. VII.
'''' Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifih Session.
Second Committee, 7th meeting, paras. 7-13.
,,, See resolution 35; 56 above. annex.
"' Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fi/ih Session.
Supplement No 37 (A 1J5eJ7)
"A/35/184 and Add.I.
.,. See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement t•io. 37 (A ,, '37). part two. annex.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

128

5. Decides that in 1981 the Committee shall, if
necessary, hold its session in two parts, the first part in
May and, if the report of the Intergovernmental Group
of Experts on the United Nations Financing System for
Science and Technology for Development is ready for
consideration, the second part late in August or early in
September for not more than a week, mainly for the purpose of considering that report.

3. Urgently appeals to all Governments, particularly
those 'Jf developed countries, to contribute substantially to the Interim Fund so that the agreed target of no
less than $250 million may be reached by the earliest
possible date, and expresses its thanks to those Governments that have contributed to the Interim Fund.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
B
UNITED NATIONS INTERIM FUND FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development,""
Recognizing the vital importance of science and
technology to the development of developing countries
as an area of international co-operation and as a central
component of the new international economic order and
of the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, 91
Bearing in mind the provisions of its resolution 34 /218
of 19 December 1979, by which it established, inter alia,
the United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development, and of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1980/48 of 23 July 1980,
Noting that on 19 May 1980 the Interim Fund was
declared operational,
Taking note of the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development on its first and second sessions 92 and of the first
meeting of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on
the United Nations Financing System for Science and
Technology for Development,°'
Recognizing that the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts, together with the practical
progress achieved through the activities of the Interim
Fund, will contribute to the long-term arrangements of
the Financing System,
Recognizing also the unprecedented efforts of developing countries in submitting more than seven hundred
projects for financing by the Interim Fund,
Concerned that, at the United Nations Pledging Conference for the Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development, held on 27 March 1980, the
agreed target of $250 million was not attained,
Convinced that both the Vienna Programme of Action
and General Assembly resolution 34 /218 provide a basis
for future consensus and collaboration in an area of
vit:i 1 importance to all countries,
I. Notes with concern that the financial resources
currently available to the United Nations Interim Fund
for Science and Technology for Development are
grossly inadequate to meet the already demonstrated
needs and aspirations of developing countries for
science and technology for development;
2. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring that the
Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development, as endorsed by the General
Assembly, is respected and fully implemented;
" Ibid.,
para. 10.

Thirty-fifth Session, Second Committee, 7th meeting,
•

35/68.

Report of the World Food Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, as well as the agreed conclusions of
the Committee of the Whole Established under General
Assembly Resolution 32/ 174 on some aspects concerning food and agriculture, 96
Recalling also its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December I 974, by which it established the World Food
Council to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism to
provide over-all integrated and continuing attention to
the successful co-ordination and follow-up of policies
concerning food production, nutrition, food security,
food trade and food aid, as well as other related matters,
by all organizations of the United Nations system,
Recalling further the Programme of Action to Eradicate Hunger and Malnutrition, contained in the
Manila Communique of the World Food Council,9' which
was adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 32/52 of 8 December 1977, the Mexico Declaration of the World Food Council,9 8 adopted by the
Assembly in its resolution 33/90 of 15 December 1978,
and Assembly resolution 34/110 of 14 December 1979
on the report of the Council on the work of its fifth ministerial session, 99
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/58 of 24 July 1980 on the report of the World
Food Council on the work of its sixth ministerial session, ioo
Expressing its concern about the unsatisfactory
progress made by the international community towards
achieving the general objectives of the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition, IOI
Noting that the food outlook for many developing
countries in the 1980s, particularly in Africa, is even
more critical than in the past,
Noting also the growing imbalances in the world food
economy,
Noting with concern the strong impact of imports of
food-stuffs on the balance of payments of food-importing
"'!hid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/34/34),
part two, sect. II, para. I 8.
" Ibid., Thirty-second Session. Supplement No. I 9 (A/ 32/ 19),
part one, para. I.
"" Ibid., Thirty-third Session. Supplement No. /9 (A/33/19 and
Corr. I), part one, para. I.
·
"/hid., Thirty-fourth Session. Supplement No. /9 (A/34/ 19).
""' Ibid.. Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. /9 (A/35/ 19).
"" Report of the World Food Conjerence, Rome 5-/6 November /974
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E 75.11.A.3), chap. I.
