UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/38
20 September 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3696th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 September 1996,
in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The
situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Tajikistan of 13 September 1996 (S/1996/754).
"The Security Council expresses its concern at the deterioration of
the situation in Tajikistan and at the increasing tension along the TajikAfghan border. It reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan and to the
inviolability of its borders.
"The Security Council is also concerned about the violations of the
Tehran cease-fire agreement of 17 September 1994 (S/1994/1102, annex I) and
about the failure of both parties to implement the Ashgabat agreements. It
is, in particular, concerned about the ongoing fighting in the Tavildara
region and the seizure of the towns of Jirgatal and Tajikabad by the
opposition. The Council demands the immediate cessation of all hostilities
and acts of violence.
"The Security Council recalls the commitments made by the Government
of Tajikistan and by the leadership of the United Tajik Opposition (UTO) to
resolve the conflict and to achieve national reconciliation through
peaceful means. It regrets that these commitments have not so far been
honoured.
"The Security Council commends the efforts of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and urgently calls upon the
parties to cooperate fully with UNMOT and to ensure the safety of the
personnel of the United Nations and other international organizations and
also calls on them to lift all restrictions on the freedom of movement of
UNMOT personnel. In this connection it is concerned about the large-scale
use of landmines due to the threat it creates for the population and UNMOT
personnel.

96-24816 (E)

200996

*9624816*

/...

S/PRST/1996/38
English
Page 2

"The Security Council welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General
to arrange for an inter-agency mission to Tajikistan to determine how to
respond most effectively to the humanitarian situation.
"The Security Council welcomes the renewed work of the Joint
Commission and the results of their efforts in reducing tensions in the
Garm region and in the Karategin valley.
"The Security Council emphasizes that the primary responsibility rests
with the Tajik parties themselves in resolving their differences. It
recalls paragraphs 3 and 4 of its resolution 1061 (1996) of 14 June 1996.
"The Security Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative and calls upon the parties to cooperate fully with
him in resuming the inter-Tajik talks. The Council reiterates the
importance of the continuation of direct political dialogue between the
President of the Republic of Tajikistan and the leader of the UTO for the
peace process and encourages them to hold their next meeting as soon as
possible."

-----
