62

General Assémbly-Thirtieth Sesaion

throughout a given time frame, in order to enable them
to plan their national economic development in a more
systematic and productive manner,
A ware that total disbursements of official development assistance have been steadily decreasing from an
estimated 0.5 per cent of gross national product sorne
teri .. years ago to about 0.3 per cent nrt975,
Realizing the necessity of enlisting popular support
for the new international economic order, inter alia
through the mobilization of public opinion in both developed and developing countries, as called for in the
Intemational Development Strategy,
Stressing the need for observance of the principles
of justice, mutual understanding, co-operation, interdependence and equity in the economic behaviour of
nations and peoples towards one another,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the heads of
other appropriate bodies, as well as with the Committee
for Development Planning, to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session a study on ways and
means of accelerating the transfer of real resources to
developing countries on a predictable, assured and continuous basis, bearing in m.ind the relevant provisions
of the above-mentioned resolutions, particularly those
of Assembly resolution 3362 (S-VII);
2. Urges anew the economically advanced countries which have not yet done so to reach the target for
official development assistance laid down in the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade by taking appropriate
measures, such as including in their national budgets,
if possible through forward planning, a provision for
the financing of such assistance;
3. Decides to consider the above-mentioned study
at its thirty-first session.
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975
3490 (XXX). lmplementation of the World Plan
of Action adopted by the World Conference
of the lnternational Women's Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the Intemational Women's Year, adopted by the World Conference of the
Intemational Women's Year, 611 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
Convinced that a comprehensive and · thorough review and appraisal of progress made in meeting the
goals of the World Plan of Action is of crucial importance for the success of the Plan and should be undertaken at regular intervals by organizations of the United
N ations system,
Recognizing that the results -0f the exercise of the
implementation of the World Plan of Action will contribute to the consideration of the review and appraisal
of the Intemational Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade and will consequently promote the role of women in the development process,
l. Calls upon the goveming bodies of the U nited
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
65 Report of the World Conference of the lnternational
Women'a Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.l), chap. II, sect. A.

Children's Fund, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the relevant specialized agencies
and the regional commissions to review annually the
activities they have undertaken in accordance with the
World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
Objectives of the International Women's Year and to
integrate such reviews into the reports submitted to the
Economic and Social Council;
2. Affirms that a system-wide review and appraisal
of the implementation of the World Plan of Action
should be undertaken, in the years of the biennial review
and appraisal of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
as an input to the process of review and appraisal of
progress made under the Strategy;
3. Urges all States and the relevant organs of the
United Nations to report to the Secretary-General on
measures they have taken for implementing the World
Plan of Action and .to _include relevant information
about the integration of women in development;
.4. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to consider reports submitted on measures undertaken
in implementation of the World Plan of Action, in
accordance with the Intemational Development Strategy, and to report its findings and conclusions on major
trends and policies with regard to the status of women,
particularly the integration of women in development,
to_ the Economic and Social Council through the C9mrruttee for ~evelopment Planning and the Committee
on Review and Appraisal;
5. Urges the Comrnittee for Development Planning,
the Committee on Review and Appraisal and the Economic and Social Council to pay special attention to
the question of the status of women in the review and
appraisal of the International Development Strategy;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements for the first review and appraisal of
the implementation of the World Plan of Action.
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975
3503 (XXX). Establishment of an International
Fund for Agricultural Development66

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the continuing food problem of the
world is afflicting a large segment of the people of the
developing countries and is jeopardizing the most fundamental principles and values associated with the
right to life and human dignity,
Considering the need to improve the conditions of
life of the poor in the developing countries and to promote socio-economic development within the context of
the priorities and objectives of the developing countries, giving due regard to both economic and social
benefits,
Conscious of the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade67 and especially the need
to spread the benefits of assistance to ali,
Bearing in mind its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974 containing the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order,
with special reference to developing countries most
seriously affected by the economic crisis and to the
66 See also p. 79, item 60.
67 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Second Committee

need for effecting the transfer of technology, particularly for food and agricultural development,
Recalling paragraph 13 of its resolution 3348
(XXIX) of 17 December 197 4 and resolutions I and
Il, 68 adopted by the World Food Conference on 16 November 1974, on the objectives and strategies of food
production and on the priorities for agricultura! rural
development, respectively,
Recalling resolution XIIJ,G 8 adopted by the World
Food Confercnce on 16 November 1974, in which the
Confcrence recognized that:
(a) A substantial increase in investment in agriculture is needed for increasing food and agricultura!
production in the dcveloping countries,
( b) Provision of an adequate supply and proper
utilization of food are the common responsibility of all
members of the intemational community,
( c) The prospects of the world food situation call
for urgent and co-ordinated measures by ali countries,
Recalling further that, in resolution XIII, the
World Food Conference resolved that an International
Fund for Agricultura! Development should be estabished immediately to finance agricultura! development projects primarily for food production in the
developing countries, that all developed countries and
ali those developing countries that are in a position
to contribute to the Fund should do so on a voluntary
basis, that the Fund should be administered by a governing board, consisting of representatives of contributing developed countries, contributing developing
countries and potential recipient countries, taking into
consideration the need for ensuring equitable distribution of representation among these three categories and
regional balance among the potential recipient representations, and that the disbursements from the Fund
should be carried out through existing international
and/ or regional institutions in accordance with the regula ti o ns and criteria to be established by its governing
board,
Recalling that at its seventh special session, devoted
to development and international economic co-operation, the General Assembly decided, in section V, paragraph 6, of resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
197 5, to set in motion the establishment of an International Fund for Agricultura! Development, to come into
being by the end of 1975 with initial resources of SOR
1 billion of the International Monetary Fund,
l. Notes the progress made by the.Meeting of Interested Countries on the Establishment of an lnternational Fund for Agricultura! Oevelopment,69 convened
by the Secretary-General, in advancing the proposals
matle by the World Food Conference in íts resolution XIII;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make all necessary preparations for and to convene in Rome, as soon
as possible after the Meeting of Interested Countries
has indicated to him that it has completed the preparatory work, a conference of plenipotentiaries on the
establishment of an International Fund far Agricultura! Oevelopment, to which shall be invited:
(a) All States;
68See ·Report of the World Food Conference, Rome,
5-16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Salea No,
E.75.11.A.3), chap. 11.
69 See A/10333, annex.

63

( b) Representatives of organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly
to participate in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under the auspices of
the Assembly, in the capacity of observers, in accordance with its resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974;
(e) Representatives of the national liberation movements recogni2ed in its area by the Organization of
African Unity, in the capacity of observers in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX)
of 10 Oecember 1974;

(d) Representatives of the specialized agencies and
of ~he International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as
of mterested organs of the United Nations;

( ~) _Observers from regional intergovernmental orgamzations;
(f) Observers from interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council;

. 3. Desires that the Secretary-General, in convenmg the conference of plenipotentiaries, take into account paragraph 6 of resolution XIII of the World
Food Conference and the prospects, based on indications of_ the intentions of States, of reaching as closely
as poss1ble the target for the initial resources of the
proposed International Fund for Agricultura! Oevelopment referred to by the General Assembly at its
seventh special session;
4. Invites the conference of plenipotentiaries:
(a) To adopt and open for signature an agreement
for the establishment of a~ In~ernational Fund for Agricultural Oevelopment, wh1ch 1s to become a specialized
agency of the United Nations;
( b) To receive and appropriately record pledges to
the Fund, taking into account a target of SOR 1 billion;

(e) To establish a Preparatory Commission for the
International Fund for Agricultura! Oevelopment to
make ali arrangements necessary to enable the Fund
to commence its operations at the earliest possible date
considering the urgency expressied by the General As~
sembly in resolution 3362 (S-VII);
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation

w~~ the _Chairman of the Advisory Committee on A:d-

mm1strative and Budgetary Questions, to malee available to the conference of plenipotentiaries amounts, .including expenses for summary records, not exceeding
$22,000 and to the Preparatory Commission far the
International Fund for Agricultura! Development
amounts not exceeding $272,000, provided that these
amounts, together with other expenses to be incurred
by the_ U~ited Nations ~r by th~ Food and Agriculture
Orgamzat1on of the Urnted Nations in connexion with
t~e establishment of the Fund subsequent to the adoptlon of the present resolution by the General Assembly, are to be repaid by the Fund as soon as possible
after it has been established and resources become
av•ilable to it;
·
f Requests the Economic and Social Council to
arrange far the negotiation with the Preparatory CommJssion for the International Fund far Agricultura!
~velo1_>ment of an. a~reement with the Fund to con- ·
stítute 1t as a spec1alized agency in accordance with
Articles 57 and 63 of the Charter of the United Nations,

General Assembly-Thirtieth Se11ion

64

to enter ínto such agreement, subject to the approval
of the General Assembly, and to arrange with the Preparatory Commission for the provisional application of
that agreement as appropriate.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

General Assembly, at its thirty-4irst session, proposals
?n the_ organizational arrangements of the special fund,
mcludmg draft statutes, in order to enable the fund
to become operational not la ter than 1977.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3504 (XXX). Special fund for the land-locked
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Rec{llling its re<;olution 3311 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, by which it requested the Secretary-General
to submit to it, at its special session devoted to devel- opment and international economic co-operation, a
comprehensive study on the transit problems of the
land-locked developing countries and a complete study
on the establishment of a fund in favour of those
countries,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1755 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, by which the
Council defined the scope of a complete &tudy on the
establishment of the fund,
A ware of the recognized problems and •particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind the various resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and its related organs and by
the specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent
measures in favour of the land-locked developing
countries,
Aware also of the need to implement immediately
the resolutions adopted by the United Nations, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and other related organs of the United Nations calling
for special measures in favour of those countries,
Reafjirming that the land-Iocked developing countries, as a result of their geographical Iimitation, are
doubly disadvantaged, especially with regard to their
additional transport, transit and transshipment costs,
Expressing its conviction that this adverse situation
has severely limited and hindered the development efforts of those countries, and noting with concern that,
up to this date, not enough concrete and effective operational measures have been taken,
Expressing its appreciatian to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development for the preparation of the comprehensive report on this subjeot, 70
Having c'?nsidered the report of the Secretary-General on spec1al measures related to the particular needs
of the· land-locked developing countries7º with a view
to the establishment of a special fund,
Recalling its decision at its seventh special session
regarding the immediate establishment of a special fund
in favour of the land-locked developing oountries, 71
Reafjirming further the need to assist the land-locked
developing countries in accelerating and intensifying the
development of th~ir transport infrastructure,
l. Decides to establish immediately a special fund
for the land-locked developing countries to compen.xite
for their additional transport and transit costs;
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in consultation with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to submit to the

3505 (XXX). lntegration of women in the
development process

10 A/10203.

O/Jicial Records of the General /-,ssembly, Seventh
Special Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/10301), p. 10, itero 7.
71 See

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975
International Women's Year,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,
Recalling further its i:_esolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 Sept~mber 1975_ on development and international
econom1c co-operatton,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3276 (XXIX) of
10 December 1974 on the World Conference of the
International Women's Year and 3342 (XXIX) of
17 December. 197 4 on "'.ornen and development, and
also Econom1c and Social Council resolution 1959
(LIX) of 28 July 1975 on the World Conference of
the International Women's Year,
T aking note of the principies of the Declaration of
~exico on the Equality of Women and their Contribut10n to Development and Peace, 1975,72 and the World
~lan of Action for the Implementation of the Objecttves of the International Women's Year, 73 adopted by
the World Conference of the International Women's
Y ear, held at Mexico C:ity from 19 June to 2 July
1975, and ~lso the _resolutions of the Conference relating
to the full mtegrat1on of women in development, 74
Recognizing that the results of the World Conference of the International Women's Year, in particular
the Wo~ld Plan of Action, indicate that the role of
~ornen m the development process must be made an
mtegral part of the establishment of the new intemational economic order,
·
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
185~ (LVI)_ of 16 May 1974 on the significance of the
full mtegratton of women in development,
A ~are_ that the economic value of the substantial
contnbution of women to over-all development has not
been widely recognized,
Recognizing that women, owing to the unequal treatment _they have endured, constitute a vast potential
force m. the process of economic and social change, as
well as m th~ struggle against all forros of exploitation
and oppress1on,
Emphasizing that accelerated development requires
~he real and effective participation of roen and women
m ali areas of national activity and the creation of the
nec~~sary condition~ . ~or equality of rights, opportumties and respons1b1hties for men and women

'

72

Re[;ort of the JJ;orld Co'.'ference of the International
Women s Year (Uruted Nations publication Sales No
E.76.IV.1), chap. l.
'
.
78 Ibid., chap. U, sect. A.
74 /bid., chap. 111.
