S/PV.7085

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7085th meeting

Tuesday, 17 December 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lamek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2013/721)

13-62250 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1362250*

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2013/721)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Japan and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/721, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: When I was last here three months
ago in September (see S/PV.7035), I highlighted the
positive trajectory as Afghanistan undergoes ambitious
security, political and economic transitions. Today I
can reiterate that progress continues and efforts are by
and large on track, although not without challenges and
temporary setbacks and at a heavy cost in life and limb
to Afghan and international soldiers. I would like to
express my condolences over the deaths of six NATO
soldiers who were killed today in a plane crash in
southern Afghanistan.
Yes, there is volatility. There is uncertainty.
However, the fundamental elements required to
enhance stability in Afghanistan and the wider region

2/29

17/12/2013

are being consolidated as the drawdown of international
forces continues. The consultative loya jirga’s recent
endorsement of the bilateral security agreement
between Afghanistan and the United States reinforced
the widespread expectations for the finalization of
that important framework for ongoing partnership
and, by extension, continuity in broader international
engagement.
Predictability is critical to building confidence
in the future. We must resolutely continue working
together to ensure a sovereign and sustainable State
that will never again become a haven for international
terrorism and organized crime, including, notably,
narco-business. This is in everyone’s interest.
The critical importance of holding credible polls
on time and in full accordance with the Constitution
is widely appreciated. Technical preparations and
political momentum for the agreed election day of
5 April remain on track and are further advanced than
previous polls. The security challenges are real and
should be proactively and realistically addressed in
order to promote maximum inclusion and avoid any
pretext for disenfranchisement or delay. This includes
transparency on the location and status of polling
centres, with important decisions to be made in the
coming period.
The polls and the surrounding political environment
should also contribute to national unity and not enflame
or exacerbate tensions, including ethnic or sectarian
divisions. Observation efforts — not just on election
day but of the environment leading up to polling and
the compilation of results — can strengthen confidence.
I urge Member States, together with regional and
multilateral organizations, to contribute to efforts in
this regard.
Afghanistan’s regional relationships and establishing
its rightful place in a cooperative neighbourhood will be
the best guarantors of future stability and sustainability
both for Afghanistan and its for neighbours. I particularly
welcome the positive momentum in relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. The recent high-level visits
are an important demonstration of mutual willingness
to build trust and cooperation in all spheres of mutual
interest. I was encouraged by the recent reception of
Afghanistan’s High Peace Council at the highest levels
in Islamabad. There is now broad recognition across the
region that political solutions will be key to sustainable
peace, security and prosperity.

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7085

The Istanbul Heart of Asia process continues
to demonstrate potential in enhancing multilateral
relationships and regional approaches on Afghanistan.
Recent progress in talks on the Iranian nuclear
programme in Geneva is being closely followed in
Kabul as potentially contributing to an environment
more conducive to peace and stability in Afghanistan
and the region, as well.

Continued momentum in the development
agenda is required to ensure continuity and progress
throughout the upcoming political transition. In taking
stock of progress on the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework and in building a forward-looking agenda,
arrangements are currently being finalized for a special
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board meeting on
29 January 2014.

In my meetings with the leaderships of
Afghanistan’s neighbours and regional partners, I heard
concerns centred around current uncertainties. This
included the potential for volatility post-2014 if there is
a vacuum that could encourage the spread of Al-Qaedalinked international terrorism and criminality, with
implications across the region. Most immediately,
another record-setting year of poppy cultivation and
production in Afghanistan — resulting in some 5,500
tons of opium — is of grave concern. This menace
threatens the health, security and economic well-being
not just of Afghanistan but also of the region and the
wider international community.

Some areas, such as elections, have seen
encouraging results, but greater efforts are needed in
others, such as the implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women. UNAMA’s
latest reporting has found that Afghan authorities
registered more reports of violence against women
under the law over the past year, but that prosecutions
and convictions remained low. Increased levels of
reporting are a positive development, but must be met
by real will to enforce legal prohibitions on harmful
practices against women, including the prosecution of
perpetrators.

It is civilians who continue to bear the brunt of
the conflict. By the end of November, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
had recorded 2,730 deaths and 5,169 injuries — a
10 per cent increase over the same period in 2012. The
Mission’s data continues to show that armed opposition
groups are responsible for the vast majority of such
casualties. As Afghan forces assume the security
lead, this brings with it increased responsibilities for
ensuring the protection of civilians. Working to build
understanding of human rights obligations, together
with promoting the transparency and accountability of
Afghan security institutions, should be an important
element of international training and assistance going
forward.
Humanitarian needs will likely increase.
Afghanistan remains a country of chronic poverty,
which exacerbates vulnerability to natural disasters and
conflict. Winter is an additional stress. Even as such
needs increase, so do the dangers to those seeking to
assist. So far in 2013, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has recorded 237 incidents against
humanitarian personnel, facilities and assets, including
36 deaths, 24 detentions, 46 injuries and 72 abductions.
The Security Council has already expressed its strong
condemnation of two particularly tragic incidents in
this period. On behalf of the humanitarian community
in Afghanistan, I express my deep gratitude for that.

The role of UNAMA, and more broadly of the
United Nations in Afghanistan, appears to be widely
appreciated. A need for greater internal United Nations
coherence and efficiencies is recognized. Assistance
must be delivered in ways that reinforce and strengthen
the capacity of Afghan institutions to deliver services
to their people, in line with agreed national priorities.
This includes increasingly integrated efforts across the
United Nations family in support of comprehensive
approaches to tackling the illicit economy and improved
coherence in the delivery of justice and enhancing the
rule of law.
While not seeking in any way to pre-empt Council
discussions on a future mandate, at this juncture I
foresee the continued need for an integrated mission
streamlined around core areas, namely, good offices in
support of Afghan-led processes, leading development
coherence among international stakeholders, and
human rights monitoring and advocacy, including a
particular focus on the rights of women and children,
as well as humanitarian assistance.
I thank Council members for their clear statements
in previous debates supporting stability in UNAMA’s
resourcing in the coming biennium. The budget must
necessarily be informed by the mandate, which remains
extensive and complex. In particular, I would like to
highlight the value of the Mission’s national footprint,
which is a unique network. Our field offices are
essential to mandated elections work and human rights

13-622503/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

monitoring in particular. Reductions in funding would
most likely, and most unfortunately, require additional
closures.
Essential elements of Afghanistan’s transition are
coalescing and efforts remain generally on track. The
key at this delicate time is enhancing predictability. We
must remain patient and not waver in our determination,
ensuring that mutual efforts remain firmly focused on
strategic interests and ultimate goals shared by both
Afghans and the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for your leadership of the Council for the
month of December. I take this moment also to welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2013/721) and to thank our dear friend,
Special Representative Kubiš, for his presence today
and his able leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.
Our meeting here this December, 12 years to the
month since leaders of Afghanistan’s political parties
signed the Bonn Agreement, is a lucid reminder of the
progress in Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban
regime. December evokes the hopeful atmosphere of
Bonn in the winter of 2001, when unity was in sight,
emergence from the shadow of violence and fanaticism
seemed possible and the vision of an Afghanistan as a
home for all — one of tolerance and moderation — was
taking shape.
We have made significant progress since those days
and have seen many of our objectives come to fruition.
More than 6 million Afghan refugees have returned
to the country after being forced to live outside their
homes for years due to war and conflict. Our State is
now based on a democratic Constitution. Millions of
Afghans have access to education and health care.
And the Afghan people enjoy more freedom and
rights than they have for decades. Although we face
challenges and continue to engage those who seek to
reverse our progress, we are advancing apace to stand
independently, take command of our future and realize
a peaceful and secure Afghanistan.
This year in particular has been pivotal to the
advancement of our goals and the solidification of our

4/29

17/12/2013

achievements. The year 2013 marks the culmination
of transition, paving the way for Afghanistan to
embark upon the transformation decade. Since June,
the Afghan National Security Forces have assumed
full responsibility for security nationwide, proving
themselves ever more capable of defending the country
and doing so with confidence and determination.
As 2013 comes to a end, Afghans look ahead to
the transformation decade. That milestone signifies
Afghanistan’s progress towards sustainable peace and
marks the start of a new phase of cooperation with the
international community. In the past year, we have
renewed our international partnerships and signed a
number of strategic partnership agreements with several
countries, including the United States. In May of last
year, President Karzai and President Obama signed the
Enduring Strategic Partnership Agreement. That was
followed by 15 months of comprehensive negotiations
on, and then the completion of, the text of the bilateral
security agreement.
Last month in Kabul, 2,500 Afghan representatives
endorsed that agreement during a consultative loya jirga.
The resolution adopted at the end of the Jirga reaffirmed
that the agreement should ensure Afghanistan’s peace,
security and development and should be accompanied
by visible steps taken on specific issues in the leadup to the signing of the agreement. As reiterated by
the leadership of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan,
those entail assurances for measures to end the
military raids on Afghan homes, and the launching of
negotiations between the Afghan High Peace Council
and the Taliban. We are certain that the bilateral
security agreement will be signed in a timely manner.
As a next step, Afghanistan is ready to begin formal
negotiations on a status of forces agreement for the
post-2014 NATO presence in Afghanistan, which will
continue our enduring security and defence partnership
with NATO.
We are preparing for our next milestone, namely,
presidential and provincial council elections. The
timely holding of transparent, free and fair elections is a
reflection of strong national consensus about the future
direction of Afghanistan and its status as a democratic,
peaceful and prosperous nation. To that end, technical
and logistical preparations are proceeding with
momentum. The Independent Election Commission has
announced the final list of 11 presidential candidates
and their running mates. More than 3 million new
voters have registered for the elections, of which one

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

third are women. That number is expected to increase
in the lead-up to elections. As we move towards the
final stage of preparations, Afghan national security
institutions have put in place a comprehensive strategy
to ensure security on election day.
Afghanistan’s peaceful future requires a political
solution to the conflict. Reaching out to the armed
opposition, building confidence and engaging in peace
talks remain central to our efforts towards peace and
stability. In spite of some setbacks, we are working to
renew momentum in the peace process. In that regard,
the Government has been continually involved at the
regional level, launching a new phase of dialogue
between Afghanistan’s and Pakistan’s leadership
through bilateral and trilateral meetings in London,
Kabul and Islamabad. We are fully committed to the
success of reconciliation, and we are conscious that
further progress depends upon not only the dedicated
efforts of all stakeholders but also the opposition’s
united voice for peace.
Alongside security and political transition, in the
light of the withdrawal of international forces at the end
of 2014, we are strengthening regional understanding
and cooperation to ensure the success of Afghanistan’s
transition. In recent months, we have ramped up efforts
to increase contact with neighbours and countries
in the region. President Karzai has engaged with
regional leaders to enhance development and security
cooperation, focusing on transition and beyond, in
New Delhi, Islamabad, Beijing, Dushanbe and Tehran,
as well as at the Shanghai Cooperation Summit in
Bishkek. The leaders agreed that they had a strategic
stake in Afghanistan and that peace and stability in
the country were essential to peace and stability in the
region. As we move forward, we will benefit from all
forms of cooperation, particularly the Istanbul Process.
As we proceed steadily towards the transformation
decade, it is essential that the successes of the past 12
years be maintained. Progress depends upon preserving
the rights of all Afghans, particularly women and girls,
upholding the rule of law and furthering economic
transition. Our continuing partnership with the
international community is critical to success in those
areas, as reflected in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. We are determined to meet our related
commitments and we hope that the international
community will be similarly steadfast in its promises
to Afghanistan.

S/PV.7085

Speaking today at this December meeting of the
Council, mindful of our recent and future milestones
and of the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead,
I again recall the spirit of Bonn. We knew during that
December 12 years ago that the challenges in front of us
were great. But we were also aware of the tremendous
potential for change and for the establishment of a stable,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. As
we arrive at 2014, we ground our progress firmly in the
constitutional foundations established 12 years ago, in
the spirit of hope and optimism that was alive in Bonn,
and with commitment to build upon and maintain the
great achievements of the past decade.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his leadership of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan for
their dedication. I also thank Afghanistan’s Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his
persuasive engagement in New York.
International and Afghan forces have made
significant progress in improving security throughout
Afghanistan over the past decade. We have reduced
Al-Qaida’s capacity to prepare and launch terrorist
attacks. And we have reduced the Taliban’s control of
territory, which provided sanctuary to Al-Qaida and
affiliated terrorist groups.
Progress on the security front has created conditions
in which basic services such as health and education
are being delivered, and for sustainable economic and
social development over the longer term. That was the
first fighting season with the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) in the lead for security across the country.
The ANSF now conducts 95 per cent of conventional
operations and 100 per cent of the planning.
In Uruzgan, where Australia’s military and
reconstruction efforts have been focused, the ANSF
have now assumed responsibility for security but
Australia will continue to support the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in 2014 through
the provision of trainers and advisers in Kabul and
Kandahar and embeds to ISAF headquarters.
Post-2014, Australia remains committed to the
NATO-led training, advice and assistance mission.
But a key consideration for Australia will be the

13-622505/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

legal arrangements. An agreed bilateral security
agreement between Afghanistan and the United States
is a precondition for an Australian commitment post2014. We welcome the loya jirga’s endorsement of that
agreement and urge its prompt signing.
The international community will view credible,
inclusive and transparent elections in 2014 as a decisive
milestone. It is a core commitment under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.
We acknowledge the important support role that the
United Nations is playing in preparing for elections and
in encouraging an electoral process that includes all
sectors of the population and maximizes participation,
especially by women. Australia itself is helping to build
more effective electoral institutions and increased voter
participation through civic awareness.
Further progress by the Afghan Government
against the reform priorities jointly identified and
agreed at the Tokyo conference is vital to Afghanistan’s
goal of self-reliance, as well as the international
community’s ability to sustain unprecedented levels of
support. The United Nations itself has played a critical
role in supporting Afghanistan’s development and will
continue to do so following security transition.
On human rights, Afghanistan must not lose the
gains of the past 12 years. In particular, the law on
the elimination of violence against women must be
implemented fully, and we encourage Afghanistan
to finalize and implement a national action plan on
women, peace and security. We also urge the continued
protection of all persons, including children, media
workers and detainees. And we condemn attacks
against humanitarian and development workers, which
have become more frequent.
Australia supports an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process. We welcome the commitment
of Afghanistan and Pakistan to work together on the
peace process. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), we are promoting
the role of the Taliban sanctions regime in facilitating
that process.
I should note that, as the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime’s Afghanistan Opium Survey
2013 highlights, Afghanistan’s narcotics industry is a
major threat to stability, helps fund the insurgency and
undermines governance. As we know, there is no quick
fix solution. It requires a comprehensive approach that
includes effective security measures, law enforcement
6/29

17/12/2013

and the creation of viable alternative livelihoods. It
needs to be Afghan-led and fully supported by local
authorities and communities.
The Security Council’s continued support
for Afghanistan is essential. As Security Council
coordinator and the pen holder on Afghanistan,
Australia is now focused on securing a strong mandate
for UNAMA in March next year. We very carefully
note the Secretary-General’s recommendations on
UNAMA’s future role. We will work with partners to
ensure that a renewed mandate has the backing of the
Afghan Government and is appropriately resourced to
ensure UNAMA is able to fulfil its role.
In conclusion, as the Secretary-General notes,
Afghanistan is entering its final year of political and
security transition in an environment of uncertainty. But
the international community is importnatly committed
to assisting the Afghan Government to ensure the hardwon gains of the past decade for the women, men and
children of Afghanistan are not reversed. Afghanistan
must seize the opportunity before it, and we have the
hope and optimism it will and is doing so, to consolidate
the foundations for a stable, secure and prosperous
nation.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
and leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). At the same time, I thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan to the United Nations, for his statement.
Rwanda appreciates the considerable progress made
by Afghanistan in the past few years, in particular in the
security, economic and political areas. That said, the
transition in Afghanistan still faces many challenges,
including the very worrying security and humanitarian
situation and the opium cultivation. Indeed, the security
of civilians and humanitarian workers, as noted by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2013/721), is of great
concern.
Along those lines, my delegation firmly condemns
the attacks in Uruzgan province on 26 November and
in Faryab province on 27 November, which led to the
death of nine humanitarian workers. We call on the
Afghan Government to do its utmost to ensure that the
perpetrators of those crimes are held accountable.
The Afghan Government has made definite
progress in preparing for next year’s presidential and
13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

provincial council elections. Rwanda is pleased to
note the inclusion of women on the electoral lists as
candidates and election officers. We regret, however,
that there was no qualified female candidate for the
presidential election. The increased participation
of women will contribute to the legitimacy and
transparency of the electoral process. That is why we
call on the Afghan National Security Forces to take the
necessary security measures so as to allow women to
enjoy their political rights and to vote independently in
inclusive, transparent and credible elections.
Rwanda notes its deep concern about the rise in
the opium production in Afghanistan. a drug that has
serious consequences for the health of consumers as
well as the security, stability and development of the
country and the region. In that respect, we welcome
the commitment of the Afghan Government and the
initiatives of its international partners, in particular the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to counter
that scourge. Eradicating the cultivation of that drug
requires a comprehensive and holistic approach as part
of a long-term security, development and institution
capacity-building strategy.
Improving relations and bolstering cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours on a wide
range of issues, in particular those related to peace,
reconciliation, regional security, development and
humanitarian assistance, are crucial to lasting peace and
stability in the region. In that context, we are pleased
with the implementation of bilateral and multilateral
cooperation frameworks between Afghanistan and its
various regional partners.
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our call to United Nations Member States and the other
development partners that made pledges at the various
donor conferences to meet those commitments. We also
encourage the international community to continue its
partnership with the Afghan Government, in particular
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
We would like to conclude by saying that Rwanda
will continue to support the Afghan Government
in completing the transition phase and over the
transformation decade that is beginning. We reiterate
our support for UNAMA and the United Nations
agencies working to support the Afghan authorities
in strengthening peace and stability and rebuilding
the country through robust regional commitment, in
particular with regard to border security and combating
drugs.

S/PV.7085

Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján
Kubiš, for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.
Azerbaijan highly values his tireless work and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in promoting peace and
security in the country. I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement, which clearly outlines his
Government’s views and analysis of the latest processes
concerning Afghanistan.
In just a couple of weeks, Afghanistan will
enter a final and momentous year in its political and
security transition. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/721) identifies progress in some areas during
the period under review. It also depicts complex
challenges that the country continues to face and the
efforts undertaken by Afghanistan, with the support of
the international community, to address them. In light
of the difficulties of the transition period, it is critical
to step up the implementation of mutual commitments
between Afghanistan and its international partners.
The international community should remain actively
engaged in the long-term stabilization process in
Afghanistan. Predictable assistance should be ensured
to that end.
The year 2014 will signify several milestone
events in the process of consolidating Afghanistan’s
sovereignty and national unity, which will determine
the future of the country. In particular, the upcoming
presidential and provincial council elections will
further strengthen the political foundations of peace,
stability and development in the country. We welcome
important advancements and steps taken in the run-up
to the elections, such as the finalization of the list of
candidates and measures to encourage the registration
of female candidates, promote voter inclusiveness and
enhance the security of the electoral process. We join
the Secretary-General’s call on all parties to commit to
a peaceful conduct of the elections and to respect the
right of the Afghan people to exercise their vote.
Ensuring national peace and reconciliation
constitutes a fundamental element of durable stability
and unity in Afghanistan. The efforts undertaken by
the Government in that regard, including through
the outreach activities of the High Peace Council
and the implementation of the Afghanistan peace
and reconciliation programme, are commendable.
At the same time, we note the lack of progress in the
establishment of a formal peace process and underline

13-622507/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

the necessity of creating the proper conditions for
inclusive talks. This process must be based on the full
respect for the Constitution of Afghanistan and must
preserve the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned character.
No attempts to undermine Afghanistan’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to reverse its
years-long democratic achievements must be allowed.
Afghanistan’s
strengthened
dialogue
and
cooperation with its immediate neighbours and other
regional counterparts on a wide range of issues,
including peace and reconciliation, regional security
challenges, economic development and humanitarian
assistance, are essential for the peaceful and stable
future of the country and the region. Having said this,
we welcome Afghanistan’s active interaction with
its various partners within bilateral and multilateral
frameworks.
We also stress the importance of the Istanbul
Heart of Asia Process as a unique regional platform for
dialogue and partnership aimed at promoting security,
confidence and cooperation, with Afghanistan at its
core. The effective realization of practical activities and
projects within all six confidence-building measures
requires thoroughly elaborated alternative funding
modalities, and we look forward to receiving the results
of an expert study at the next senior officials meeting,
to be held in January in New Delhi.
Azerbaijan and Afghanistan share strategic and
fraternal relations with solid bilateral cooperation. As
the international security forces prepare to withdraw
next year, Azerbaijan will continue to strengthen those
relations by providing capacity-building assistance and
training programmes to Afghanistan in many areas
of mutual interest. Our long-time participation in the
International Security Assistance Force and declared
intention to partner with NATO in a post-2014 training,
advice and assistance mission derive from our regional
security concerns and strong willingness to work
towards the establishment of stability in Afghanistan
and the region. Azerbaijan will continue to be a part
of collective efforts in Afghanistan and is capable of
contributing significantly in terms of troops, training
and financial assistance, as well as its growing transit
capacity.
I want to conclude by stressing that Afghanistan is
no longer at the crossroads. It has made an irreversible
choice to pursue the path of building a secure, self-reliant
and self-sustainable State. The Afghan people have long
struggled and have made significant sacrifices for that
8/29

17/12/2013

cause. I want to reaffirm my country’s strong support
for Afghanistan’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity, and our resolve to stand by the brotherly Afghan
nation in its aspirations.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. I also wish to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubiš for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.
The year 2013, which is coming to an end, is of
great significance to Afghanistan. The nomination
of candidates for the 2014 presidential election has
concluded and preparations for the elections have
already entered their final stage. The Afghan National
Security Forces are making good progress, with the
Forces already starting to assume responsibility for
security and stability across the country. All those
achievements have laid a good foundation for the
country’s move into the next transformative stage.
China welcomes that development.
However, at this time, Afghanistan is still facing
a daunting task in restoring national stability and
reconstruction. China supports Afghanistan’s ongoing
promotion of Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peaceful
reconciliation to achieve durable peace, stability and
development at an early date. In that regard, I would
like to make the following five points.
First, China welcomes the efforts carried out by
the different segments of Afghan society in preparation
for the 2014 presidential and provincial elections, and
it hopes that the Afghan Government will continue to
take effective measures to ensure that the elections can
be held in a safe and smooth manner. We call on the
international community to provide active assistance
to Afghanistan with a view to creating the conditions
for the elections to be held on time and in a successful
manner.
Secondly, China is concerned about the growing
number of security incidents that have resulted in
civilian deaths, especially those of women and children.
We urge the parties concerned to strictly abide by
international humanitarian law and international law
so as to effectively protect civilians. China supports the
Afghan Government in its continued efforts to build
the capacity of the military police so as to better carry
out its responsibility of maintaining security and safety
across the entire country to ensure that the security

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

transition phase can be successfully completed. The
parties concerned should give full consideration to the
need to maintain safety and stability in Afghanistan
and to transfer the responsibilities of security to
Afghanistan in a steady and orderly manner.
Thirdly, China supports the Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned reconciliation process and supports the
efforts carried out by the Afghan High Peace Council
toward reconciliation. It calls on the international
community to help the Afghan Government and
people assume responsibility in moving the national
reconciliation forward and to create an enabling
external environment. China welcomes the positive role
played by Afghanistan’s neighbours and the assistance
they provide in that connection.
Fourthly, China encourages the Afghan Government
to further promote economic and social development and
urges the international community to effectively honour
their commitments of assistance as soon as possible
and to enhance the efficiency of their assistance. It is
important to scale up inputs in areas that have a direct
impact on people’s livelihood. Priority should be given
to providing support and assistance in such areas as
agriculture, education and health. It is also important to
help Afghanistan to strengthen its own jobs-generating
capacity and to achieve durable economic and social
development to enhance people’s standard of living,
thereby eliminating the breeding ground for terrorism,
narcotics production and smuggling and transnational
organized crime.
Fifthly, regional cooperation on the question of
Afghanistan should be further improved and enhanced.
Relevant cooperation should respect the legitimate
concerns of the countries of the region. It is essential
to give an important role to the regional organizations,
including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
China is ready to continue to support and actively
participate in regional cooperation on Afghanistan,
including hosting the fourth ministerial meeting of the
Istanbul Process next year, in order to make continued
contributions to maintaining regional peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan.
During the past year, the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
been positively received by different sectors of Afghan
society and the international community as a whole.
China supports UNAMA’s continuing to work under its
mandate to strengthen communication and cooperation
with the Afghan Government and the parties concerned

S/PV.7085

in order to enable it to play an even bigger role. China is
also ready to work to with the international community
to explore ways and means for UNAMA to play a better
role in 2014 and beyond.
China and Afghanistan are friendly neighbours.
China has always been committed to developing
bilateral relations and has actively participated in
reconstruction in Afghanistan. In a spirit of mutual
benefit and common development, and in the light of
Afghanistan’s real needs, China is ready to continue to
provide Afghanistan with support through multilateral
and bilateral channels. We are ready to work with the
international community to contribute to the early
realization of long-term peace, stability and sustainable
development.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We once again welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš, whom we
thank for introducing the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/721). We also welcome the statement made by
Ambassador Zahir Tanin. I have five brief comments
to make.
First, on the electoral process, we welcome the
fact that a foundation has been laid for credible
presidential and provincial council elections to take
place — in other words, elections that could be accepted
by everyone. Preparations are well under way with the
electoral framework in place, a final list of presidential
candidates and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission that has been established. At the same
time, we must continue to insist that the process be fair
and inclusive. In that regard, it is striking that there
are quite a number of women candidates for provincial
council seats and that three of the presidential tickets
include women as candidates for the vice-presidency.
The measures undertaken by the Independent Election
Commission have certainly had an impact in driving the
registration of women forward. Successful elections are
an important step towards the country’s future and its
sustainability; however, we must also ensure security.
Secondly, as Mr. Kubiš reminds us, it is
disheartening that terrorism, in its various forms and
spheres, is continuing to spread and even worsening in
some regions. The number of terrorist acts and victims
thereof has contiuned to increase, with their attendant
tragic toll in death and injury. The measures employed
are increasingly grotesque and nobody, not even United
Nations officials and humanitarian workers, is safe from
the danger of being afflicted by an act of terrorism. As
an illustration of that, we deplore the recent terrorist

13-622509/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

attacks in Uruzgan and Faryab provinces carried out at
the end of November.
I mention that because we cannot leave behind a
security vacuum when international forces withdraw at
the end of 2014. It is imperative that the withdrawal
be offset by strengthening the capacities of Afghan
security forces so that they can be duly prepared to
meet the challenges and looming threats. That also
means dispelling the current uncertainty that prevails
in Afghanistan. A specific example is the approval
by the consultative loya jirga of the bilateral security
agreement with the United States. It is now important
that the agreement be concluded, so that NATO can
also move forward to define its mission proposal, which
the Security Council will have to examine.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the lack of progress
in the peace process over recent months. We know
from our own experience that the process is lengthy
and arduous: in the case of Guatemala, it took several
decades before a peace was signed. We therefore stress
the importance of continuing to move towards the goal
of stability and national reconciliation. We support the
efforts of the head of the High Peace Council towards a
national Afghan process led by Afghans. On the other
hand, we are encouraged by the heightened dialogue
between Afghanistan and Pakistan on peace and
stability underpinned by economic cooperation.
Fourthly, the Tokyo commitments acknowledge
the importance of safeguarding and strengthening the
progress made in the area of human rights over the
past decade so as to ensure the future development of
Afghanistan. The protection of the rights of women and
children should continue to be a priority. When it comes
to civilian casualties, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is providing
valuable cooperation through verification activities
and by promoting international humanitarian law and
respect for human rights, carefully following up on real
incidents of civil casualties.
Finally, I should like to refer to the upcoming
renewal of UNAMA’s mandate. Guatemala will
continue to support a solid United Nations presence in
order to ensure that Afghanistan, with the support of
the international community, can appropriately face
2014 and beyond. In that regard, we believe it is vital
for the next Government to be able to rely on stability,
continuity and predictability in order to ensure an
orderly transition. To that end, it is advisable to extend
UNAMA’s mandate for a further 12 months — without
10/29

17/12/2013

any major changes to its mandate and while continuing
the same basic activities. Moreover, UNAMA has to be
given adequate resources to enable it to fully fulfil its
mandate.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to Mr. Ján Kubiš for his briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan and for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/721). We also
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his detailed statement.
We are pleased to note that, in comparison with
previous reports, the one under consideration today
is more appropriate and objective in its evaluation of
trends in the situation in Afghanistan, which continues
to be of some concern. However, unfortunately, we
would note that, once again, the report does not touch
upon the true nature of the threat emanating from
the Taliban/Al-Qaida, since neither organization is
mentioned, as is also the case with regard to other
terrorist armed groups whose aggressive activities in
the country led to an increase in the number of Afghan
civilian and military deaths. The acuteness of that
problem is illustrated by the attacks by the opposition
in the spring, including the seizing of a number of areas
in the country, including parts of Kabul. Every now and
then it seems as though there is a certain element of selfserving reassurance in NATO’s decision to withdraw
its military presence from Afghanistan. We do not
suscribe to such well-meaning approaches, all the more
so since during the 2014 presidential elections — whose
successful holding we sincerely wish for the friendly
Afghan people — fighters intend to demonstrate all
their destructive capacity.
We are particularly concerned about the rise in
terrorist activities in the three north-eastern Afghan
provinces of Badakhshan, Takhar and Kunduz. In
October alone they grew by 30 per cent. The number of
militants from the Taliban and the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan in those provinces rose to 5,000 individuals.
Yet just around three to five years ago northern
Afghanistan was far more calm and prosperous. We do
not conceal the fact that we are extremely concerned
at the situation that may arise in the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and the bordering region of Central
Asia after the withdrawal of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF).
In that regard, we can ask a reasonable question.
How appropriate is it to hasten the transfer of
responsibility for security in the country from the
13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

international military presence to the Afghan military,
and making that all follow an artificially imposed
withdrawal timeline? How long will the coalition forces
cope with the tasks mandated by the Security Council
for stabilization and the preparation of an effective
and viable Afghan security and law enforcement force
and armed forces? All of those issues require detailed
and self-critical reporting from NATO to the Security
Council at the end of next year.
For our part, we stand ready to continue interacting
with NATO in Afghanistan after 2014, with the
understanding that the new alliance mission will have
an appropriate international legal base in the format
of a Security Council resolution. Without that, the
practical agreements existing in Afghanistan today
would legally collapse. We feel that after completing
the task of stabilization, foreign contingents will no
longer need to be present in the country.
We have no doubt that the rise in the influence of
fighters both facilitates and has brought about the 50 per
cent increase in the production of opiates this year.
There is a horrifying statistic — the number of drug
addicts in Afghanistan is more than 1 million, which is
almost 3 per cent of the Afghan population. Moreover,
according to the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, of that total 300,000 are children. The
issue, which is a threat to peace and stability not only
in Afghanistan but in the region and the whole world,
requires collective efforts and the participation of all
players. The problem cannot be ignored by saying that
the ISAF mandate has no counter-narcotics element.
The time has come to look, in an unbiased manner, at
the formats for possible cooperation between NATO
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), first and foremost in counter-narcotics and
lost opportunities, all the more so given that the CSTO
has solid experience in stemming drug flows on the
perimeter of the northern border of the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan.
Russia fully supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government in the progress it is making in the national
reconciliation process, including through dialogue
between the High Peace Council and representatives of
the armed opposition, under the leading role of Kabul,
and on the basis of the well-known triad of principles:
laying down arms, recognizing the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and decisively cutting
ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.

S/PV.7085

At the same time, it is obvious that, as the
international contingents withdraw from Afghanistan
and with progress in establishing the Afghan National
Security Forces, the motivation for the armed opposition
to come to an agreement will diminish. The story of the
Qatar office, which the Taliban supposedly temporarily
closed without even waiting for its requests to be met,
is just another demonstration of that. Taking that into
account, we believe that demonstrating flexibility
with regard to easing the Security Council’s sanctions
regime with respect to the Taliban is possible only if the
Taliban take steps towards compromise.
We share the view on the need to activate and
strengthen the role of regional cooperation by assisting
with Afghanistan’s revival as a peaceful, independent
and economically flourishing State. We are convinced
that the most optimal platform for synchronizing
regional efforts to provide assistance to Afghanistan
is the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, in which
almost every country in the region is represented,
including Afghanistan. At the same time, we think it
unjustified that sometimes excessive emphasis is placed
on the Istanbul Process. Its added value has not yet
been proven. Participation in working group meetings
is often low, and a number of States have demonstrated
slight interest in its proceedings.
Achieving significant results in stabilizing
Afghanistan is possible only through our collective
efforts. If we want to achieve maximum results with
our outside partners, we need to coordinate our efforts.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
has provided invaluable assistance. Its role will only
increase with ISAF’s withdrawal.
For our part, we shall continue our active efforts for
the stabilization of the situation in Afghanistan, both
bilaterally and by participating in large-scale regional
projects aimed at ensuring the sustainable economic
development of the country and of the Central Asia
region. We have consistently and respectfully supported
the efforts of the Afghan Government in establishing
conditions conducive to long-term stabilization in the
country and in the region on the basis of the friendly
partnership that has traditionally existed between
Russia and Afghanistan. That is in line with the national
interests of our countries and contributes to a stable and
multisectoral development of the whole region.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
take this opportunity to express my condolences for the

13-6225011/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

helicopter accident that just led to the loss of lives of six
American personnel in Afghanistan.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for your expression of condolences.
I would like to welcome Special Representative
Kubiš back to the Council and thank him for his
briefing. On behalf of my Government, I also extend
our appreciation to the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
entire United Nations country team for their efforts,
which have been crucial contributions as Afghans
have made significant advances for their country. We
also welcome Ambassador Tanin and thank him once
again for both his valuable comments and valuable
engagement.
We can see evidence of the transformational
changes in Afghanistan in the United Nations 2013
Human Development Index. Since 2000, Afghanistan’s
score in the Index has improved by nearly 60 per cent,
more than any other country. Without losing sight of
the remarkable transformation Afghanistan has made
in the past 12 years, today I would like to address the
ongoing security, political and economic transition.
On the security side, with the help from the
United States military and our many allies, the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) have assumed
lead responsibility for security country-wide. That
milestone also signalled a shift in the International
Security Assistance Forces’ primary mission from
combat to training, advising and assisting the ANSF.
In that connection, the outcome of recent deliberations
by the loya jirga on the United States-Afghanistan
bilateral security agreement shows that the Afghan
people overwhelmingly support the partnership that
has brought us this far and want very much to sustain it.
Concluding the bilateral security agreement
promptly would be an important signal to Afghans that
their interests will be protected and that their concerns
about the future will be addressed. The United States
is committed, in the spirit of the bilateral security
agreement, to remain a strong partner in support of
the Afghan people’s effort to achieve lasting peace,
security and development.
Turning to the political transition, my Government
is encouraged by the progress Afghans have made
in preparing for the April 2014 elections. Two key
electoral laws have been enacted. Election and
complaints commissioners have been appointed. A
12/29

17/12/2013

list of candidates has been finalized, and each of the
presidential tickets represents a broad-based coalition,
which is critical to ensuring that all groups have a stake
in both the process and its outcome.
Like the United Nations and other countries that
have been supporting Afghanistan’s development,
the United States strongly supports that democratic
process, but I emphasize that we neither endorse nor
favour any individual party or candidate. The choice
of president and provincial officials rests, as it should,
entirely with the Afghan people. The United States will
continue to assist the Afghan Government, especially
its electoral authorities, as well as the Parliament and
civil society, in their efforts to strengthen the electoral
system and prevent fraud. It is our profound hope that
the April presidential balloting will prove to be a truly
unifying moment for the Afghan people — an event
that will both consolidate recent gains and provide a
sturdy platform in future for improved governance.
Economically, the United States and our
international partners have in the past decade made a
substantial contribution to Afghanistan’s progress. For
example, we have built or rehabilitated more than 3,000
kilometres of road, laid fibre-optic cables that connect
Afghans to one another and other countries, and made
it easier for Afghans to obtain access to basic health
and educational services. Looking ahead, we strongly
support a vision for regional cooperation called the New
Silk Road. Secretary Kerry announced our backing just
last week for the CASA-1000 transmission line project,
which will allow existing hydroelectric generation
capacity in Central Asia to be used in Afghanistan
and Pakistan. We appreciate the efforts of the World
Bank and the Islamic Development Bank to advance
CASA-1000, and hope that other donors will join us in
supporting this promising initiative.
More generally, we are convinced that expanding
connections to its Central Asian neighbours will
greatly enhance Afghanistan’s ability to diversify its
economy, increase trade and create more and better
opportunities for its people. Accordingly, we fully
endorse Afghanistan’s goal of acceding to the World
Trade Organization in 2014.
The progress Afghanistan has made has been
built in part on the contributions of development
professionals and humanitarian personnel, helping
the local population on projects of every description.
Their effort can entail severe risks. Already this year,
there have been more than 230 incidents of violence
13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7085

directed at such personnel, imperilling both Afghans
and the international staff and volunteers who work in
partnership with them. Just three weeks ago, separate
attacks Uruzgan and Faryab provinces claimed the lives
of nine aid workers. My Government extends its sincere
condolences to the families of the victims of all such
attacks. We call on all parties in Afghanistan to respect
the neutrality and basic human rights of humanitarian
and development workers.

The political transition requires a smooth electoral
process and inclusive, integrative reconciliation.
Timely, inclusive, transparent and credible elections
will have a salutary impact on efforts for peace and
stability. The Afghan Government is making extensive
preparations for the elections. Security challenges to
the electoral process ought to be addressed in the early
stages of planning, as underlined by the SecretaryGeneral.

Finally, with an eye to continuity, my Government
hopes that the Council will approve, in March 2014, a
one-year renewal of UNAMA’s mandate. The Mission
continues to play a vital role in Afghanistan and we
see no need to alter the time frame or scope of its
core mandate at this time. We must also ensure that
UNAMA has adequate resources to carry out its many
important priorities, which include the coordination
of humanitarian and other assistance, support for
regional diplomacy, the political process, human
rights monitoring, institution-building and capacity
development.

Simultaneously, an inclusive, Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process must
take off and succeed. A political settlement is central
to that process. We have called on all stakeholders to
seize this opportunity and support the peace efforts.
That is imperative to reverse the destructive cycle of
conflict. For its part, Pakistan will not choose sides,
play favourites or interfere in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan, nor should any other State. The people
of Afghanistan must have the necessary strategic and
political space to make their own decisions.

In conclusion, I would like to cite the words of
a leader whose legacy has been much on our minds.
“In the history of nations”, observed Nelson Mandela,
“generations have made their mark through their
acumen to appreciate critical turning points and, with
determination and creativity, to seize the moment”.
Today, the leaders of Afghanistan and their people and
the international community all have choices to make.
My Government hopes that we will choose to seize the
moment now so that in 2014 we may continue working
in partnership — lasting partnership — on behalf of a
safer, more prosperous and more united Afghanistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his comprehensive briefing
to the Council today. His dynamic leadership and the
effective role of United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) continue to contribute
to stabilization in Afghanistan. We also welcome
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, to the Council and deeply appreciate his
statement as well as the perspective he has shared with
us.
Afghanistan stands at the threshold of a
consequential year. The people of Afghanistan will be
taking important steps in the coming months to shape
their destiny. We wish our Afghan brothers and sisters
success as they negotiate difficult political, security
and economic transitions.

Pakistan will continue to do all it can to help
Afghanistan sustain the reconciliation process. At the
request of the Afghan leadership, Pakistan appealed
to the Taliban to enter into dialogue with the Afghan
Government. We have released Taliban prisoners,
including Mullah Abdullah Ghani Baradar, and
facilitated his dialogue with the High Peace Council.
Our leadership at the highest level remains engaged with
that Council, which is making commendable efforts for
peace under the leadership of Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani.
We feel that the potential of the Doha process or a
similar process must be explored to accelerate the pace
of reconciliation and political settlement.
The drawdown of NATO-International Security
Assistance Forces in Afghanistan should not lead to
a security vacuum. It is vital that arrangements be in
place beyond 2014 to bolster stability in Afghanistan
and its neighbourhood. The Afghan security forces
and institutions are gaining increased capacities and
capabilities, as the Secretary-General has noted in
his report (S/2013/721). The transformation of a war
economy to a peacetime economy will require greater
reliance on strong domestic growth and resources.
The Secretary-General’s report indicates a slowdown
in economic growth because of the uncertainty
surrounding the political and security transitions. That
can be turned around by the active involvement and
continued assistance of the international community
for Afghanistan’s reconstruction and economic

13-6225013/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

development. That is important not just for economic
viability but political stability.
Pakistan, despite its own resource crunch, is
contributing to Afghanistan’s economic reconstruction.
During his recent visit to Kabul, Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif announced the enhancement of our assistance
for reconstruction and socioeconomic development in
Afghanistan, from $385 million to $500 million.
The peoples of Pakistan and Afghanistan are bound
by strong bonds of geography, history and kinship.
Those bonds will never be atrophied or severed. A
peaceful, stable, united and prosperous Afghanistan
is in Pakistan’s interests. During his recent visit to
Kabul, Prime Minister Sharif said “your stability is our
stability”.
In developing its relations with Afghanistan,
Pakistan is focused on three interlocking dimensions,
namely, the Afghan peace and reconciliation process;
a strong, comprehensive bilateral relationship with
an emphasis on trade and economic partnership; and
regional economic cooperation.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s positive
evaluation of the constructive engagement between
Pakistan and Afghanistan on economic cooperation,
security issues and the peace process. Today
Mr. Kubiš mentioned the positive momentum in
Pakistan-Afghanistan relations to build trust and foster
cooperation. I welcome his remarks.
Prime Minister Sharif is reaching out to the Afghan
leadership in pursuit of his vision for a peaceful and
prosperous neighbourhood. In their three meetings — in
Islamabad, London and Kabul — Prime Minister Sharif
and President Hamid Karzai resolved to draft a strategic
partnership, address common challenges of extremism
and terrorism, and work for economic development that
benefits the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan, as
well as the entire region. Our two countries have agreed
to enhance connectivity, including through a motorway
between Peshawar and Kabul and rail links between
Peshawar and Jalalabad and Chaman and Spin Boldak.
We are planning for a hydropower project on the Kunar
River. We are also confident that our two countries
will be able to enhance bilateral trade to reach up to
$5 billion by 2015.
We have assured Afghanistan of optimum utilization
of the Afghanistan-Pakistan transit trade agreement
so as to facilitate its access to foreign markets through
Pakistani seaports and land routes. People-to-people
14/29

17/12/2013

contacts have also increased. This year, another 600
Afghan students joined thousands of others who were
already pursuing higher education studies in Pakistan.
On the regional plane, we also agreed to accelerate
transregional projects, including the Central AsiaSouth Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project,
known as CASA-1000, and the gas pipeline involving
Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India, known
as TAPI.
The international community, led by the United
Nations and the Afghan Government, should work to
create conducive conditions for the early return and
sustainable reintegration of over 3 million registered
and undocumented Afghan refugees still in Pakistan.
Pakistan has renewed their stay and legal status until
the end of 2015. Pakistan will not be able to absorb
fresh inflows of refugees.
The report of the Secretary-General refers to record
levels of poppy cultivation and opium production in
Afghanistan. Illicit drugs production and trafficking
fuels instability and ruins health and security
conditions, involving hundreds of millions of lives,
as Mr. Kubiš noted in his briefing today. Pakistan is
directly affected by the narcotics trade. We have been
taking part in regional efforts in that regard and hope
that the Afghan Government will be able to eliminate
poppy cultivation with the support of regional and
international organizations.
It is incumbent on us to secure the PakistanAfghanistan border through constant vigilance,
effective management and real-time communication.
Militants should not be allowed to trigger rounds of
escalating tension by pitting border security forces
against each other. More importantly, we should
have regular contacts between the armed forces and
intelligence agencies of the two countries so as to
prevent periodic volatility along the border.
The United Nations role in supporting the Afghan
people and Government will be crucial in the post-2014
period. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
United Nations should concentrate on good offices, the
support of Afghan-led political processes and coherent
approaches to equitable and sustainable development.
Let me conclude by quoting Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif, who, during his recent visit to Kabul, said,
“Pakistan has a vital stake in Afghanistan’s success
and in its journey to peace and development, and I

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7085

reassure you that Pakistan will stand by and support
the Afghan people every step of the way”.

incidents increased by 74 per cent and armed clashes by
48 per cent.

Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/721) and for his excellent
work as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), despite the extremely harsh
conditions. I also thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for
his intervention.

We deplore the fact that the number of civilian
casualties, including women and children, is steadily
rising — it is up by 13 per cent compared to last year. We
are particularly disturbed by the situation of children,
who are subjected to indiscriminate, untold suffering.
Faced with that tragedy, the end of which is far from
sight, we are determined to express our gratitude to all,
particularly the Government’s technical working group
on children and armed conflict, UNICEF and UNAMA,
and their tireless efforts to end violence against women
and children.

Afghanistan continues to face many challenges,
despite enormous efforts that have led to tangible
progress. The situation concerning security and human
rights and the narcotics issue have not fared any better.
The political situation has shown little improvement,
in particular, the peace process and dialogue remain
deadlocked. Given the situation, we call on all political
actors to recommit to that process. We urge the
Chairperson of the High Peace Council to continue
to take initiatives towards a successful conclusion,
and we call on UNAMA to continue efforts to reduce
inter-ethnic and intertribal tensions.
Nevertheless, on a positive note, tangible progress
continues in Afghanistan’s relations with the other
countries of the region. The same holds true with regard
to implementation of the Kabul process concerning the
coordination of development assistance.
The presidential and provincial elections to be
held next year remain a focus of attention for Afghan
politicians and the entire international community. The
technical and institutional preparations under way, the
publication of candidate listings, as well as the naming
of the Independent Electoral Complaints commissioners
and the provision of substantial logistical and financial
resources towards the effective fulfilment of their
mission, illustrate the Government’s commitment to
holding the elections on time and in better conditions.
Effective measures are needed to ensure security
for voters and election officials alike, during that
important phase in Afghanistan’s history. Violence
clouding the process, namely, the killing of a Kunduz
provincial election official, reminds us that the Taliban
and other armed factions will make every effort to
sabotage the electoral process in order to prevent voters
from fulfilling their civic duty.
The violence punctuating the electoral preparations
is indicative of an even graver climate of insecurity in
the country, such that, in the past three months, security

Factors leading to insecurity will eventually be
overcome through strengthened human resources
and security institutions as the International Security
Assistance Force withdraws. In that regard, we urge
the continuing establishment of Afghan local police
forces, despite the persistent attacks against them.
Unfortunately, those attacks have not spared the
United Nations, relevant partners and humanitarian
organizations, as well as diplomatic missions. We
condemn those unjustifiable, despicable acts, and again
request that the authors be identified and prosecuted in
accordance with applicable laws.
In that context, we welcome the bilateral security
agreement between the Afghan authorities and the
United States Government that was recently signed and
ratified by the consultative loya jirga, and hope that it
will help strengthen security throughout the country,
thus reducing violence.
The United Nations and international partners are
working with the Afghan authorities to create conditions
conducive to peace and reconstruction of the country in
the conditions of insecurity that we mentioned above.
One of the major challenges it needs help in dealing
with is drugs. The fact is that the fight against drugs
is still a serious headache for Afghanistan, despite the
adoption and implementation of a national strategy to
combat drugs. Poppy cultivation in the country has
reached unprecedented levels, with an increase of 49 per
cent. Given the situation, we call on Afghanistan’s
neighbours and other international partners to support
the Government’s efforts and provide it with the
assistance necessary for dealing effectively with this
scourge, which also has negative repercussions for
peace and security in the region.

13-6225015/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan is changing, happily and despite
everything, in a favourable regional environment
where trade with other States, bilaterally and through
regional entities, is getting stronger, particularly in
the framework of the Istanbul Process. We encourage
all the countries concerned to continue to work with
Afghanistan to meet their shared challenges. We hope
that the commitments made within the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework and aimed at implementing
the Kabul process will continue to be honoured, with
UNAMA’s help.
Finally, I should commend the unwavering support
that the United Nations and its programmes and funds
have continued to give Afghanistan. I would like
to reiterate my country’s gratitude to Mr. Ján Kubiš,
who has shown exemplary leadership at the head of
UNAMA. Nor should I omit to commend Ambassador
Gary Quinlan of Australia and his whole team for the
admirable role they have played in taking over the
management of this issue from Germany.
While Togo will be leaving the Council in a
few days, we remain ready, within the framework
of the international community’s efforts, to support
Afghanistan in its quest to regain definitive peace and
national harmony.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing and
his work as Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like
to thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his statement.
I associate myself with the statement to be delivered
later in this debate by the observer of the European
Union.
I would also like to offer my condolences to the
United States and the International Security Assistance
Force for the helicopter accident that took the lives of
six American soldiers.
Now that the presidential and provincial elections
scheduled for 5 April 2014 are looming on the horizon,
we can better assess the road that Afghanistan has
travelled over the past 12 years. What was hardly
imaginable in 2001 is taking shape today. If the elections
are successful, the country will have established a
significant milestone partway along the road that can
distance it a little farther from the recent years of war
and lead it to peace and stability.
16/29

17/12/2013

A successful election is one that takes place on
schedule and in which candidates campaign freely,
peaceably and with mutual respect. It is an election in
which the participation of everybody, women included,
is assured without exception, in which voters’ and
candidates’ physical safety is guaranteed, and in which
voters, especially women voters, can go to the polls
without having to deal with moral or psychological
pressure. It is also an election whose results are accepted
by the largest possible number of people because the
balloting and counting are conducted transparently. We
welcome the progress made so far with the electoral
preparations. We urge that no effort be spared to put a
capable security framework in place and emphasize the
importance of ensuring the broad inclusion of women at
all levels of the electoral process.
The distance travelled since 2001 is also visible at
the level of the security transition. The Afghan security
forces, which did not exist 12 years ago and which were
created with the help of the international commuпity,
are now in overall charge of the national territory.
Despite the magnitude of the task, they are rising to
the occasion. But the challenges remain significant.
Anti-Government elements are still operating, and
attacks on humanitarian workers and the numbers of
civilian victims of the conflict have grown alarmingly.
These challenges demand that security capacities be
strengthened. It is also crucial to put an immediate end
to any uncertainty as to the scope of future international
support missions to the Afghan security forces, or we
risk losing the fruit of years of work and cooperation.
Concerning human rights, the progress made
since 2001 must also be preserved. In that regard, it
is important that the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission Human maintains its autonomy
from the Government and its credibility vis-à-vis the
people. It is also important to act decisively in order to
combat the high levels of discrimination and abuse of
which Afghan women are still victims. In that regard,
we are extremely concerned about the findings of the
8 December joint report from UNAMA and the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
implementation of the law on eliminating violence
against women. The low rate of indictments under
the act compared to the number of complaints filed
is inexplicable. Impunity seems to be the rule rather
than the exception. It should be recalled that full
application of the law eliminating violence against
women was one of the major commitments in the Tokyo

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

Mutual Accountability Framework. The international
community should not compromise on this point.
I would also like to reiterate how serious
Luxembourg considers the plight of children in armed
conflict. We welcome the fact that the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/721) includes information
on violations and abuses committed against children.
Given the scale on which such abuses and violations
continue to occur, we urge that UNAMA maintain
sufficient capacity for child protection, in accordance
with resolution 2096 (2013).
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
belief that for national reconciliation to succeed in
Afghanistan it must be led by the Afghans themselves.
At the same time, close cooperation must be established
with regional partners in order to address the many
challenges that exist not only in the areas of the
economy and security, but also in the fight against drug
trafficking. UNAMA, meanwhile, will continue to play
an important supporting role after 2014 and should
be provided with resources sufficient to fulfilling its
mission.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/721)
and Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his
important statement today.
I would first like to join with others in expressing
our sadness at today’s crash in southern Afghanistan
in which six United States soldiers of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) were killed, and to
pay tribute to the work of ISAF’s service personnel for
their tireless efforts to build peace in Afghanistan in
the face of danger.
My statement today will focus on five key areas:
security, the peace process in the region, elections,
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework and
the future engagement of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. First, concerning the security landscape,
the determination and dedication of ISAF and the
Afghan national security forces have allowed the
Government of Afghanistan to build the foundations
of a stable and democratic country. The Afghan
national security forces have proved themselves this
fighting season, their first in the lead. But the gains
they have made are fragile, and the insurgency remains
resilient. The support of NATO and the international
community will be vital to ensuring long-term stability

S/PV.7085

in Afghanistan. We welcome the loya jirga’s decision
last month to endorse the bilateral security agreement,
and we hope it will now be signed without further delay.
NATO will be able to plan properly for a long-term,
sustainable and balanced relationship only once the
bilateral security agreement between the United States
and the Government of Afghanistan is in place, as the
representative of Australia said before us.
The second key issue is work towards a stable
and prosperous region. A political settlement remains
the best way to security and sustainable peace in
Afghanistan. We welcome the weeks of dialogue
between the leaders of Afghanistan and Pakistan, which
has delivered tangible results. The United Kingdom is a
strong supporter of that vital relationship. Afghanistan’s
other close neighbours will also be central to that effort.
We welcome the support of those countries engaged
in the Heart of Asia process and other initiatives to
promote trade, economic prosperity and security.
Third is preparations for elections. Afghanistan
is entering the final phase of preparations for the
presidential and provincial council elections, which
are just four months away. Technical preparations are
proceeding well. The new legal framework is being
implemented. Over a third of those taking part in voter
registration so far were women. That is good news.
Alongside support to the United Nations Development
Programme Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity
for Tomorrow — the ELECT II programme — in recent
months, the United Kingdom has pledged a further
$11 million to build the capacity of women elected to
provincial councils next year and to ensure that their
voices are heard in the democratic process.
The United Kingdom encourages the Government
of Afghanistan to give election observers the access
they need to the electoral process so that when the time
comes, they can report credibly to the Afghan people
on how inclusively the election has been conducted.
The fourth key issue concerns our challenge to
deliver on the commitments we made at the Tokyo
Conference in 2012. The Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework remains the blueprint for the international
community’s development efforts in Afghanistan. The
priorities of the Government of Afghanistan next year
are to maintain economic stability, to deliver credible
and transparent elections and to consolidate the gains
made in human rights, particularly women’s rights, as
our colleague from Luxembourg underlined earlier.
A Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board meeting,

13-6225017/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

scheduled for January 2014, will provide an important
opportunity for the international community and the
Government of Afghanistan to review progress, set
post-election priorities and plan for the ministerial
development conference later this year. The United
Kingdom looks forward to co-chairing that conference.
Finally, on the future of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom is firmly behind a
strong United Nations presence in Afghanistan. The
United Nations will have a central role next year,
working with the Government of Afghanistan to lock
in the gains made over the last decade. To deliver that
objective, the Council will need to deliver a mandate
next March that gives the Special Representative
and his team the clear steer on what we see as their
priorities for 2014 and beyond and the tools to execute
that mandate effectively.
We agree with the priorities identified in the
Secretary-General’s quarterly report. We also agree
that a country-wide presence is essential for the United
Nations to carry out its responsibilities. To do that
effectively, the United Nations must have the resources
it needs as well as the backing of the host Government.
We also want to see the United Nations country team
step up its activities, particularly on the rule of law.
The year 2014 will be challenging. We pledge to
continue our support to the Government of Afghanistan
as it seeks to build a more peaceful, democratic and
prosperous future for all Afghans. That is in our
common interest here today.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Special Representative
Kubiš for presenting the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/721) and Ambassador Tanin for his important
contribution.
I would also like to express heartfelt condolences
for the death of the six United States soldiers in southern
Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General’s report presents a
comprehensive overview of the circumstances in which
the transition in Afghanistan is taking place, the goals
attained and the difficulties still to be confronted.
The report acknowledges the importance of the 2014
elections for strengthening the peace, reconstructing
Afghanistan and completing the political and security
transition.

18/29

17/12/2013

Therefore, we highlight the progress in the
preparations for the elections, the existence of a
preliminary list of 10 presidential candidates, and
later identifying the corresponding process for the
independent electoral institutions. At the same time,
we believe that it is important that the elections be
carried out in an appropriate security framework that
enables the Afghan people to freely exercise their
rights. In particular, we encourage Government and
the international community to make provision for the
presence of women, police officials and security agents
so that Afghan women can exercise their right to elect
their representatives. The full participation of women
in the elections is a major challenge. However, it is
also an important demonstration of an inclusive and
transparent electoral process.
While we acknowledge the significant progress that
has been achieved over the last decade, when it comes to
gender equality in Afghanistan and the empowerment
of Afghan women, we are aware of the challenges, and
we believe it is vital for women to fully participate in
the peace and reconciliation processes as well. As on
we have said on other occasions, we believe that must
also be a strategic priority in the transition. The full
participation of women at all levels and sectors of
economic activity is vital in building solid economies
and consolidating societies that are stable and fair.
With regard to the security situation, we are still
seriously concerned about the rise in the number of
civilian victims of terrorist attacks. Among them are a
high number of women and children killed or injured.
We reiterate our urgent appeal to all parties to observe
international humanitarian law and for the perpetrators
of those acts to be brought to justice.
Under the leadership of its Government, the decisive
impetus of its people and the support international
community, Afghanistan has travelled a long road and
is preparing to begin a new phase of independence
and sovereignty in 2014. In that new phase, the United
Nations and the international community must continue
to accompany the Afghan people and Government in
capacity-building as they shoulder their responsibilities
to reduce the impact of the transition to the lowest
possible extent. We agree with the High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the importance of ensuring that
the progress achieved on human rights over the last
12 years should not be compromised in the transition
process. We highlight in particular the need to protect
and strengthen the rights of women and children.

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing
and to extend our full support for the dedicated work
the Special Representative and his team are carrying
out. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for
his important statement.
My delegation would like to express our deep
condolences on the loss of United States troops in a
helicopter crash in southern Afghanistan.
Afghanistan has achieved progress in its political,
security and economic transition over the past decade.
As Afghanistan enters its final year of transition, it
is important that the gains made be sustainable and
irreversible. In that context, I would like to focus on
four key areas where more efforts are required.
First, on political transition, ensuring the
success of the presidential and provincial elections
in 2014 will be the most critical task in the Afghans’
political transition. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing electoral preparations made by the Afghan
Government, including the finalization of candidates
and the completion of voter registration. Efforts must be
enhanced to ensure the security of electoral personnel
and voters and better access to encourage women’s
participation. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) should strengthen its
support to that end so as to consolidate the legitimacy
and integrity of the process. National reconciliation,
owned and led by Afghans, is another important step
in moving the political transition forward. We welcome
the High Peace Council’s recent efforts towards that end
and hope that such efforts will yield tangible progress
in the near future.
Secondly, on the security situation, while we
welcome the ongoing efforts to strengthen the capacity
of the Afghan National Security Forces and the Afghan
National Police, a 13 per cent rise in civilian casualties
shows that serious challenges remain. The recent attacks
on humanitarian and development personnel further
adds to our concern. We strongly condemn such acts of
violence. We reiterate that all parties must take every
feasible step to ensure the protection of civilians and
comply with their obligations under international law.
The ongoing support of the international community
to strengthen the Afghan security sector and improve
cross-border cooperation is essential to effectively
meet such challenges.

S/PV.7085

Thirdly, on human rights, the protection of human
rights, especially those of women and children, is a key
commitment made by the Afghan Government under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. We expect
the Afghan Government to build on the improvements
made and strive to make further advances, including
through the full implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women.
Lastly, on narcotics, we are concerned at this year’s
record levels of poppy cultivation and opium production.
A comprehensive and coordinated response is needed
to address that threat. We urge the international
community and regional partners to further support
Afghan-led efforts to that end.
In conclusion, I wish to underline that the sustained
support of the international community remains vital to
Afghanistan’s long-term stability. For its part, UNAMA
should continue to play an active role in assisting
Afghanistan, especially in protecting human rights and
strengthening governance.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by expressing our condolences to the
United States delegation following the tragic helicopter
accident. I would also like to extend my condolences
to the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
I thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for having presented the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/721). Through
Mr. Kubiš, I would also like to congratulate the entire
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for having shared with the Council the efforts
being carried out by his country to meet the manifold
challenges it is facing.
The report of the Secretary-General takes stock of
a real momentum taking place in the preparations of
the presidential and provincial elections scheduled for
2014, which are part and parcel of the transformation
process that will come with the withdrawal of ISAF
from Afghanistan.
That momentum has been supported by the
appointment on 15 September 2013 by President Karzai
of the Electoral Complaints Commission and the
allocation of resources so that the Commission can do
its work. The only concern in that respect are the calls
by the Taliban and the armed faction of Hezb-e Islami
to boycott the elections and the attacks on four voter
registration offices that cost the life of a registration

13-6225019/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

official. We commend UNAMA for its effort to launch
local dialogues to mitigate ethnic and intertribal
tensions during this decisive moment in the electoral
process. We also commend its valuable support for
national reconciliation.
The efforts on the part of both the international
community and the Afghan Government to ensure that
Afghanistan takes the lead in its own security sector
are seen in the expanded capacity of the security
institutions, the increase in the size of the Afghan army
to 185,300 enlisted men and of the air force to 6,800,
and, more symbolically, in the launch of the programme
to recruit women.
We deplore the continued violence committed
by those hostile to the Government, targeting local
security institutions and even ISAF premises. Civilians
continue to die in the conflict, with a 13 per cent rise
in civilian casualties in the first 10 months of 2013 as
compared with the same period in 2012.
On a positive note, we welcome the voluntary return
of 7,907 refugees, bringing to 36,194 the total number
of refugees who preferred to return during the first
10 months of 2013 and to take advantage of aid from
United Nations refugees. That is a sign of optimism on
the part of the population with regard to the prospects
for stability and peace coming to their country. In the
same context, we hail the endeavours to carry out the
polio vaccination campaign that has helped 8,300,000
children under five years of age.
The regional impact of the security situation in
Afghanistan shows how important it is for there to be
cooperation amongst the countries of the region with
respect to political, security and economic issues. The
momentum given to bilateral and regional relations
deserves to be pursued, intensified and diversified in
the interest of all States in the region.
The challenges that Afghanistan faces are great
and many. Political support, economic, security and
humanitarian aid remain vital to helping the country
consolidate the process of stabilization that would lead
to true stability. As we approach the holiday season, we
wish to express our hope that 2014 will be a decisive
year for peace and security in Afghanistan and for all
countries in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now speak
in my capacity as the representative of France.

20/29

17/12/2013

First of all, I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš,
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin, for their statements. I align myself
with the statement to be made shortly by the observer
of the European Union.
I shall address three points: the upcoming
presidential election, the human rights situation and
drug control.
First of all, with respect to the elections, Afghanistan
has entered the final phase of preparations for the spring
2014 presidential elections. The preparations are being
carried out in a satisfactory manner. The presidential
electoral campaign should start next February. The
election will be the foundation for the future legitimacy
of the Afghan Government and the sign that democracy
has become entrenched in Afghan public life and that
reversing course is no longer possible. The success
of the elections will hang on security, and everything
must be done to ensure that the Afghan forces meet that
challenge successfully. There must be comprehensive
mobilization against fraud so as not to affect the
legitimacy of the winner at the polls.
Beyond the elections, the confidence of Afghan
forces in their own ability to operate independently and
to engage with strength and determination against the
insurgents is critical. The short-term viability of the
Afghan State will depend on it.
The human rights and humanitarian situation also
remains a concern. The renewed fighting has had a tragic
impact on the civilian population. Nearly one civilian
casualty in five occurs in the field. We therefore urge
the parties to take all necessary measures to minimize
the impact of such clashes.
We remain attentive to the rights of women, which
have enjoyed unprecedented progress in Afghanistan.
These rights should not be diminished because of
political uncertainty. Moreover, reporting delays on
the part of Afghan authorities on the implementation of
the law for the elimination of violence against women
are of concern. We urge the Afghan Government to
remove all doubts about its continued commitment to
human rights following the withdrawal of international
forces. We are also concerned about the security of
humanitarian workers and the staff of development
agencies. The compliance of the parties with the
principles of humanitarian law is essential to the
continued international engagement in Afghanistan.

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7085

With regard to the anti-drug campaign,
Afghanistan has seen record opium production in 2013.
Drug production has also been diversified. Cannabis
cultivation and methamphetamine production centres
have emerged. The Afghan population has nearly
1 million drug addicts. The fight against drugs is an
imperative not only for security but also for public
health.

funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations in order to promote a development
model that meets the challenges of an eonomy fueled
by drug trafficking. To that end, we feel it particularly
important to simplify the UNAMA mandate. However,
we remain committed to maintaining its presence
throughout Afghan territory, which will be essential for
a clear and comprehensive view of the situation.

In that respect, we emphasize the importance of the
regional framework in the fight against the production
and trafficking of drugs. The Paris Pact framework
remains essential to the mobilization of the international
community. We support the activities of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries through our
annual voluntary contributions to the Paris Pact and to
the regional Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries
programme. Bilaterally, a treaty of friendship and
cooperation between France and Afghanistan provides
for enhanced partnership in the fight against drugs,
which is recognized as a priority by both countries.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

While operational cooperation may be satisfactory,
the fight against drugs must be taken better into account
at the political level, whether by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) or the
Afghan authorities. As the Secretary-General points
out in his report (S/2013/721), this is a prerequisute for
the stability and development of Afghanistan and its
neighbours.
Afghanistan’s partners will remain present in
the form of bilateral relations based on enhanced
military and civil partnership. The modalities of future
international missions to support the Afghan security
forces are being defined in response to requests by
the Afghan authorities. The recommendation handed
down by the loya jirga on 24 November and the timely
signing of the bilateral security agreement with the
United States will mark a new step in the consolidation
of that partnership. In this context, we believe that
the United Nations will be required to assume greater
responsibility in Afghanistan. Placed in a more visible,
central and complex position, UNAMA will absolutely
need to strengthen its political role.
UNAMA will provide its good offices to facilitate
the implementation of the Afghan political process.
It will also need enhanced competencies in matter of
defence and the promotion of human rights. Finally,
it will need to assume the role of coordinator of the

I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, let me thank
you, Sir, for organizing this debate on the situation
in Afghanistan. I take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement. We also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ján Kubiš for his briefing.
Let me begin by expressing our concern over
the attacks in Afghanistan’s Uruzgan province on
26 November and in Faryab province on 27 November,
which resulted in the death of nine development
workers. We are pained that these attack have brought
the number of attacks against humanitarian personnel,
facilities and assets in Afghanistan to 237 so far this
year. All this points to the fact that the main threat
to security in Afghanistan is terrorism perpetrated
by those who do not want to see a strong, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.
We note that progress has been made in the
finalization of the candidates for the presidential and
provincial elections due in 2014. This is a significant
step during a period of Afghanistan’s transition
that encompasses security, political and economic
dimensions. I would like to reiterate that the key to
successful elections in 2014 is a process whose outcome
is acceptable to the people of Afghanistan.
The events preceding the presidential elections
are extremely important as they will bring to the
political discourse issues that are close to the heart of
the Afghan people. This will have an impact on the
political reconstruction effort in Afghanistan, which
must always remain Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and
Afghan-controlled. At this juncture, the support of the
international community for the Afghan authorities’
electoral preparations is critical. We must also be
vigilant to any effort to derail the process, and that
would certainly include strengthening the security
apparatus.

13-6225021/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
under threat from terrorism. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/721) mentions that during
the first 10 months of 2013, there were 7,394 civilian
casualties, which represents a 13 per cent increase
compared to the same period in 2012. Three-quarters
of these casualties were attributed to attacks by
anti-Government elements. It is also noteworthy that
the use of improvised explosive devices, including
in complex and suicide attacks, accounted for 49 per
cent of these casualties and remains the biggest threat
to civilians. There are forces active in derailing the
process of reconstruction. Here, I would like to reiterate
that India will be undeterred by these cowardly acts of
violence. We do not have an exit policy in Afghanistan,
and I would like to re-emphasize our commitment to
standing by the Afghan people and their servicemen,
who have shown exemplary courage in protecting the
Afghan people.
The internal security situation has been held
hostage to terrorist attacks originating from beyond
Afghanistan’s border by groups closely allied to
Al-Qaida and their affiliates. We would like to reiterate
that we must be continuously watchful of the designs of
these terrorist organizations. In this regard, concerted
action is also needed to isolate and root out the
syndicate of terrorism, which includes elements of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida, Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist
and extremist groups.
In order to have a smooth transition security plan, it
is therefore extremely important that the drawdown of
troops and its implications for the security arrangements
be carefully assessed and appropriate measures taken
to ensure the safety of the Afghan people. I note that the
Secretary-General has mentioned the twelfth annual
trilateral meeting of Foreign Ministers of Russia, India
and China on 10 November, which emphasized the
need for continuing international support to and greater
regional integration with Afghanistan.
We also note the recent announcement of record
levels of poppy cultivation and opium production.
The Secretary-General’s report rightly mentions that
it is a critical hazard to the security, well-being and
development of Afghanistan and the wider region. This
aspect must not be neglected.
In view to the efforts of the international
community to ensure an Afghan-led process of
transition, the time has come for the international
community to reassess the role it wishes to play.
22/29

17/12/2013

I would suggest that we need to discuss the issue of
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). Afghanistan has achieved a
considerable level of political maturity with the ongoing
political reconstruction efforts. There is no doubt that
UNAMA has played an exceptional role over the past
decade in the political, humanitarian and development
spheres in Afghanistan, along with other agencies of
the United Nations system. However, I would like to
mention that in view of the maturity of the process in
Afghanistan, the international community may wish to
define UNAMA’s political mandate in the light of the
changed circumstances. The new mandate of UNAMA
should help to keep its focus on supporting the political
institutions rather than attempting to influence the
political process itself, which must be left entirely to
Afghanistan’s own leaders.
Speaking of UNAMA’s role, we also believe
that the Mission must step up its humanitarian
and developmental role through better delivery of
assistance in Afghanistan, since the United Nations
is uniquely placed with access to the most remote and
isolated communities in the country. We must also not
forget that it is not “capacity-substitution” but capacitybuilding that we are seeking to achieve in Afghanistan.
The future role of UNAMA needs to be discussed
so that it plays an effective role, keeping in mind the
overall objective of the transition process. In doing so
we must take into account problems of coherence, the
duplication of effort and the resulting higher cost of
programmes.
In conclusion, I would like to say that, as we enter a
new year, we should be hopeful that Afghanistan will be
taking definite strides towards a new era of development
and progress. India sincerely believes that the huge
efforts of the Afghan people and the international
community that have gone into the process of transition
will provide a solid basis for a stable future. We would
like to assure the Council that India will stand by
the people of Afghanistan in all its endeavours. We
reiterate our support to the efforts of the international
community leading towards a peaceful, prosperous and
stable Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikawa (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his participation
and for his comprehensive briefing today. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
the important role of the United Nations, especially
that of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in 2014 and beyond, in
supporting the Afghan Government’s efforts to meet
its political and development goals. In that regard, I
would like to express my highest respect to all the staff
of UNAMA for their deep commitment and dedication
to their challenging mission.
We hope that UNAMA will also continue to play
an important role in coordinating both the Afghan
Government’s and the international community’s
efforts in implementing their commitments under
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. Japan
attaches particular importance to reforms in the area
of public finance and private banking, as revenue
mobilization is a matter of urgency for the Afghan
Government to attain sustainability. We request the
Afghan Government, including the future Government,
to make consistent efforts in the fight against corruption
and demonstrate tangible results in the run-up to the
next Ministerial Meeting of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board, which will be held in January
and will be co-hosted by the Afghan Government and
the United Kingdom. We expect UNAMA’s continued
engagement in that process.
The year 2013 was a busy one of critical
importance. It paved the way for Afghanistan to
achieve important goals in 2014, the final year of its
political and security transition. Looking back at the
year, the Government and the people of Afghanistan
have made significant achievements. To name a few,
the Afghan National Security Forces have taken the
lead in most operations since June, preparations for the
elections have been advancing and intensive dialogue
for regional cooperation has taken place. Today, I
would like to address some key issues on which Japan
believes Afghanistan must make further efforts in order
to ensure successful political and security transitions,
which will be indispensable for long-term stability in
the country.
First, in terms of political transition, it is of the
utmost importance that the next presidential and
provincial elections give strong legitimacy to the new
Government. To that end, elections must take place in
compliance with the Afghan Constitution and other legal
frameworks, and the current schedule for the holding of
the elections, in April 2014, must be observed. A fair
and transparent elections process is also imperative.

S/PV.7085

Furthermore, the election result should be a reflection
of the will of the country’s entire population.
Japan welcomes the diversity of presidential
candidates, as well as the participation of women
in both elections as voters and candidates. Yet the
security situation continues to be of concern. In order
to encourage the full participation of all eligible voters,
especially female voters, security challenges must
be properly addressed. The Afghan Government is
encouraged to take further risk-mitigation measures
based on a realistic security assessment.
In order to make a positive impact on the election
processes, Japan has donated approximately $20 million
to support the work of the Independent Election
Commission through the second Enhancing Legal
and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow project. We are
also looking into the possibility of sending an election
observer mission.
I would now like to turn to the security transition.
Despite the increased competence and confidence of
the Afghan National Security Forces, serious security
challenges persist. A number of brutal terrorist attacks
over the past quarter again caused the tragic loss of
innocent lives, including those of aid workers and other
civilians. Japan joins in the message sent by the Security
Council in its press statement of 4 December (SC11199)
condemning acts of violence against development and
humanitarian aid workers.
With that security uncertainty, it is a matter of
critical importance for the Afghan Government to
conclude a bilateral security agreement with the
United States at an early stage, as recommended by the
consultative loya jirga in November. The Government
bears the responsibility to ensure that the dividends of
the security transition are irreversible. Furthermore,
security uncertainty will inevitably impact negatively
on our future aid policy. We strongly hope that the
Government of Afghanistan will fulfil its duty to
provide its people with a sense of security and stability.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that without
progress of the peace process, the dividends of all the
transitions will remain uncertain. The process should
be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned; responsibility must
not be shifted to any other parties. But, as witnessed
in the constructive engagement of Pakistan as well
as in other third parties’ initiatives, the international
community stands by Afghanistan ready to lend a hand
as it takes steps forward.

13-6225023/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

I would like to conclude my statement by recalling
that the whole transition process and the peace and
reconciliation process are supported by mutual
trust among all the stakeholders, including the trust
between the Afghan Government and the international
community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
First of all, I would like to join others in expressing
our condolences to the United States for the loss of life
suffered by its servicemen in today’s helicopter crash.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/721), and his Special
Representative Mr. Ján Kubiš for his briefing and the
very hard work he is doing in the face of very difficult
challenges. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his remarks.
We are approaching the start of a very important
year for Afghanistan and the Afghan people. In April,
Afghans will elect a new President and, by the end
of 2014, Afghan security forces will have exclusive
responsibility for maintaining and increasing security
across the country.
We are very much encouraged by the lively
political debate and the progress made in preparing for
the presidential and provincial elections, including the
important technical roles played by the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. It will be vital for the
elections to be inclusive and transparent and lead to
a legitimate outcome. The Afghan authorities must
ensure that a comprehensive security plan is in place
to enable as many Afghans as possible to have an
opportunity to exercise their democratic right. It will
also be important that appropriate measures be in
place to minimize multiple voting, in particular men
24/29

17/12/2013

voting on behalf of women, ensure the security of
ballot boxes and combat electoral fraud. From our side,
we will continue to provide financial and technical
support through the United Nations and other bodies to
strengthen the electoral process.
A political solution and a genuine peace and
reconciliation process are key to lasting stability and
development. A genuine peace and reconciliation
process should be Afghan-led, inclusive and based on
the Constitution.
The security transition has been implemented
successfully according to plan. However, we should
not underestimate the remaining security challenges.
Further strengthening the capacity to address those
will be a prerequisite for progress.
In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
importance of the bilateral security agreement between
the Government of Afghanistan and the United States
of America. It will both provide the basis for continuing
international support to train and develop the capability
of the Afghan National Security Forces and facilitate
the continued provision of significant international
development assistance to the Afghan people across the
country.
The international community’s engagement must be
matched by continued progress on Afghanistan’s agreed
commitments under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. While recognizing that important progress
has been made, there are continued concerns about the
human rights situation in Afghanistan, in particular
the situation of women and girls. The Government
of Afghanistan needs to take all possible measures
to tackle corruption and improve the business and
investment climate, especially to address the concerns
regarding the economic situation, as expressed in the
current Secretary-General’s report.
Looking ahead to the mandate renewal of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in March, we would like to reiterate our full support for
the important role played by UNAMA and all United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people
and in coordinating the international community’s
assistance to Afghanistan. UNAMA will play a key role
as a sounding board for the Afghan authorities and civil
society in preparation for the elections. But the role of
the United Nations will be even more important after
2014 in ensuring that the international community’s
assistance continues to reach people on the ground. It is

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

therefore critical that the United Nations have enough
resources to retain a broad countrywide presence and
that it support the Afghan Government in ensuring that
development efforts gradually lead to self-reliance.
With those brief remarks, we would like to conclude
by underlining that the international community
should remain strongly committed for the long term
to progress in Afghanistan. From our side, we will
remain firmly focused on supporting the people of
Afghanistan in achieving their aspirations. Our goal
remains clear — the emergence of a fully self-reliant,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous society for the
benefit of all Afghans.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council. Let me begin by expressing the
condolences of the United States of America for the loss
of lives in today’s helicopter accident in Afghanistan.
(spoke in French)
The coming year will be one of milestones for
Afghanistan that will involve Afghans taking on
an increasing responsibility for the security and
development of their country and set the stage for
further democratization, stability and peace.
(spoke in English)
The April 2014 presidential election will mark the
first democratic transition of power from one leader to
another in Afghanistan’s history. The announcement
of the final list of candidates for the presidential
and provincial council elections is a first step, and
the Independent Election Commission (IEC) and
the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission
(IECC) did thorough work in vetting the candidate
lists. Canada is committed to supporting efforts to
ensure transparency and accountability in the electoral
process. That is why we recently announced that we
are providing more than $1.8 million to train election
observers, with a specific focus on training women. As
elections preparations proceed, we encourage the IEC
and the IECC to maintain transparency in their activities
to enhance the credibility of the democratic process and
ensure that all Afghans have the opportunity to make
their voices heard.
The coming year will also see the end of the
International Security Assistance Force’s mandate and

S/PV.7085

the transition of the United States and NATO missions
in Afghanistan. The Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) have taken over the lead and are now
consolidating responsibility for security across the
entire country. Through that transition, the ANSF must
demonstrate that it is becoming ever more capable and
professional in confronting security challenges, which
originate from both within Afghanistan and within
neighbouring countries.
However, the ANSF still requires continued support
and training to be able to carry out its operations
effectively. Canada has pledged $330 million between
2015 and 2017 to improve the capacity and sustainability
of the ANSF. However, for those funds to be effective,
there must be a clear framework for international
support in place. We urge President Karzai to sign the
bilateral security arrangement with the United States,
which was endorsed overwhelmingly by the members
of the consultative loya jirga, so that planning for a
post-2014 NATO support mission can begin.
(spoke in French)
The progress being made should not make us lose
sight of the challenges still faced by Afghan women
and girls. We are deeply troubled by the latest figures
from the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, which indicate that it received more than
4,100 reports of violence against women in the first
six months of 2013. We must be clear — sacrificing
the safety and security of women cannot be viewed as
an acceptable compromise for stability. Such numbers
show how widespread the problem of violence against
women is in Afghanistan and underscore the importance
of fully implementing the law on the elimination of
violence against women. Canada remains committed to
advancing the rights of Afghan women and girls and
looks forward with interest to the Afghan Government’s
report on the implementation of that law — a key
commitment under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework.
(spoke in English)
It is crucial that the Government of Afghanistan
take concrete steps to implement that law by providing
training to police, prosecutors and judges and by
strengthening investigative units to ensure that those
responsible for carrying out the law have the tools they
need to do so. It is also essential that the rights of women
and girls be taken into account in all legislation being
developed, including the Afghan Penal Code and the

13-6225025/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

Criminal Procedure Code, and in discussions regarding
a peaceful settlement to the current conflict. Without
those efforts, the gains that Afghan women have made
in the past 12 years are at risk of being stripped away.
The future success and stability of Afghanistan will
be a result of the integration and leadership of women.
Afghanistan’s success will come hand in hand with
the realization that women are an essential resource
necessary for the country’s development.
(spoke in French)
The coming months represent a critical time for the
democratization and future stability of Afghanistan.
We all know that that path is difficult and there are
those who are actively working to reverse the progress
made to date. That is why it is important that the
international community recognize the progress made,
while not losing sight of the challenges that remain.
Ungoverned spaces remain havens for terrorists, and we
condemn the actions of States that sponsor terrorism as
an extension of their policy. We also note with concern
from the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/721) that
poppy cultivation has increased by more than one third
over the past year, with production increasing by more
than 49 per cent. That illicit activity serves only to
strengthen the insurgency and undermine the rule of
law.
(spoke in English)
However, the Afghan people have demonstrated
that they are resilient in the face of ongoing instability
and are determined to build a better future for
themselves and their children. In that context, Canada
is committed to supporting those that are working to
build that better future. That is why we announced in
2012 a commitment of $227 million in development
assistance to Afghanistan for the period between
2015 and 2017. Together with the Afghan people, we
will help strengthen the country into one that is more
secure, stable and prosperous and never again a haven
for terrorists or one that embraces transparency,
accountability, human rights and the rule of law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his comprehensive
briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.
We continue to welcome the encouraging
signals from Afghanistan in the fields of security,

26/29

17/12/2013

democratization, good-neighbourly relations and
regional cooperation. Yet political, economic, social,
security and humanitarian challenges remain, as do
perceived uncertainties about the future. Addressing
those uncertainties will be crucial for building a
sustainable and confident Afghanistan at peace with its
neighbours and the world.
Let me emphasize that lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan can be maintained only by the
Afghans themselves in a spirit of national unity. Good
governance, the rule of law and protecting human rights
can meaningfully improve only on that basis. Efforts
towards a level of relative economic self-reliance are
also crucial. Looking at the current state of affairs, we
are glad to see that a conscious strategy that draws its
strength from local ownership and seeks to put together
various strands of efforts into a meaningful whole is in
place.
The April 2014 elections are approaching. The
acceptance and legitimacy of those elections will be
crucial to ensuring the well-being and sustainability of
the Afghan State, based on local ownership. Therefore,
keeping the elections fair, inclusive and free from
internal and external interference and fraud will be key.
The positive momentum in the technical preparations
for the 2014 elections is well noted. The three main
challenges are security, accessibility and inclusiveness.
Robust domestic and international observation will be
essential before and during the elections to identify and
address those challenges.
Following the elections, international support
for democratization and institution-building should
continue. The United Nations should continue its
assistance in terms of capacity-building and technical
support. Addressing grave human rights matters,
particularly violence against women and girls, and the
issue of civilian casualties should be another priority
in the short and long runs. Long-term solutions can be
reached only through inclusive, Afghan-owned and led
reconciliation. The focus should remain on that issue,
with the facilitating role of the United Nations and the
help of Afghanistan’s regional partners.
As international forces withdraw, regional
cooperation grows in importance for sustainability in
Afghanistan and beyond. We are glad to observe the
increased momentum in the Istanbul Process, and we
look forward to its next ministerial meeting in China.
We also welcome all trilateral, quadrilateral and
multilateral initiatives centred around Afghanistan
13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

and the constructive role played by the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. We support efforts to
enhance regional connectivity and economic growth,
and attach particular importance to the completion and
maintenance of local railroad and land routes and the
enhancement of civil aviation capabilities.
Afghanistan has come a long way. When in doubt
about the future of Afghanistan, we should remember
the achievements of the past 12 years, as well as the
strength and resilience of the Afghan people as they
strive for better tomorrows, no matter what the
conditions are. That being said, the continued display
of will on the part of the international community will
strengthen the hopes of the Afghan people for the future
and help ensure a smooth transition.
I would like to stress in particular that ensuring
that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has the necessary resources to
fulfil its mandate will be key both during and after the
transition. Turkey will always remain in solidarity with
the Afghan people and continue to contribute to a safe,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done
for many decades.
In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong belief
that the United Nations will continue to play a crucial
role during and after the transition. I would particularly
like to commend the valuable efforts of the United
Nations, and UNAMA in particular, and to express
our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kubiš and his hard-working team.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting. My thanks also should go to Ambassador
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
for his statement. I should also thank Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his briefing and hard work. We continue
to support him and his team in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
dedicated work that they are doing in Afghanistan.
The role of UNAMA, in our view, is definitely
very important and needs more support. UNAMA
should continue playing its active role in the post2014 period. It should expand its cooperation with the
neighbouring countries in order to enhance stability in
Afghanistan and promote its sustainable socioeconomic
development. Basically, the United Nations support

S/PV.7085

for Afghanistan is crucial, especially in the post-2014
period.
We are glad to hear that significant progress has
been made in the political and socioeconomic areas
in Afghanistan. It is also promising that the United
Nations and the international community of States, in
particular in the region, are resolute in their strong longterm commitment to a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. Those are essential, especially on the eve
of the year 2014, when two significant events — namely,
the presidential election and the withdrawal of foreign
forces — will take place in Afghanistan, with their large
impact in shaping the country’s future. We hope that the
active participation of Afghans will ensure the holding
of successful elections, which is indeed essential to
enhancing the political stability and national unity of
Afghanistan and its advancement in all other areas.
Likewise, the peace and national reconciliation
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan, leading to an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process,
need to be continued. In such a process, Afghanistan’s
Constitution should be observed and any external
pressure or interference or rewarding of the extremist
and terrorist groups should be avoided.
In line with those developments, enhancing the
security of Afghanistan should continue to be the
highest priority, as it is a prerequisite for the success
of efforts in all other areas. Accordingly, we believe
that the complete withdrawal of foreign forces should
be followed by the strong support of the international
community in equipping Afghan forces commensurate
with the existing security threats, in particular those
posed by terrorists, illegal armed groups and organized
criminals.
For the Islamic Republic of Iran, as an immediate
neighbour of Afghanistan, the security and stability of
Afghanistan are a vital element for its neighbours and
the region. During all these years, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in cooperation with Afghan Government, has
been trying to assist Afghanistan in various areas.
We believe that special attention should be paid to
combating the interlinked sources of insecurity and
instability in Afghanistan, in particular the production
of and trade in narcotic drugs as the financial source of
terrorist, extremist and illegal armed groups.
In that regard, continued international support for
the Triangular Initiative on cooperation on countering
narcotics among Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan is

13-6225027/29

S/PV.7085

The situation in Afghanistan

essential not only to strengthening the security and
stability of Afghanistan, but also to alleviating the
serious concerns of neighbouring States and transit and
destination countries of drug trafficking.
Unfortunately, millions of Afghan refugees still
continue to live in host countries and an alarming
drop in their voluntary repatriation in 2013 underlines
the importance of meeting the reasonable needs of
repatriated refugees in Afghanistan in order to reverse
that trend, and underscores the necessity for rendering
more international support to the host countries of
Afghan refugees pending their repatriation.
In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran
will continue its full support for the promotion of
security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan. In his recent visit to
Tehran, President Karzai held fruitful negotiations with
his counterpart, the President of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, and with other Iranian officials, and he was
assured of the continued cooperation and support of my
country.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank
Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing today
and for his dedicated work in support of the Afghan
people. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his remarks and to express our heartfelt condolences
with respect to the tragic loss of life of six NATO
soldiers earlier today in Afghanistan.
Despite many challenges, Afghanistan has come a
long way in its security, political and economic transition
processes. The Afghan National Army and the Afghan
National Police have proven to be increasingly capable
of mastering the enormous task of providing a secure
environment. That development has been guided and
supported by the framework set up in Bonn, Chicago
and Tokyo by the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community. It is indispensable that all
mutually agreed commitments be fully implemented. As
for the ongoing substantial international commitment in
Afghanistan, the message of all those conferences and
of General Assembly resolution 68/11 on Afghanistan
is clear — the international community continues its
support.
The year 2014 will be marked by decisive events,
such as the presidential elections in April and the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) combat troops at the end the year. As an
international community, we need to lay the foundations

28/29

17/12/2013

for the post-ISAF era. Let me stress that Germany stands
ready to remain engaged in Afghanistan with regard
to supporting the Afghan security forces as well. The
most important precondition for that is the signing of
the bilateral security agreement between Afghanistan
and the United States. Without that signature,
the continued presence of the whole international
community, military as well as civilian, will be put
into question. The recommendation of the loya jirga to
sign the security agreement is an encouraging signal.
Consequently, the signature of the agreement should
not be put off for too long.
In the ongoing political transition and transformation
process, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), with the consent of the
Afghan Government, needs to remain the backbone
of international engagement and the post-2014
architecture in Afghanistan. That will require focusing
UNAMA’s work on key areas in which its coordinating
and supporting role will remain indispensable.
The first is the continued implementation of
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework to
ensure coherence and sustainability in Afghanistan’s
development.
Secondly, while we appreciate the progress
Afghanistan has made in preparation for the upcoming
elections, UNAMA’s good offices will remain necessary
to ensure the transparency and inclusivity of political
processes in the future.
Thirdly, UNAMA also has a role to play in
supporting the Afghan Government’s efforts to advance
in the Afghan-led and Af han-owned process of peace
and reconciliation. UNAMA should also closely
accompany Afghan efforts to increase cooperation with
neighbouring and regional partners, especially within
the framework of the Istanbul Process.
Fourthly, in the light of continuing violations of
human rights, including a reported increase of cases of
violence against women, UNAMA will need to continue
its monitoring and supporting role. We call upon the
Afghan Government to prioritize respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without any
discrimination. The Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission remains the key partner for such
efforts. To carry out those challenging tasks, UNAMA
will need to be adequately financed and staffed. That
also includes UNAMA’s necessary presence in the field
throughout the country.

13-62250

17/12/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

I would like to conclude by underlining that
Germany will continue to support the Government of
Afghanistan through the transition period and beyond.
We are confident that the Afghan government will use
the remaining months of its tenure to further work on
fulfilling the preconditions of a sustained international

S/PV.7085

engagement in Afghanistan for the benefit of the
Afghan people.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

13-6225029/29
