S/2020/1089

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 November 2020
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Twenty-eighth report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 28 July 2020 (S/2020/753).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third country nationals or their remains
2.
On 16 September, Iraq handed over to Kuwait the human remains exhumed from
the Shaykhiyah site in the Iraqi Samawah desert in late January 2020. The handover,
delayed for almost six months owing to coronavirus disease (COVID -19) movement
restrictions, was conducted at the United Nations forward support base near Baghdad
International Airport, under the auspices of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and in the presence of representatives of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), the Ministry of Defence of Iraq and the Embassy of
Kuwait in Iraq. UNAMI facilitated the handover by making available its air assets.
3.
The repatriation of the human remains was completed with the arrival of 21
caskets at Kuwait International Airport, where Iraqi, Kuwaiti and ICRC
representatives signed the documentation in accordance with international procedures
on the handover of human remains. The Kuwaiti General Department of Criminal
Evidence will perform DNA tests on the remains to determine whether the results
match information contained in the database of missing Kuwait i and third-country
nationals.
4.
Before the transfer of the human remains, my Deputy Special Representative
for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance engaged with relevant interlocutors on
UNAMI support for the repatriation. On 18 August, she met the Secretary-General of
the Office of the Legal Counsel in the Ministry of Defence, who is responsible for the
Kuwaiti missing persons file, and representatives of ICRC to discuss the modalities
for the handover. She reiterated the readiness of UNAMI to assist by providing its air
assets upon the agreement of Iraq and Kuwait.

20-13866 (E)

101120

*2013866*

S/2020/1089

5.
On 2 September, my Deputy Special Representative held a call with the Head
of the National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs, withi n
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Rabea al-Adsani, to discuss the modalities
and logistical preparations for the transfer. Mr. al-Adsani reported that the
identification process for the human remains exhumed in Samawah in August 2019
was continuing in Kuwaiti forensic laboratories. He underscored the complexity of
the process, which required the extraction of DNA from the commingled human
remains in order to reassemble and identify the remains before the results could be
announced. He emphasized the desire of Kuwait to finalize the identification of the
remains and to share details with the grieving families concerned and the Tripartite
Commission members.
6.
After several months of delays owing to travel restrictions relating to the
COVID-19 pandemic, the Technical Subcommittee of the Tripartite Commission held
its 113th meeting, in Kuwait on 17 September. The Iraqi representative provided an
update on efforts regarding the identification of potential burial sites in Samawah,
Khamisiyah, Karbala’ and Salman Pak in Iraq, which are believed to contain the
remains of missing Kuwaiti persons. Owing to COVID-19-related restrictions, no
excavation activities were conducted in Iraq during the reporting period.
7.
The Kuwaiti representative explained that COVID-19-related restrictions in his
country had slowed down the work of the Kuwaiti forensic experts pertaining to the
reassembly and analysis of the commingled human remains recovered from Samawah
and transferred to Kuwait in 2019. He expressed the hope that some results would be
announced at the next meeting. He provided new information regarding possible
witnesses in relation to three potential burial sites, one in Samawah and a new location
in Mahawil in Iraq and the naval base in Kuwait. The Iraqi rep resentative undertook
to follow up with those witnesses.
8.
Although no new information had emerged from the analysis of aerial images
of the Khamisiyah site, the Technical Subcommittee decided that the Iraqi technical
team should continue its exploration and excavation activities in the area. It also
agreed that the Ministry of Defence of Iraq would continue exploration work at the
sites in Karbala’ and Salman Pak. In the absence of any information regarding the
Radwaniyah site in Iraq, the Technical Subcommittee agreed to suspend its work there
until new information became available.
9.
The Ministry of Defence of Iraq continues to broadcast calls for witnesses
through the media every three months, most recently on 16 September.
10. On the basis of new coordinates received from the United States of America
regarding sites in Kuwait believed to contain the remains of missing Iraqi soldiers,
and following satellite imagery analysis by ICRC, excavations were carried out by
the Kuwaiti technical team between 22 March and 9 April. No human remains or
evidence thereof were found.
11. Meanwhile, on 5 August, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs
met, in Baghdad, the Ambassador of Iraq to Kuwait, Al-Manhal al-Safi, with whom she
discussed the Kuwaiti missing persons and property file, among other issues. Mr. al-Safi
reiterated his Government’s commitment to making progress on the file and confirmed
that it would remain under the purview of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq.
12. On 31 August, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs met the
Undersecretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Abdulkareem Hashem, with
whom she discussed the Kuwaiti missing persons and property file. She explained the
complexity of the ongoing identification process for the human remains in the forensic
laboratories in Kuwait, acknowledging the professionalism with which the remains were
processed during her visit to such a laboratory earlier in 2020. The planned training of
2/3

20-13866

S/2020/1089

staff of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on the use of ground-penetrating radar in the
search for human remains, to be conducted by UNAMI, was delayed throughout the
reporting period owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. UNAMI is considering alternative
means to deliver the training activities in the coming months.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
13. During the reporting period, there were no significant developments with regard
to the return of Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. The t ransfer of
previously located Kuwaiti property, including microfilms and scientific books,
remained postponed owing to COVID-19-related movement restrictions.
14. During her meeting on 5 August with the Ambassador of Iraq to Kuwait, my
Deputy Special Representative noted that the return of the Kuwaiti national archives
remained a high priority for the Government of Kuwait, given their symbolic and
historical importance. Mr. al-Safi underlined his country’s commitment to locating
Kuwaiti property, including the archives. My Deputy Special Representative also
discussed the issue of the archives, including the importance of locating and
repatriating the missing items, during her meeting with the Undersecretary of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq on 31 August. She particularly urged the Ministry
to reflect further on ways in which it might support and expedite a systematic search
for the archives. The Undersecretary reiterated the commitment of Iraq to making
progress on that important file.

IV. Observations
15. The constraints imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic notwithstanding, the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait made progress on this important file during the
reporting period. Thanks to constructive cooperation and collaboration between
the technical teams of Iraq and Kuwait, who overcame logistical difficulties,
including COVID-19-related challenges, the repatriation to Kuwait of human remains
found in Samawah earlier in 2020 was completed. That is an achievement that
demonstrates that the commitment of all sides can indeed yield results even in the
face of challenges. I sincerely hope that the diligent efforts of the Kuwaiti forensic
team to complete the identification of those remains will bring some relief to the
families of the missing, who have been waiting so long for news of their loved ones.
In that regard, the ongoing guiding role of ICRC, supporting and coordinating
activities on the file during these difficult times, is commendable.
16. The members of the Tripartite Commission continue to demon strate exemplary
commitment and cooperation on the file, which is particularly noteworthy amid the
COVID-19-related challenges. It is my sincere hope that the cooperation will yield
further positive advancements in the months to come.
17. I encourage the Government of Iraq to build on its previous successful efforts
to locate and return Kuwaiti property by taking early steps for the repatriation of
previously identified Kuwaiti books and by accelerating the search for further missing
Kuwaiti items, in particular the national archives.
18. Building on the recent progress made, UNAMI remains strongly committed to
supporting the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait, the Tripartite Commission and other
partners in making further progress in the implemen tation of this important mandate.

20-13866

3/3
