United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8989th meeting

Tuesday, 8 March 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lamce
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Ms. Lebatteux
Mr. Doumbeneny Ndzigna
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Setia/Ms. Dubey
Mr. Broderick
Ms. Nyakoe
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Moe
Mr. Kuzmenkov
Mr. Mansfield
Ms. Strainic

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Women’s economic inclusion and participation as a key to building peace
Letter dated 1 March 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/175)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28157 (E)
*2228157*

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collar of the
microphone will prompt speakers to bring their remarks
to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Germany.
Mr. Geisler (Germany): I would like to thank the
United Arab Emirates for hosting this debate marking
International Women’s Day. I also thank the Executive
Director of UN-Women, the Managing Director of the
International Monetary Fund and civil society briefer
Ms. Coulibaly for their important contributions.
International Women’s Day should not be about
flowers; nor should it be about politicians giving
lectures to women in front of television cameras.
It should be about fighting for women’s rights, this
year more than ever. We are united in solidarity with
the women living through war and conflict, and we
remember the struggles that women and girls still face
around the world.
Today, we stand with Ukraine and with its people,
who have been exposed to an unprovoked heinous
and brutal attack. Suddenly, they find themselves
in a war of aggression. Civilians are suffering from
indiscriminate shelling. They are running out of food,
water and medicine. Millions are fleeing Russia’s
onslaught, and women are suffering disproportionately.
Last week, 141 States Members of the United Nations
condemned the Russian attack on Ukraine. It gives
me hope to see so many Member States standing up
for the Charter of the United Nations, peace, justice
and respect for the international rules-based order.
Germany will continue its support for Ukraine and
its people. Russia must stop the war and withdraw its
troops from Ukraine immediately.
Let us remember all other fights for women’s and
girls’ rights around the world. We pay tribute to those
who bravely protest for peace in Russia. We commend
them for their tireless and courageous efforts.
Furthermore, we continue to be particularly concerned
about the exclusion of women and girls from public life
in Afghanistan. They are suffering restrictions in their
access to education, employment and health services,
as well as their freedom of movement.
2/31

08/03/2022

In many other countries and conflict situations,
women and girls continue to struggle and need our
strong support. For more than 20 years, the women and
peace and security agenda has required the international
community to comprehensively implement and ensure
women’s rights, participation in all sectors and at
all levels, protection, involvement and leadership in
conflict prevention and essential contribution to relief
and recovery after conflicts.
Germany is fully committed to the implementation
of all pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda. As part of our feminist foreign policy, we
will also step up our efforts, in partnership with civil
society, to mainstream the agenda and women’s rights
across all of our activities. Let us join ranks and hope
that next year will give us more reasons to rejoice and
less to worry.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Inanç Örnekol (Turkey): We thank the United
Arab Emirates for organizing this important debate.
We also thank the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the briefers for sharing their insights.
As we mark International Women’s Day, let me
first express our full solidarity with all women and girls
living in conflict situations and other emergencies. We
know that women and girls are particularly impacted
by crises. We stand in solidarity with women and girls
in Ukraine, who are showing resilience and courage in
the face of an unjustified, illegal and illegitimate act of
aggression by Russia.
Recent events in Ukraine, as well as in Afghanistan
and many other places around the world, highlight the
critical importance of the women and peace and security
agenda. We must ensure that all women and girls in
all conflicts and crises are party to resolution efforts,
have their basic needs met and recourse to justice where
their rights are violated, and continue to have access to
essential services.
Delivering life-saving and empowering outcomes
for peace and security is a collective endeavour. It calls
for the concerted efforts of Governments, international
and regional organizations, civil society, women’s rights
organizations and women peacebuilders. Likewise, the
effective implementation of the agenda requires focus
on all four of its pillars: participation, prevention,
protection and relief and recovery, with a holistic and
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

balanced approach. In this regard, we find the theme of
today’s debate to be quite relevant and timely.
Economic empowerment is a vital compound of
women’s full and effective participation, as well as an
enabler to strengthen the overall resilience of society.
However, discrimination against women in controlling
and accessing economic resources, compounded by
the disproportionate burden of unpaid care work,
undermines the economic resiliency of women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict settings. Acknowledging
this challenge, the women and peace and security
architecture, with its four pillars, was designed to
comprise the promotion of economic inclusion and the
empowerment of women and girls. However, 22 years
after the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325
(2001), we see that the agenda’s effective implementation
continues to face challenges.
In order to bridge this gap between commitments
and action, we not only need to do more, but also to
do things differently. This involves focusing on the
root causes of gender inequalities and fragility and
considering links between those challenges. We should
also recognize women as agents of change, rather than
as passive beneficiaries of aid. We must support women
peacebuilders, human rights defenders and civil society
representatives so that they can fully and meaningfully
engage and take part in all aspects of public and
political life. Only then can we achieve truly inclusive
societies that allow for progress in maintaining peace
and security, upholding human rights and implementing
the Sustainable Development Goals.
Advancing women’s inclusion in paid work
holds enormous potential for increased productivity,
innovation and economic growth. Simply increasing
the number of women in paid work could significantly
boost countries’ gross domestic product.
Violence against women, on the other hand, costs
the global economy more than $12 trillion annually,
owing to productivity losses from a lack of women’s
well-being. On these important fronts, as well as
advancing financial inclusion and changing norms
in their respective societies, the private sector has a
critical role to play. We are pleased to see that, working
in partnership with Governments, United Nations
agencies and civil society, a growing number of private
firms are investing in women’s empowerment.
In Turkey, in collaboration with the private
sector and the international financial institutions, we

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

have initiated and successfully implemented various
projects aimed at women’s economic empowerment and
increased participation on corporate boards.
Turkey supports the empowerment and well-being
of women and girls in various emergency, conflict or
post-conflict situations through its comprehensive
development assistance programmes. The projects we
carry out in Afghanistan and Somalia, especially in the
fields of education and health services, are concrete
examples of our efforts to this end. Moreover, Turkey
has been a safe refuge for close to 4 million Syrians,
including women and girls, who had to flee Syria for
their lives. We will continue to make every effort to
support those women and girls and ensure their social
and economic well-being. We sincerely hope that our
efforts will enable Syrian women to participate in the
rebuilding of post-conflict Syria in the future.
Let me conclude by reiterating my country’s
commitment and readiness to contribute to the
international efforts to take the women and peace and
security agenda forward.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I wish everyone a happy
International Women’s Day. I would like to thank
the United Arab Emirates presidency for giving my
delegation the opportunity to speak during this debate.
In Pakistan, women have played and continue to
play an important role in every walk of life. Pakistani
women have served as Prime Minister, Speaker of the
National Assembly, Leader of the Opposition, cabinet
ministers, judges, army officers and fighter pilots.
Twenty per cent of our diplomats are women and that
percentage is increasing. Pakistan has deployed 450
women peacekeepers and their ratio in our contingents
is also growing.
The women and peace and security agenda remains
an important endeavour to promote a comprehensive
approach to building peace and security. All four pillars
of prevention, participation, protection, and relief and
recovery must be built for sustained success in realizing
the success of the women and peace and security agenda
and the objectives of resolution 1325 (2001).
We agree with the need to prioritize key enablers.
First, women should be part of all conflict prevention,
peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts. Secondly,
during
post-conflict
reconstruction,
women’s

22-281573/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

participation should be ensured in all relief and
recovery programmes and activities with a view to
ensuring their economic empowerment and inclusion.
Thirdly, international partners, including international
financial institutions and the private sector, should
promote sustained gender-responsive, communitydriven approaches for women’s economic inclusion and
participation. Fourthly, countries affected by conflicts
require technical support within a culturally sensitive
framework in shaping their judicial, legislative and
administrative sectors for the empowerment of women.
At the same time, all such efforts should be promoted
with full respect for State sovereignty and national
ownership of policies and programmes.
While the Security Council promotes the holistic
approach set out in the women and peace and security
agenda and the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/827),
it is imperative to address the immediate challenges in
numerous situations of conflict where women and girls
are endangered and their fundamental rights violated.
These challenges should be addressed in a holistic,
effective and non-discriminatory manner.
There have been references in this Chamber to
the plight of women and girls affected by the ongoing
conflict in Ukraine. The Security Council is also
preoccupied with the protection of the rights of women
and girls in post-conflict Afghanistan. Less visible in
the Council’s debates is the ongoing violence against
women and girls in occupied Jammu and Kashmir,
where there is documented evidence of rape and
sexual violence being used as a weapon of war against
thousands of women and girls. Their plight should
not continue to be ignored. We must overcome double
standards in all United Nations processes, including in
the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I
also thank the briefers for their briefings.
Today, the world is ravaged by miscellaneous
humanitarian crises, including but not limited to armed
conflicts, climate change and, recently, the coronavirus
disease pandemic. At the same time, women play
an undeniable role in dealing with such challenges,
particularly those related to promoting dialogue and
confidence in the peace and security process. It is a
well-known fact that encouraging women to engage in
4/31

08/03/2022

the peace process increases the possibility of peace.
As a result, their participation and inclusion in the
peace process increase the efficiency of humanitarian
assistance, improve civilian protection, contribute to
the political resolution of disputes and the maintenance
of long-term peace, and accelerate economic recovery.
Numerous United Nations resolutions have
highlighted the importance of women’s empowerment
in armed-conflict prevention, resolution and postconflict situations, as well as their greater efforts to
maintain international peace and security. Given their
important role, women’s political, social and economic
empowerment is critical, as it enhances their resistance
in times of crisis and encourages their participation
in peace and reconciliation processes, as well as postconflict reconstruction and rehabilitation initiatives.
Promoting
women’s
rights,
dignity
and
empowerment is among the prerequisites for the
development of all societies. With that in mind, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, since its establishment, has
always considered the promotion of the cultural, social,
economic and political status of women and girls
as a key element in its policymaking, legislation and
national planning. Despite the United States’ illegal and
inhumane sanctions, which have negatively affected the
financing and execution of the programmes planned by
the Government, civil society and private sectors aimed
at women’s advancement and empowerment, Iran has
remarkable achievements in this area.
In our fragile region, we continue to observe
the devastation created by armed conflicts, violent
extremism and foreign occupation and aggressions, as
well as terrorist attacks targeting innocent civilians,
including women and girls.
Palestinian women and girls continue to suffer as
a result of the decades-long occupation and human
rights violations, as well as the Israeli regime’s colonial
and apartheid policies and practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory, all of which violate the basic rules
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
In Afghanistan, the current situation has severely
affected Afghan women’s rights, including their
political and socioeconomic rights, such as the right
to education, work and political participation. Afghan
women’s rights must be respected. The Taliban should
heed the international community’s call to protect
human rights, particularly women’s rights.
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

Finally, we restate our principled position that issues
concerning women and girls are the responsibility of
the General Assembly. The Security Council should
address that issue only if it is directly related to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the Nordic and Baltic countries.
I would like to start by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s important meeting on women and
peace and security. We also welcome the statements by
the briefers.
On International Women’s Day, I would like to
emphasize our country’s full solidarity with Ukraine and
its people, including women and girls. The unprovoked
Russian military aggression towards a sovereign State
Member of the United Nations is an appalling violation
of international law and United Nations principles and
must be stopped immediately.
We condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in
the strongest possible terms and fully support the
accountability preparations that have been initiated
at the Human Rights Council. The disproportionate
consequences of war on women and girls are well
documented, and conflict-related sexual violence is a
horrifying part of it. We are extremely concerned about
reports of sexual and gender-based violence and call for
accountability and the prevention of further incidents.
We are also concerned about the fact that
large-scale displacement is seriously curtailing the
access of women and girls to basic services, which
could infringe on their sexual and reproductive health
and rights. We commend Ukrainian women for their
courage and resilience in their role in the political,
military and humanitarian response. Women’s and
other civil society organizations are playing a critical
role. We, the international community, must ensure that
the women and peace and security agenda is at the heart
of our response.
We urge the Security Council to stay focused
on women and peace and security across its agenda,
including the deeply concerning situation of women
and girls and the protection of their human rights in
Afghanistan. The women and peace and security
agenda rests on the pillars of prevention, participation,
protection, relief and recovery, which are all crucial and

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

interlinked and must be implemented in an integrated
manner. The agenda is based on, and cannot be achieved
without, ensuring that all women and girls fully enjoy
their human rights, which includes civil, political,
social, cultural and economic rights. That is why we
are committed to the human rights-based approach to
the women and peace and security agenda, including
women’s economic empowerment.
Women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in peace and political processes is not possible if the
effects on women’s economic realities are ignored.
Their safety and protection, including from sexual
and gender-based violence, are not possible without
removing discriminatory legislation and other barriers
to women’s economic empowerment. The role women
can play in any part of the conflict cycle is also shaped
by their disproportionate burden of unpaid domestic
and care work and limited access to social protection.
Women’s economic conditions have deteriorated as
a result of the pandemic. When building back better and
greener, we must ensure targeted measures for women’s
rights and gender equality in all public policies and
budgeting. We must promote transformative measures
that address the power structures that sustain and
reproduce women’s exclusion and gender inequality.
We agree that multi-stakeholder partnerships are
critical. We must engage all levels of actors, including
within the private sector, in order to holistically and
efficiently address implementation gaps in the women
and peace and security agenda. The Generation Equality
initiative, with its multi-stakeholder approach, provides
a positive example.
We are pleased to note that the Compact on Women
and Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action has
several catalytic and board members among the Nordic
and Baltic countries.
Let me end by reiterating that we all need to step up
our efforts to ensure the full enjoyment of human rights
by women and girls. We must step up support to women
human rights defenders and women’s and other civil
society organizations at the grass-roots level. When
unjust obstacles are removed, women will empower
themselves. It is imperative that the Security Council
maintain an active discussion on the women and peace
and security agenda and all its pillars and that we
keep building on the efforts of the trio presidency and
subsequent presidencies to place the women and peace
and security agenda at the heart of the Council’s work.

22-281575/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

08/03/2022

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

2021, which, as Council members know, is contained in
document S/2021/827.

Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
In the light of the Security Council’s programme of work
for this month, we welcome the fact that your country,
Mr. President, has sought to raise the profile of issues
with increasing convening power among members, such
as the subject of today’s meeting, which is particularly
symbolic in the quest for gender equality and will be
discussed tomorrow in Arria Formula format. It also
keeps the doors of the Council open.

In the Ecuador-Colombia border area, we have
implemented programmes with the United Nations to
build capacity for women and girls, with support from
the Peacebuilding Fund. Such funding has proved to be
very important but insufficient in the light of existing
challenges, in particular with regard to focusing on
a preventive approach. To that end, we call for the
replenishment of such funding and for promoting and
strengthening public-private partnerships.

We welcome the presence of representatives of
the majority of countries at today’s meeting and their
participation in the work of the Security Council. The
United Arab Emirates is building on efforts initiated
in October 2021, under Kenya’s leadership, when we
reverted to the open debate format to address the need
to invest in women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
(see S/PV.8886). Those efforts were complemented
by the debate convened by Norway in January (see
S/PV.8949), during which we discussed the protection
of women in peace and security processes.

Ecuador hopes to be elected to the Security Council
in June for the period 2023-2024 and is particularly
interested in developing the women and peace and
security agenda. We will seek to contribute with our
input and joint efforts with all those countries that
are not members of the Security Council but share
that objective.

For that reason, I would again like to highlight,
first, the key role played by non-permanent members
in efforts to move the needle towards methods of
inclusive work and, secondly, the need for the women
and peace and security agenda to become a standing
item on the Council’s agenda, beyond a mere review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
I underscore the importance of promoting the
meaningful participation of women in peace and
security. We must therefore continue creating and
preserving stable environments. For example, we
must continue to build the capacity of peacekeeping
missions to protect the women who work in them by
strengthening zero-tolerance for impunity, as well as
efforts to prevent intimidation and violence.
Resolutions 2493 (2019) and 2538 (2020) are key
tools in the work conducted under the women and peace
and security agenda, although increasing synergies
within the United Nations system, in particular among
its main organs, is essential. In that regard, it is
important to note that the Secretary-General’s report
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) is based on a clear
link between efficacy and the equal participation of
women in peacebuilding activities. That link is also
comprehensively addressed in the report entitled
“Women and peace and security”, of 27 September
6/31

I conclude with my country’s call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and the urgent restoration of
peace as the only way to pay tribute to all the women
and girls who are victims of the armed aggression
against Ukraine.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Guatemala.
Ms. Estrada Girón (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks Her Excellency Mariam Almheiri,
Minister of Climate Change and Environment of the
United Arab Emirates, as well as Ambassador Lana
Nusseibeh, Permanent Representative, and the team of
the United Arab Emirates Mission for having convened
this open debate. Likewise, we extend our appreciation
to the speakers.
Mitigation and recovery constitute the fourth pillar
of the women and peace and security agenda and relate
to post-conflict peacebuilding. That pillar focuses
on incorporating the active participation of women
into post-conflict resettlement, reintegration and
governance. It also calls for the specific needs of women
and girls in post-conflict situations to be addressed and
for their active participation in mitigation and recovery
efforts to be supported.
As the concept note (S/2022/175) clearly indicates,
compared with the other three pillars of the agenda,
the fourth pillar has received less attention from the
international community.
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

The fragility and instability that often characterize
post-conflict environments negatively affect the poorest
and most vulnerable groups in society, including
women and girls. As a result of the unrest and upheaval
caused by the conflict, women are frequently affected
by displacement, limited access to public services,
livelihood insecurity and domestic violence.
As those inequalities increase, social relationships
become strained and community support mechanisms
are weakened. They suffer disproportionately in postconflict situations, making them more vulnerable to
violence and exploitation. When a conflict ends, women
remain at higher risk of sexual violence, exploitation and
human trafficking, especially if they have been forced
to migrate owing to the conflict, which for the vast
majority means dealing with lack of access to adequate
accommodation, education and health-care facilities.
Therefore, adopting a gender perspective that
incorporates the specific needs of women and girls at all
stages of post-conflict reconstruction efforts is critical
to reweaving the social fabric of fractured societies.
Socioeconomic development and poverty reduction
go hand in hand with higher levels of participation
and empowerment of women. We therefore agree
that alliances are a key element of efforts to maintain
international peace and security.
Almost 22 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), States still have a long way to go to
comply with the provisions of this and subsequent
resolutions on the global agenda of women and peace
and security. On the one hand, the consequences of the
coronavirus disease pandemic are creating additional
burdens for women and girls in post-conflict situations.
Internally displaced, migrant and refugee women are
the most affected.
In addition, conflicts around the world continue
to undermine the scarce efforts that have been
made to ensure that women have significant spaces
in our societies. The unprovoked, unjustified and
disproportionate conflict that Ukraine is experiencing
on the part of the Russian Federation is a clear example.
The civilian population is being affected, and their
rights are being violated.
In short, to advance the women and peace and
security agenda, what is needed is a comprehensive
vision of not only the problems but also the opportunities.
The inclusion and economic participation of women is

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

crucial for the development of countries and therefore
also for global peace and stability.
The benefits of investing in the economic inclusion
of women must be optimized with public policies that
provide them with options for child care and that improve
access to education and public services such as water,
electricity and transportation, among others, so that
they can free themselves from those tasks and dedicate
themselves to economic activities, whose benefits are
far-reaching. Likewise, States must continue to apply in
a transparent manner the commitments emanating from
the Beijing Platform for Action, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the various conventions on gender equality
of the International Labour Organization.
On this 8 March, International Women’s Day,
Guatemala expresses its wish to continue investing
in the economic empowerment of women, as that
contributes directly to gender equality, the eradication
of poverty, inclusive economic growth, sustainable
development and, therefore, to the peace and stability
of our societies.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Chile.
Ms. González Carrillo (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the United Arab Emirates for having convened
this important debate. We also thank the speakers for
their presentations and the testimonials provided.
As we have pointed out on different occasions,
the women and peace and security agenda is one of
the priority axes of Chile’s multilateral foreign policy.
Through various means, we have strengthened our
commitment to the implementation and promotion of
resolution 1325 (2000). Indeed, our intersectoral table
includes three ministries and other institutions.
Chile’s strong commitment to the women and peace
and security agenda has made us leaders in the region,
with the launch of the first national action plan in 2009,
updated in 2015 by the second plan, which incorporates
measurable and updatable objectives in a fresh context.
We believe that it is important to acknowledge the
work done by civil society in that area and to focus on the
establishment of follow-up mechanisms that enhance
and expand the implementation of the agenda. We now
have an opportunity to prepare a third document of
the same methodological rigour but that incorporates
a holistic and intersectoral perspective that will allow

22-281577/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

us to strengthen our response to emerging challenges
such as the current health crisis, the natural disasters to
which Chile is so prone, social conflicts and the greater
prevalence of gender violence in all those scenarios.
In that respect, it should be noted that Chilean
foreign policy has defined as standing objectives
the maintenance and promotion of lasting peace, in
addition to a commitment to actively contributing to
the efforts to bring about peace that are promoted by
the United Nations.
Investing in women to promote peacekeeping and
peacebuilding should not focus only on investing in
the development of women’s mediation and negotiation
skills, the promotion of gender-sensitive policies and
programmes and knowledge of international human
rights guarantees, but also on ensuring their economic
empowerment and autonomy so as to make them into
resilient actors in the face of conflicts.
The economic empowerment of women is an
important factor that must be considered in long-term
peacebuilding strategies, not only to contribute to the
sustainability of their communities but also because
the participation of women in the economy in fragile
and conflict-affected countries also makes them less
likely to be the victims of the various forms of violence
stemming from economic vulnerabilities. Likewise, the
participation of women in local economies contributes
to reversing the structural causes of conflicts such as
poverty, including the feminization of poverty.
It is not possible, however, to think about
empowering women in the framework of the economy
and in decision-making processes in the context of
conflicts if the protection of their rights and security
is not first guaranteed. For the same reason, it is
relevant to promote a peacebuilding approach from
the territories according to which we see peace not as
an absence of conflict but as the creation of the basic
conditions that allow our societies to prosper under a
democratic and inclusive rule of law that promotes the
peaceful resolution of conflicts at all levels. That is
where the role of women, in all aspects of public life,
is vital.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
8/31

08/03/2022

of Women, Peace and Security. I wish to add a few
words on behalf of the Czech Republic.
As we are meeting in this Chamber today, on
International Women’s Day, Ukrainian women and
girls are being killed in an aggressive and senseless
war. Women and girls are being disproportionately
affected and are facing a higher risk of sexual and
gender-based violence. We are horrified by reports
of rape of Ukrainian women by Russian soldiers in
occupied towns.
The Czech Republic is gravely concerned at the
impact of Russia’s aggression on the civilian population
in Ukraine. Civilians, including women, children and
elderly people, are being killed in their hometowns.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, more than 2 million
refugees, most of them women and children, have fled
Ukraine, uprooted by Russia’s unlawful, unprovoked
and unjustified use of force, and the numbers of
refugees are rising rapidly.
Let me be absolutely clear: all the suffering and
misery could easily end if Russia, a permanent member
of the Security Council, decided to stop its aggression
against Ukraine and pull back its troops. We call on the
Security Council to act immediately and stop the war.
Russia’s blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law must stop now.
In a historic Uniting for Peace action at the General
Assembly last week, a total of 141 States Members
of the United Nations voted in favour of a resolution
that demands that Russia immediately cease its use
of force against Ukraine (resolution ES-11/1). The
collective wish of the international community for
the end of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine must
not be ignored. The perpetrators of all crimes related
to this conflict must be held accountable, including
making full use of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
Let me take this opportunity to praise all those
brave Ukrainian women who have taken up arms to
defend their homes and loved ones. We also admire
the courage of female journalists and media workers
striving to ensure access to reliable information
amid Russia’s indiscriminate shelling and massive
disinformation campaign. Moreover, we also praise
women activists and civil society organizations for
providing urgently needed humanitarian assistance for
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

millions affected by war and the forced displacement
caused by Russia´s aggression.
The Czech Republic strongly supports all four
interlinked and mutually reinforcing pillars of the
women and peace and security agenda. We believe
that sustainable conflict-prevention and peacebuilding
measures must be human-rights-based and address the
root causes of conflict. This includes addressing gender
inequalities, which have been identified as a highly
reliable predictor of conflict.
While we agree that the economic empowerment
of women has proved effective in our efforts to achieve
gender equality, such initiatives cannot be separated
from the advancement of the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and girls at all levels and in
all sectors of our societies. It applies both in times
of war and in times of peace. Partnerships between
Governments, international and regional organizations,
civil society and the private sector are indispensable for
the effective implementation of all four pillars of the
women and peace and security agenda.
Finally, let me thank the United Arab Emirates for
convening today’s meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): I thank the delegation of
the United Arab Emirates for convening this important
debate on the occasion of International Women’s
Day, gravely overshadowed by the aggression against
Ukraine and the terrible reports reaching us regularly
from the ground.
Armed conflict puts a particular burden on women
and girls and is a setback in the achievement of
gender equality. The war in Ukraine is no exception.
Ukrainian women and girls suffer violence and trauma,
discrimination, marginalization and exclusion in
various ways. But their resilience is inspiring: they
continue to be leaders in the civilian, political, military
and humanitarian responses to the aggression and
stand up with courage and conviction for peace and the
sovereignty of their country.
Through the women and peace and security agenda,
the international community has recognized the diverse
and crucial roles women play as agents of change — in
preventing and resolving conflict, countering terrorism
and violent extremism, building post-conflict peace and
stability, and defending human rights and fundamental

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

freedoms. We have seen this all over the world, be
it in Afghanistan, Belarus or Myanmar. We stand in
support of women and girls around the globe in their
roles as politicians, lawyers, mediators, civil society
leaders, peaceful protestors, human rights defenders,
journalists and media workers. For them to succeed, we
need to invest more in enabling environments that are
free of discrimination and stigmatization.
Ensuring women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in all stages of decision-making remains
as important for gender equality as is investing in areas
where they are notoriously discriminated against or
neglected. The limited access of women to resources
and the exclusion of women in financial and economic
areas that we are addressing today is both cause and
consequence of gender inequity. Women form a
disproportionately large share of the world’s unbanked
population. Inequalities in employment and earnings
limit them in opening accounts in formal financial
institutions. In conflict-affected settings, women’s
economic empowerment is even more restricted, and
marginalized women, who are the majority of victims
and survivors of modern slavery and human trafficking,
face further exclusion.
Our response in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development can be strengthened by
leveraging the role played by the financial sector in
ending these crimes. This is why we responded directly
to calls from the Security Council to partner with the
private sector in tackling modern slavery and human
trafficking and to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals. Together with other Governments, the private
sector and United Nations University, we have created
a public-private partnership called the Finance Against
Slavery and Trafficking (FAST) initiative. FAST aims
at engaging the financial sector to tackle trafficking and
slavery, including doing more to enhance the financial
inclusion of women and girls to prevent vulnerability
in the first place. We invite all States, the United
Nations system, international financial institutions
and financial actors to join our efforts. Together we
must protect and empower all women and girls, which
is a necessary precondition for a more peaceful, just,
inclusive and sustainable world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.

22-281579/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
This International Women’s Day is not a time
for celebration. As the war in Ukraine rages on, and
Ukrainians — including many women — fight bravely
for their country, we must take this opportunity to
reaffirm our full support for Ukraine and its people.
We are particularly concerned at reports of alleged
sexual violence and of attacks by Russia on civilian
facilities, including hospitals, with the risk of depriving
Ukrainians of access to essential health services,
including sexual and reproductive health-care services.
As underlined by the General Assembly last
week (resolution ES-11/1), Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine is a flagrant violation of the United Nations
Charter and of international law. We reiterate our
demand that Russia immediately cease its military
actions and unconditionally withdraw all forces and
military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine.
Today, we also speak to the women of Russia.
Women around the world are building movements for
peace, and in many Russian cities we have seen women
leading peace protests at the risk of their own freedom.
We stand with them, support them and thank them for
their mobilization in a difficult and dangerous context.
Since August 2021, the rights of women and girls
have experienced a sharp setback in Afghanistan. We
welcome the recent launch of the One United Nations
transitional engagement framework, which envisages,
among other things, immediate funding to sustain
social services. On 10 March, the EU will host a
forum for Afghan women leaders in Brussels, which
will be followed by continued structured dialogues
to ensure that Afghan women are included in efforts
towards political dialogue, diplomacy and the future
of Afghanistan.
Those recent developments — and many other
situations around the world — underpin the importance
of placing the women and peace and security agenda
at the centre of all efforts. There should be no cherrypicking in the implementation of the agenda. It is a
peace and security matter and the agenda’s four pillars
10/31

08/03/2022

must be addressed together and comprehensively. In
that regard, we welcome the decision of several Council
members to mainstream women and peace and security
in all discussions.
We know that the inequalities perpetuated and
reinforced by the exclusion of women and girls from
decision-making are drivers of conflict and can lead,
among other things, to an increased risk of sexual and
gender-based violence. We also know that promoting
the economic empowerment of all women and girls is
a way to strengthen overall societal resilience, which
in turn is critical to conflict prevention and long-term
peacebuilding. That is why the promotion of women’s
economic rights and economic justice is at the centre of
the EU’s efforts for gender equality.
Ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of all women and girls in all sectors — including, but
also beyond the economy — is a key priority for the EU.
We highlight the importance of building and respecting
partnerships with civil society organizations, including
grass-roots movements and women human rights
defenders, in that respect. We welcome the important
commitments made during the Generation Equality
Forum, in partnership with civil society, and call on
its participants to ensure the full implementation of the
Forum’s five-year action journey.
It is unacceptable that women civil society leaders,
peacebuilders and human rights defenders, as well as
women journalists and media workers, continue to
face gender-specific threats, challenges and reprisals,
including for simply engaging with the Council. It is
high time that the Security Council set up an effective
mechanism for the protection of its civil society briefers.
Let me conclude by thanking the United Arab
Emirates for organizing this debate and reiterating
the EU’s full commitment to the implementation of all
pillars of the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We greatly appreciate the convening of this
open debate.
The economic empowerment of women is crucial
to achieving peace. There can be no peace, security or
prosperity without conditions conducive to women’s
full development in all their capacities. While not
exclusive, the constraints faced by women in fragile
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

and conflict-affected countries are often more severe
and pervasive.
From restrictive and discriminatory laws, a
lack of legal protection and a lack of recognition,
tax relief and redistribution when it comes to unpaid
domestic care to adverse social norms and a lack
of access to financial, digital and property assets,
women’s economic opportunities in such contexts are
constrained on multiple fronts, including due to the
absence of mechanisms to claim their rights through
legal or informal channels.
It is therefore necessary to work from peace
agreements themselves to ensure that they are fair for
women and include an economic axis, all on the basis of
a human rights framework. When women have control
of financial accounts, generating income and enjoying
economic security, they can increase their savings,
invest more quickly in the welfare and education of
children, improve food security and rebuild rural
economies, thereby contributing greatly to longterm stability.
Beyond that, however, women’s empowerment and
economic inclusion must be anchored in rights. The
root causes of gender inequality must also be addressed
and tackled with a preventive approach. Therefore, as
stipulated in the women and peace and security agenda’s
normative framework, the full, meaningful and
equitable participation of women in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding must be ensured, seeking to involve
them more in political and economic decisions at
all stages of recovery processes while encouraging
their leadership, supporting their organizations and
combating negative societal attitudes about women’s
ability to participate as equals.
We believe that the design, implementation and
monitoring of economic recovery programmes and
macroeconomic policies should be conducted from
a gender perspective, including with an evaluation of
the effects of such programmes on women’s economic
security and rebuilding vital services for women. That
must be undertaken with a vision of the future as
regards the transformative role that women can play in
the economy. Advancing women’s financial inclusion
in fragile and conflict-affected States is an agenda that
concerns not only Governments but the private sector,
major multilateral agencies and civil society.
Finally, women and girls affected by the war in
Ukraine now join the millions suffering due to the

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

unrelenting human cost of armed conflict in Syria,
Afghanistan, Yemen and many other places. They are
disproportionately affected by the painful conflict,
and we therefore reiterate our call on the Russian
Federation to uphold a ceasefire and, guided solely
by its commitments under the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, to facilitate humanitarian
assistance for all affected civilian populations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): We align ourselves
with the statements delivered by the observer of the
European Union and by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security (see S/PV.8989), as well as with the written
advice submitted by the Peacebuilding Commission.
Portugal welcomes this timely debate as we
celebrate International Women’s Day. On this occasion,
we reiterate our full commitment to respect for and the
protection and fulfilment of all women and girls’ human
rights, as well as women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace negotiations, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping.
Discriminatory laws and practices continue to
be imposed on women and girls in many parts of the
world. There is a clear need to fight impunity, to avoid
reprisals and to promote prevention and accountability.
Our thoughts today are with all women and
girls victims of the unprovoked armed aggression in
Ukraine, as well as with all women and girl victims of
violence and discrimination anywhere in the world — in
Yemen, in Afghanistan, in Myanmar and in many other
crisis situations.
Portugal is implementing its national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000). Gender equality is particularly
relevant to the coherence of development policies.
Portugal has therefore reinforced gender mainstreaming
bilaterally and multilaterally in its partnerships for the
full realization of women’s human rights.
Women’s economic empowerment is key to
realizing women’s rights and gender equality. It gives
women more autonomy and more freedom. It boosts
productivity and it increases economic diversification
and income equality. Ensuring the right of women
and girls to education without discrimination is
a fundamental precondition for their economic
empowerment. Also, women who are economically

22-2815711/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

empowered are more likely to be able to contribute to
building peace.
Finally, on this International Women’s Day, we
should all heed the Secretary-General’s call and the
relentless work of the entire United Nations system to
put an end to violence against women in all its forms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
I wish to thank the Emirati presidency of the Security
Council, and Her Excellency Ms. Mariam Almheiri,
Minister for Climate Change and Environment of the
United Arab Emirates in particular, as well as today’s
briefers, for taking the initiative to convene this
debate on the theme of women’s economic inclusion
and participation as a key to building peace, which
coincides with International Women’s Day.
Before I turn to the issue before us at this meeting,
my delegation wishes to reiterate its deep concern
about what is happening in Ukraine, as well as the
humanitarian situation directly affecting women and
children and causing their daily suffering. We once
again call for an immediate cessation of hostilities, the
resumption of diplomatic dialogue, in accordance with
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
immediate attention to the situation of the hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons,
in accordance with the obligation of all States to respect
measures under international humanitarian law.
Returning to the issue at hand, we believe that it is
essential to include women and gender approaches in
processes aimed at building tolerant, diverse, cohesive
and peaceful societies. To that end, efforts must be
redoubled to achieve an effective, full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in those processes,
taking the dual dimension of women into account: on
the one hand, as active agents of peace and, on the
other, as beneficiaries of peace.
Such empowerment is currently a challenge for
the economy and post-conflict areas in transition to
development given the ongoing inequalities between
men and women. That requires the coordinated work
of local governments, the private sector, academia and
civil society in order to achieve women’s involvement
in the processes of economic recovery and access
to resources.
12/31

08/03/2022

Women must be involved in the transformation of
their communities and societies and in the markets and
economic activities that begin to be generated in the
post-conflict phase. They must also participate in the
processes and spaces aimed at attaining their labour and
productive inclusion, with the support of public-private
partnerships and by seeking their active participation
in legislation and policy development.
The work with public-private partnerships should
be geared towards companies promoting the inclusion
and economic empowerment of women in their value
chain, while encouraging investments in economic
activities with greater viability in their communities.
Those productive enterprises and strategies must ensure
that women have the economic resources to enable
them to drive productive projects under their leadership
and the implementation of inclusive business models,
in which they have access to ownership and financing
modalities for those projects.
We must be clear and transparent. In order to achieve
a new and genuine social contract, women’s active and
equal participation in the leadership of such transition
processes must be achieved. Their economic inclusion
and involvement in decision-making are conducive
to building trust in their communities and promoting
partnerships with the public and private sectors.
Finally, I would also like to highlight the key
role of the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding
Commission in contributing to the economic
empowerment of women in transition processes. To
achieve that goal, it is crucial to promote partnerships
with international financial institutions and relevant
regional and subregional organizations, as well as to
carry out coordinated work with the public and private
sectors and civil society, in order to achieve social
cohesion, which entails equal access to opportunities
for all, without discrimination or exclusion of women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): Allow me to begin by
congratulating the United Arab Emirates on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. We also thank the Russian Federation for
its presidency in February. We take this opportunity
to welcome Her Excellency Ms. Mariam Almheiri,
Minister for Climate Change and Environment of the
United Arab Emirates, to the Council. We also thank
the briefers for their inputs.
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

In the context of today’s theme and in response to
the questions guiding our discussion, allow me to make
the following points.
In South Africa, March is celebrated as human
rights month, a time that we use to amplify that women’s
rights are human rights. Today’s discussion is timely as
we take stock of women and peace and security as a
transformative agenda, with a focus on the importance
of investing in women’s participation in all sectors of
our society. In our view, such participation should be
considered more holistically, as women play a dynamic
and essential role in economic activities.
At its Assembly of Heads of State and Government
convened in February 2020, the African Union (AU)
declared the decade 2020-2030 the Decade on Financial
and Economic Inclusion of African Women, which
South Africa fully supports. During our membership
of the African Union’s Peace and Security Council and
the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, we will
also advocate for women’s economic inclusion in postconflict and peacebuilding processes, including at the
level of legislative policy frameworks and institutions.
It is in that context that South Africa supports
partnerships between the United Nations and the AU in
promoting the empowerment of women, as well as the
women and peace and security agenda in its entirety.
South Africa reiterates that the Security Council,
through its missions, must remain responsive to the
needs of the communities that it serves and protects.
When the Council considers a mandate, it is our view
that a peacebuilding component of the mission should
be strengthened in support of women’s participation
and economic empowerment. That should include close
cooperation with national actors and key stakeholders at
all levels. We believe that that will enhance nationallyled and -owned initiatives, which are more effective for
sustainable peace long after the peacekeeping mission
has ended.
In response to the Secretary-General’s call
for more predictable, adequate and sustainable
financing for peacebuilding, as a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, South Africa convened
a multi-stakeholder dialogue to explore the role of
the private sector in peacebuilding. In the context
of that initiative by South Africa, it is our view that
public-private partnerships, along with regional and
international financial institutions, must go beyond
corporate social responsibility and implement not

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

only gender-responsive institutional policies, but also
gender-responsive and peace-positive private-sector
development. We believe that those institutions must
invest directly in women’s capacity-building, education,
training and development, including in support of
women entrepreneurship and financial literacy, access
to digital and information technologies and the financing
of local actors, as well as women’s organizations.
South Africa believes that the United Nations,
Member States and private partnerships are critical to
attainting the Sustainable Development Goals, which
will require increased engagement and the inclusion
of perspectives of women at the community level.
That will enable women to share their experiences and
challenges, as well as explore available opportunities
to strengthen their economic empowerment during the
peacebuilding process.
The Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission must also continue to engage with the
various stakeholders and institutions, such as the
African Women Leaders Network, co-chaired by South
Africa and Germany.
Lastly, engagement among United Nations bodies
that work on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda should align their respective
objectives to support a more holistic approach to
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in
peace processes and post-conflict reconstruction, as
well as prevention efforts. That will allow for greater
coherence and avoid duplication in implementing the
women and peace and security agenda.
As we commemorate International Women’s Day
today, let us all recommit to actions that are discernible
so as to fully and effectively implement the women
and peace and security agenda for all women and
girls affected by all new and long-standing conflicts,
including women and girls in Ukraine and other conflict
situations, such as the Sahel, Palestine and Yemen.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to thank the
presidency for organizing this open debate and express
our gratitude to the briefers for their insightful remarks.
Poland aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

22-2815713/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

On this International Women’s Day, our thoughts
are with Ukrainian women and their families and
children. A couple of days ago, Olena Zelenska, the
wife of the President of Ukraine, stated,
“Our current resistance has a particularly female
face. I admire and bow to you, my incredible
compatriots — those who fight, heal, save, provide
food and continue to do their normal jobs in
pharmacies, shops, transportation and utilities so
that life continues and prevails”.
We also admire the exceptional courage and
determination of Ukrainian women and men alike. Such
courage is sometimes demonstrated by their paying
the ultimate price, as in the case of Maryna Fenina, a
national member of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, who died last Tuesday in Kharkiv while
getting supplies for her family.
We are horrified by the mounting reports of civilian
casualties and the indiscriminate nature of Russian
attacks. As of today, more than 1.5 million persons
have been forced to flee the violence perpetrated by
Russia, with more than 1 million persons crossing
the border with Ukraine into Poland and more on
their way every day. According to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, at
that rate the situation appears set to become Europe’s
largest refugee crisis this century. They are mostly
women and children. In Poland, they are provided with
accommodations and health care and have access to
employment and education.
The escalating violence and forced displacement
deepen the unfolding humanitarian crisis and expose
women and children to an increased risk of physical
and sexual assault. We are appalled by the reports of
rape and other forms of sexual violence committed by
soldiers in occupied areas of the country. We recall
that conflict-related sexual violence constitutes a war
crime and a crime against humanity and is a violation
of relevant Security Council resolutions.
Last year also brought a serious setback for the
freedoms of expression, movement and association and
political inclusion for Afghan women. Many of them
have also been deprived of earned income. We are
gravely concerned about the violations of the human
rights of women and girls, particularly the severe
restrictions on access to education, public life and
employment for women and girls.
14/31

08/03/2022

We cannot allow the reversal of the hard-won
gains involving women’s recognition and protection, as
well as their equal and meaningful participation in all
spheres of life. As a member of the Group of Friends of
Women in Afghanistan, Poland stands ready to support
any initiative within the United Nations framework
aimed at ensuring equal access to education for Afghan
women and girls and safeguarding the positive changes
achieved over the past two decades.
With humanitarian needs growing at an alarming
pace in conflict-ridden Ukraine and Afghanistan
confronting an unprecedented humanitarian crisis, the
economic inclusion and participation of women has
become more important than ever. In times of crisis,
such barriers impede women’s participation in peace
processes and public life in general. Our humanitarian
efforts are now particularly important and should
take into account the female perspective and women’s
specific needs.
We agree that strong partnerships with the private
sector and civil society, including local women’s
organizations, are crucial for advancing the women
and peace and security agenda. By working together,
we can develop programmes and initiatives that will
push for progress towards peace and support women
in crises and post-conflict situations. Despite the many
persisting challenges, we share the hope that together
with public and private partners, genuine progress in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
is possible.
We would like to reiterate that the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in peace
processes and post-conflict reconstruction, in line
with the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent women and peace and security resolutions,
is a prerequisite for successful peace processes and
consequently for a durable and sustainable peace.
Lastly, on this special day — International Women’s
Day — we should all unite around the common goal
to stop the war brought to Ukraine by Russia, with
its devastating consequences for women and children
above all. It is also an opportunity to show solidarity
and mutual understanding among women in the pursuit
of that common goal. In that context, the First Lady
of Poland, Agata Kornhauser-Duda, issued a special
appeal to women all over the world to encourage them to
post a message to women in Russia on this particularly
important day, with a picture and the hashtag,
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

“#RussianWomenStopTheWar”, in order to call on all
women in Russia to demand an immediate halt to the
aggression and that they their sons and husbands are
brought home. Together, women can stop the war. We
encourage everyone to join that important campaign.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): Permit me the honour to
extend Sri Lanka’s good wishes to the United Arab
Emirates on being the President of the Security Council
for the month of March and extend my appreciation for
its convening of this debate, which aims to enhance the
focus on the role that women play in advancing peace
and security.
When the Security Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000), it sent a clear message to the global community
that international peace and security would not be
genuinely achieved if women and girls were left out of
the peace agenda. The women and peace and security
agenda confirmed the role of women’s participation
in ending the cycle of armed conflict. Today’s topic is
very apt, in that it considers how women’s economic
empowerment interplays between the participation
and prevention pillars of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Although significant strides have been made in
executing the women and peace and security agenda in
its 22 years, there remains a missing link — a tangible
concrete connection between public and private
enterprises, especially those working in conflict and
post-conflict environments — to converge with the
aims of the women and peace and security agenda with
regard to women’s economic inclusion.
What we are seeing are siloed business worlds:
one world in which businesses increasingly adopt an
employment policy that is viewed through a gender lens,
thereby committing to corporate social responsibility
initiatives of gender equality, and another world in
which corporate initiatives like Business for Peace and
the United Nations Global Compact — supported by the
United Nations and the women and peace and security
agenda — aim to drive businesses in conflict zones.
Everyone will appreciate that the Global Gender
Gap Report published by the World Economic Forum
makes the claim that female-founded businesses deliver
revenues that are more than twice as high, per dollar
invested, than their corresponding male-led businesses.

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, it makes the claim that bridging the gender
gap would add upwards of $4.0 trillion to the global
gross domestic product (GDP). Conflict-affected
economies are the most affected, owing to lack of
foreign investment, mass emigration and skill loss, all
of which underscores the need for GDP growth.
Those numbers support the case for women’s
participation in businesses and it is those numbers and
data advocating for women’s inclusion in businesses,
especially in conflict zones, that need to be highlighted.
Although important strides have been made since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), women’s direct
participation and representation in formal peace
processes continues to be the one area that lags behind
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Between 1992 and 2019, women served as only
6 per cent of mediators, 6 per cent of signatories and
13 per cent of negotiators globally. The coronavirus
disease outbreak has shed even greater light on the full
extent of gender inequality. In that context, empowering
women leaders to participate in peacebuilding becomes
increasingly crucial. Women who participate in peace
processes tend to represent broader and more diverse
constituencies, ensuring that a range of views and
interests are represented and that peace processes are
fully democratized.
I am compelled to ask the following question, which
I have posed before: Is it not surprising that although
women are active in community peacebuilding, they
are almost completely absent from political negotiating
tables? Their exclusion from peace tables is notable.
Why is that?
First, women are affected by conflict and therefore
by the consequences of peace agreements.
Secondly, in relation to my first point, women’s
inclusion at all stages of peace processes is crucial for
inclusive social justice.
Thirdly, the presence of women makes a difference
with regard to the sorts of issues generally raised in
formal peace processes. Again, reiterating my second
point, women’s absence from negotiating tables
minimizes the possibility of inclusive just politics.
Their relative absence from negotiating tables is
significant because when they are present or participate
in less formal negotiations, they tend to raise different

22-2815715/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

issues and frequently adopt different approaches to
conflict resolution.
I cannot but conclude by recalling what the authors
of the article “Women waging war”, published in
Foreign Policy Magazine in May-June 2001, very
pithily said, “allowing men who plan wars to plan peace
they say is an irrational bad habit”. They suggest that
while men come to the negotiating table directly from
the war room or the battlefield, women generally come
from family care and civilian activism. Now I ask,
finally, is that not something to think about?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): I would like to start by
wishing all women in the world a happy International
Women’s Day. Without their strength, persistence and
resilience, where would we be now?
I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your delegation on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this March and to extend my gratitude
to all briefers for their presentations, which have laid
the foundation for the open debate we are having today.
In our wish to pursue achievements, we should be
mindful not to allow ourselves to backslide. In reality,
many of the milestones that have been set have yet to
be completed, which could potentially draw us back
from the hard-won achievements on women and peace
and security.
In that regard, Indonesia encourages and supports
the Security Council’s efforts to meet those unmet
commitments by first, among other things, supporting
the Security Council’s initiative to intensify crosscutting dialogue and collaborate with relevant United
Nations organs.
While pertinent, we also acknowledge that the women
and peace and security agenda is multidimensional
and interdisciplinary in nature. Therefore, we share
the view that the Security Council cannot be the only
forum in which to pursue the implementation of the
agenda. The contributions and views of other relevant
United Nations organs are especially needed, based
on their mandates, focus, coverage and expertise. It
includes issues such as economic inclusion and publicprivate partnerships.
The convening of this open debate is also
timely, as it coincides with the sixty-sixth session
16/31

08/03/2022

of the Commission on the Status of Women. With
this year’s theme, we can look closer at how climate
change, disasters and environmental degradation
can exacerbate the crises faced by women in conflict
areas. In that way, collaboration with United Nations
organs can be explored through, among other things,
the strengthening of the capacity of United Nations
peace missions to reduce, respond and mitigate the risk
of disasters.
Secondly, with regard to the strengthening
of women’s role in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, more efforts are needed to strengthen
women’s role and capacity in peacekeeping missions,
guided by resolution 2538 (2020), and to emphasize
the importance of establishing an institutionalized
and sustainable peer-to-peer framework for women
peacekeepers and potential women peacekeepers
to share their knowledge and experience. Such a
framework will equip and prepare future women
peacekeepers for their missions. One of the necessary
skills, among others, is community engagement.
Finally, with regard to engaging regional and
national women’s networks, as laid out in the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
partnership within the United Nations and women’s
networks at global and regional levels plays an
imperative role.
At the regional level, while establishing the
Southeast Asian Network of Women Peace Negotiators
and Mediators in 2020, Indonesia witnessed the huge
capacity of women mediators in the region. In 2019,
through Indonesia’s close communication with Afghan
women in preparing to establish the AfghanistanIndonesia Women’s Network, we also saw the same
great potential. Those promising capacities of women
mediators are a tremendous asset to be utilized by the
international community.
Against that background, Indonesia calls on the
United Nations to intensify partnerships with such
networks of women peacekeepers and peacebuilders.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express appreciation to United Arab Emirates for
convening this debate on women and peace and security
today, 8 March, International Women’s Day.
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

Today more than ever, women long for peace. We
all do, but it is women and children who suffer most as
the war continues to rage in Ukraine.
Indiscriminate attacks on civilian infrastructure,
residential areas, schools, kindergartens and hospitals
are mind-boggling. Innocent civilians, many of whom
are women and children, continue to die or flee their
homes. Two million Ukrainian refugees fled for their
lives to Eastern European countries, most of them
women and children.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and in my
national capacity I would like to add the following.
We condemn Russia’s aggression. Violating
agreements reached impedes the opening of
humanitarian corridors to allow the safe evacuation of
civilians and the delivery of much-needed humanitarian
aid, which reportedly has led to the death of civilians,
including children.
That is an assault on international human rights
law and international humanitarian law and a violation
of key principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris. We call
for accountability.
All international humanitarian and human rights
mechanisms must be granted safe, immediate and
unimpeded access wherever needed, throughout the
entire territory of Ukraine.
Unfortunately, Russian aggression and occupation
is well known to Georgia. In fact, what we see in
Ukraine is a continuation of the same pattern we
witnessed in my own country years ago. As of today, in
breach of all the international commitments, including,
inter alia, the EU-mediated 12 August 2008 ceasefire
agreement, the Russian Federation continues its illegal
and provocative actions against the occupied regions
of Georgia, conducting the so-called “borderization
process”, which in effect is nothing less than a
continuous aggression and a creeping annexation.
The humanitarian consequences of the actions I have
mentioned are appalling, given the unbearable human
rights situation and the conditions that the civilian
population — above all women and children — have
to endure.
Ensuring the meaningful engagement of women in
the peace process is a high priority for us. In that regard,

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

Georgia tries to maintain the issue of conflict-affected
women, including internally displaced persons, on the
agenda of the Geneva International Discussions, which
is the only format of negotiations between Georgia
and Russia on the security and humanitarian issues
stemming from the Russian aggression and occupation
of two Georgian regions.
Yet, despite the Georgian Government’s efforts
to empower conflict-affected women, the ongoing
occupation of Georgia’s Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
regions by Russia makes them the most vulnerable
segments of our society. Women living in Georgia’s
occupied regions, as well as in the areas adjacent to
the occupation line, continue to suffer from systematic
grave violations of their fundamental rights and
freedoms, including but not limited violations of their
freedom of movement and illegal detentions by Russian
occupying forces.
In conclusion, let me once again call on the
Russian Federation to immediately and without any
preconditions cease its military actions in and against
Ukraine, as well as to withdraw all its military forces
and immediately and unconditionally reverse the
illegal decisions related to the status of integral parts
of Ukraine, in full respect of Ukraine’s territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence within its
internationally recognized borders and territorial
waters. We call on Russia to do the same with regard to
the occupied Georgian regions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate the United Arab Emirates on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for convening this open debate as we celebrate
International Women’s Day today. I also thank the
briefers for their insightful presentations.
It is increasingly evident that building and
sustaining peace requires ongoing partnerships with
various actors, including women. Empowering women
and advancing gender equality in fragile, conflictaffected and vulnerable settings can transform vicious
cycles into virtuous ones, which will lead to sustainable
peace and development.
My delegation also remains convinced that
efforts to increase women’s economic participation in
conflict and their long-term empowerment must be

22-2815717/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

strengthened. The humanitarian and socioeconomic
development of every segment of society should go
hand in hand in order to help prevent a new spiral of
fragility and instability.
In addition, Malaysia continues to call for greater
efforts and partnerships among Member States, United
Nations entities, civil society organizations, youth
organizations and the private sector. However, those
collaborations and engagements must take into account
local and cultural contexts, as well as national priorities
and policies.
In that respect, Malaysia is committed to building
capacity and advancing the women and peace
and security agenda at the national, regional and
international levels. We continue to provide financial
aid to UN-Women annually, in support of the agency’s
efforts to boost women’s meaningful participation and
the integration of gender perspectives in peace and
security processes.
At the regional level, recognizing the transformative
roles that women play in building, maintaining
and fostering peace and security in the region, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations is currently
developing a regional plan of action on women and
peace and security, with the support of the United States
Agency for International Development and UN-Women.
As part of our continued commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), Malaysia is also preparing its
national action plan on women and peace and security.
My delegation also believes that women’s equal
and full active participation is key to peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. In support of gender-responsive
peacekeeping and peace operations, Malaysia recently
deployed its largest number of women peacekeepers
to serve in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon — 85 female personnel. We remain convinced
that their participation will contribute positively
to promoting inclusivity towards sustainable peace
and development.
Malaysia also calls for greater representation
of women in peace negotiations and mainstreaming
gender perspectives into peace agreements. In that
respect, we encourage the Secretariat to appoint more
women as mediators and special envoys for countryand region-specific conflicts.
18/31

08/03/2022

In conclusion, my delegation strongly believes
that women’s inclusion and participation are critical
for preventing and responding to conflict, as well as
building lasting peace. Malaysia remains committed
to partnering for peace and advancing the women
and peace and security agenda in peacebuilding,
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and postconflict processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and the statement made by the representative
of Canada, on behalf of a number of members of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see
S/PV.8989).
We welcome the initiative of the United Arab
Emirates to convene today’s open debate on
International Women’s Day and are grateful to the
briefers for their interventions.
Today, our thoughts and solidarity are with all
women and girls who suffer from conflicts and crises
around the world, in particular those in Ukraine, many
of whom as we speak are forced to flee their homes,
often leaving behind their husbands and sons, and face
dire humanitarian conditions due to the unprovoked and
unjustified Russian aggression that has been widely and
strongly condemned by the international community.
We would like to use this opportunity to reiterate our
call on Russia for an immediate cessation of the attack
and return to a peaceful path.
Our thoughts and solidarity are also with those
women and girls in Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen
who continue to be exposed to serious violations and
abuses of their human rights, including through all
forms of discrimination and gender-based violence.
Our thoughts and solidarity are also with women and
girls in Libya, Ethiopia and other conflict-impacted
countries of Africa. The situation of those women and
girls constantly reminds us of the importance of placing
the women and peace and security agenda, in all its
aspects, at the centre of the activity of the Council.
We welcome the decision of several Council
members to mainstream the women and peace and
security agenda in all relevant discussions and look
forward to the inclusion of the women and peace and
security dimension in the agreed conclusions of the
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

Commission on the Status of Women at its upcoming
sixty-sixth session.
Italy is a strong supporter of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda remains one of our key priorities. We
are currently in the implementation phase of our fourth
national action plan on women and peace and security
for the period 2020-2024. At the same time, we continue
to engage with our EU partners in the implementation
of the relevant EU action plan for the 2019-2024 term.
Promoting women’s participation in mediation
is one of our main long-standing objectives. In 2017,
Italy promoted the launch of the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network, which now brings together more
than 60 qualified women mediators from 21 countries
from the Mediterranean region.
We also remain committed to providing our
peacekeeping troops with targeted training on gender
issues and promoting an increasing presence of
women among their ranks, in line with resolution 2558
(2020). Addressing inequalities, multiple intersecting
forms of discrimination and gender-based violence,
while promoting the full, effective and meaningful
inclusion of women in all spheres of society and key
decision-making processes, as well as enhancing the
economic empowerment of women and girls, are other
ways to strengthen the resilience of our societies.
Those efforts in turn reinforce peaceful coexistence,
help to prevent conflicts and consolidate peace in postconflict scenarios.
For any progress on women’s empowerment
to be made, the contribution of civil society and
private sector is key. That is why Italy supports the
continued engagement of multi-stakeholders with
Governments and non-governmental actors, working
hand in hand to achieve the same objectives. In that
spirit, Italy encourages and supports multi-stakeholder
initiatives, including the Generation Equality Forum
and its Compact on Women and Peace and Security
and Humanitarian Action. Those objectives are to
be pursued at all levels in all situations, including in
countries that are not directly affected by conflict.
The Italian recovery and resilience plan, which
aims at a sustainable relaunch of the economy after
the coronavirus disease, is also devoted to women’s
inclusion in the economy through ad hoc measures to
make the labour market more inclusive by promoting
gender equality and women’s empowerment. Those

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

concepts were also at the core of the ministerial event
especially dedicated to women, which Italy organized
in August 2021 in the framework of its presidency of
the Group of 20. Women’s empowerment and the fight
against all forms of discrimination and gender-based
violence against women are also key priorities of our
current presidency of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe.
In conclusion, rest assured that Italy will remain
actively engaged in pursuing the full implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, at both
the national and international levels, in full cooperation
with the relevant agencies of the United Nations and
other international partners.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, allow me to
express my sincere appreciation to the United Arab
Emirates for convening today’s open debate on this
important topic on this very special day — International
Women’s Day.
Over the past two decades, since the inception
of the women and peace and security agenda at the
Security Council, we have seen the increased role and
participation of women in all areas — from conflict
prevention to peacebuilding to reconciliation.
Women have also demonstrated their distinctive
role in reconstruction and economic recovery
efforts. Nonetheless, women continue to face many
challenges. They have been among the hardest hit by
the consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
especially in regions affected by conflicts. Too few
gender-sensitive response measures across countries
are aimed at women’s economic security.
To ensure prosperity, long-term economic stability
and growth in all nations, the role of women remains
essential, not just as beneficiaries but more importantly
as leaders and participants. We believe that for the
potential of women to be fully realized, they should
fully engage in and own processes at all stages,
including economic policymaking and implementation.
The international community as a whole must further
encourage and support their efforts. In that regard, we
call for more programmes and capacity-building for
women at the local, national and international levels
in order to help ensure sustainable peacebuilding

22-2815719/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

08/03/2022

and women’s economic empowerment, in line with
resolution 1889 (2009).

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.

Such support, especially to conflict-affected women,
should be multifaceted, from education, employment and
health care to mitigation of the negative consequences
of the pandemic. To that end, it is important to ensure
that a minimum of 15 per cent of official development
assistance is dedicated to advancing gender equality in
conflict-affected countries.

Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Thailand wishes to
express its appreciation to the United Arab Emirates
for having convened this open debate to advance the
important women and peace and security agenda. We
thank Minister Mariam Almheiri for the initiative.
We also wish to thank the heads of UN-Women and
the International Monetary Fund, as well as the
representative of civil society, for their briefings.

Furthermore, we need to enhance partnerships
in that regard — partnerships among the private and
public sectors, partnerships among the United Nations,
Member States and non-governmental actors. That will
help us explore useful tools for analysis, for sharing
experiences and for mobilizing resources and capacitybuilding for women. Member States should incorporate
such measures in their national plans, especially in the
context of socioeconomic development.
The mandates of the relevant United Nations
missions could also be adapted to further support
the role of women in peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction.
The women and peace and security agenda has
long been high on Viet Nam’s agenda, including
during our two terms serving on the Council. Our
commitment stems from the long history of Vietnamese
women leading the fight for our country’s freedom,
independence and development. In recent years,
our women have contributed significantly to the
development and implementation of national plans.
Vietnamese women have assumed key roles in our
national leadership as well as in the business sector. On
international issues, our women have also demonstrated
their role as active United Nations peacekeepers.
In December 2020, in commemoration of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the inception of the
women and peace and security agenda, Viet Nam
hosted the International Conference on Strengthening
Women’s Role in Building and Sustaining Peace:
from Commitments to Results. The Hanoi Action
Commitment, adopted at the Conference, highlighted
the critical role of women in contributing to sustainable
peace and development.
To that end, we will continue to be a proud and
committed partner among the international community
for women’s economic inclusion and empowerment.
20/31

I am pleased that we are gathering here today, on
International Women’s Day, to reaffirm the importance
that we attach to women’s economic participation
and empowerment. Those are key elements in
promoting lasting peace, sustainable development and
inclusive societies.
In that regard, I would like to share the following
five points.
First, Thailand fully supports the women and peace
and security agenda and continues to explore ways to
strengthen its commitment. We believe that the agenda
should cut across the whole conflict cycle to ensure the
sustaining of peace. More efforts should also be made
in terms of linking the agenda with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, particularly Sustainable
Development Goals 5 and 16.
Secondly, women are active players in peace
processes. They must be included in the decision-making
process at all stages to ensure their full and equal
participation. Women personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping operations have contributed positively to
mission success. Their ability to access communities
and to build trust has proved to be a valuable skill set.
As a troop-contributing country, Thailand is pleased to
have achieved a high ratio of women peacekeepers to
male peacekeepers and will continue to work to further
promote women’s participation at higher levels.
Thirdly, women’s economic empowerment is
key to achieving the 2030 Agenda and to promoting
sustainable peace. Governments and stakeholders
should strengthen their efforts in enhancing women’s
ability to generate and exercise control over productive
resources. There should also be measures to promote
access to decent work as well as to ensure that women’s
voices are heard and their meaningful participation
in economic decision-making at all levels, from the
household to global institutions. We should also work
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

to promote women’s access to education, employment
and health-care services as well as to financial tools.
Fourthly, partnership is a crucial element in the
women and peace and security agenda. We must enhance
cooperation and partnership within the United Nations
system and with regional organizations and other
stakeholders, including civil society and the private
sector. We believe that the innovation and resources
of the private sector, channelled through vocational
training and other support programmes, can be utilized
to help women earn income, support their families and
lay a stronger foundation for the community.
Fifthly and lastly, Thailand believes that
national action plans are an important vehicle for the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and provide a framework for a coordinated,
whole-of-Government approach. On our part, we
adopted national measures and guidelines on women
and peace and security, equivalent to the national action
plan, in 2016. They aim to enhance the role of women in
addressing conflict and to support their participation in
political and social processes, both within the country
and at the international level.
In closing, Thailand reiterates our commitment
to advancing gender equality and the empowerment
of women at home and abroad, because we believe
that women not only contribute significantly to the
realization of peace and security but are also pivotal to
the attainment of sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the United Arab Emirates
for having convened this open debate.
The pandemic has exacerbated financial limitations
with respect to the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. The private sector
can contribute to peacebuilding, especially in terms
of investment and the creation of companies run by
women and jobs for women and by women.
In that context, allow me to make the following points.
First, more than two decades and 10 resolutions
later, we still have not sufficiently explored the role of
the private sector in promoting the women and peace
and security agenda. The private sector can play and
is playing an important role in peacebuilding and

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

peacekeeping. Public-private partnerships promote the
post-conflict recovery of local communities, creating
a stable business environment, empowering women
and encouraging their political participation. They also
provide us with fresh resources, actors and approaches.
However, current efforts are scattered and have failed
to maximize that potential.
Secondly, although the resolutions on women and
peace and security do not explicitly mention widows
or widowhood, 50 per cent of the female population
in post-conflict contexts are widows. Widows bear
the burden of social and economic recovery in their
communities and are a critical factor in recovery efforts.
Their economic inclusion not only prevents growing
inequalities but proactively ensures respect for and
the protection of their human rights, while challenging
gender norms. For that reason, Costa Rica encourages
the Council as well as Member States in general to
diversify their associations, directing their financial
support towards non-governmental organizations that
have thematic experience and can have a strong impact
owing to their economic and social investment.
Thirdly, it is crucial to recognize, reduce and
redistribute unpaid and care work and to eradicate
the stigmatization of informal work. The reduction
and redistribution of care requires investment from
both the public and private sectors. Those investments
have significant benefits not only for individuals
and their families but also for the economy, society
and businesses.
Costa Rica calls on States, the private sector
and civil society to support and recognize informal
workers’ organizations, such as cooperatives and
voluntary associations, and to improve data collection
and analysis on issues of particular importance to the
economic empowerment of women, including unpaid
work, paid care work, informal work, part-time work
and domestic work. Let us not forget that what is
unmeasured is unseen.
The peacebuilding architecture has broadened
our understanding not only of the multiple causes and
manifestations of conflict but also of the various actors
that have a clear and direct responsibility for the policies
and practices that can both silence the guns and ensure
the conditions conducive to sustainable peace. Women
are agents of change in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding. Only with women and

22-2815721/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

women’s economic and political empowerment will
there be peace.
I wish everyone a happy International Women’s Day.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar): We would like to thank
the United Arab Emirates for convening today’s open
debate on a subject of great importance.
Twenty-two years ago, resolution 1325 (2000), which
underscored the strong link between gender equality
and international peace and security, was adopted. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development emphasizes
the centrality of gender equality and the need to step
up our efforts for women’s economic empowerment.
Today’s discussion captures the relationship between
these two themes; women’s economic empowerment is
essential to global stability and prosperity.
The State of Qatar’s strategy for implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) is aligned with the vision
set forth in the Sustainable Development Goals. We
believe in the need for strengthening and addressing
barriers to the political and economic participation
of women and girls in conflict resolution and postconflict reconstruction, particularly through initiatives
that enable their inclusion.
Thanks to the leadership of His Highness Sheikh
Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, the Amir of the State of
Qatar, Qatar safeguards women’s participation in peace
and security matters domestically and abroad. The State
of Qatar continues working to unlock opportunities
to increase women’s economic empowerment and
participation in the labour force. When more women
work, our economy grows.
On 20 and 21 January 2022, the State of Qatar
co-hosted with Finland, Colombia and the United
Nations, the High-Level Global Conference on YouthInclusive Peace Processes. Participants noted that
there is a need to invest in the efforts of young women
peacebuilders and to ensure they have meaningful
opportunities to contribute to the economic and postconflict-recovery provisions of peace agreements.
Partnerships and funding are critical. The State
of Qatar provides funding to several United Nations
agencies and departments crucial to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. In addition,
the Qatar Fund for Development (QFFD) has prioritized
22/31

08/03/2022

the economic empowerment of women and girls in
conflict and recovery settings. While collaborating
with strategic partners, the QFFD has focused on such
programmes as women’s participation in both largeand small-scale economic programmes, addressing
structural barriers to their economic participation
and control of resources; sustaining and supporting
microfinance institutions; improving employment and
income-generation opportunities for displaced women;
enhancing education and social services in refugee
camps; and implementing localized economic models to
generate employment and income to stem poverty. For
instance, in April 2021, the QFFD and Digital Citizen
Fund signed a grant agreement to finance a vocational
training project for girls and women in Afghanistan,
focusing on business and digital expertise. As a further
example, the Qatar-based Silatech Foundation supports
young women in conflict and post-conflict situations,
with access to job opportunities, vocational training,
technological platforms and career guidance.
In conclusion, let me assure the Security Council
that the State of Qatar is committed to playing its part
to fully implement the women and peace and security
agenda. Working with international organizations,
academia, civil society and the private sector, we are
aiming at creating the change that will sustain peace
and gender equality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Ms. Nassrullah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate our sisterly country,
the United Arab Emirates, on its accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for March, and to
wish it every success. I would also like to thank the
Russian Federation for having successfully guided the
work of the Council last month.
Today, we all celebrate International Women’s
Day as we believe in the important pioneering role and
efforts of women in development and all other sectors.
My country’s delegation appreciates the sacrifices
made by women in all countries of the world, especially
Iraqi women working to ensure Iraq’s recovery.
We stress women’s rights to use their talents to
build their communities and strive to make their dreams
come true.
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

On this occasion, my delegation would like to lay
out the most important efforts and achievements of my
country’s Government.
First, the efforts of the Iraqi Government have
enabled 96 Iraqi women to be elected to the Iraqi
Parliament, more than half of whom were elected
without using the women’s quota set forth in the
Iraqi Constitution.
Secondly, the Iraqi Government has launched the
second national action plan to implement resolution
1325 (2000). Its programmes and activities are being
implemented, with a focus on preparing women to
be capable and influential in managing negotiations
and peacebuilding.
Thirdly, as regards the economic empowerment of
women, the Iraqi Government launched a second plan
for 2021-2022 that includes six pillars, including the
financial inclusion of women and capacity-building.
Fourthly, pursuant to article 28 of the General
Budget Law for the financial year 2021, ministries
received instructions to create programmes to empower
women in accordance with their needs.
Fifthly, the Central Bank of Iraq requires all banks
to allocate 25 per cent of soft loans to women heads of
families to support their economic projects.
My delegation values the role played by the civil
society in building and promoting women’s capabilities
through empowering them economically and making
them aware of human rights and gender equality. We
also value the significant role played by UN-Women in
supporting Government efforts to promote economic
opportunities for women and facilitating their access to
the labour market.
In conclusion, Iraq stresses its support for all
efforts to achieve the economic inclusion of women
and their participation in peacebuilding, taking into
consideration differences between societies and the
need to respect the national policies and priorities of
each country. We emphasize positive interaction with
various initiatives, in line with our societal reality and
pursuant to the outcomes reached among the States
Members and main organs of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the President of the Security

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

Council and the United Arab Emirates on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of March and
to thank the delegation of the Russian Federation for its
presidency last month.
I would like to express to Minister Almheiri
and Ambassador Nusseibeh how proud I am as an
Arab woman to sit in this Chamber and see them
presiding over the Security Council. It is indeed a
reason to feel very proud. I would also like to thank
the President for organizing this important debate on
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
through partnerships and thank the briefers for their
insightful briefings.
We are meeting today at a very difficult and
challenging time for our world. Women, peace and
security are challenged like never before in our recent
history. The terrifying sounds and images of war — and
not the peaceful sounds and images of partnership — are
what we hear and see today.
Unfortunately, in war situations, people, especially
women and children, are the ones who bear the brunt
of the horror on the ground. While women usually face
conflicts with courage and resilience, their voices are
not heard when the guns go silent and negotiations over
their future and the future of their countries are taken
up and decisions that touch their lives are made.
According to UN-Women, between 1992 and 2019
women represented, on average, just 13 per cent of
negotiators, 6 per cent of mediators and 6 per cent of
signatories in major peace processes worldwide. It is
important now, as we handle the aftermath of current or
future conflicts, that women’s roles reflect the pain and
suffering that they endure.
The world is witnessing a rollback on two fronts:
democracy and women’s empowerment. We are
warned every day that women’s political and economic
empowerment is stalling or declining around the world
and that the assault on women’s rights has coincided
with a broad assault on democracy. The linkages
between them, according to Foreign Affairs magazine,
are stark. The more democracy thrives and the more
diversity and inclusivity we have, the more women can
play their part as partners in all fields, especially in
peace and security.
Foreign Affairs magazine put it best when the
writers noted that women’s participation in mass
movement is like a rising tide that lifts all boats.

22-2815723/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

08/03/2022

Although they were talking about participation in mass
movements, that applies to women’s participation in the
entire peace and security agenda.

Commission, in partnership with the various United
Nations agencies, are essential for the success of the
peace and security agenda.

In its 2021-2022 report Women, Peace and Security
Index, the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and
Security highlights the interlinkages between women’s
rights and other industries, including democracy, and
points out that countries in which women are doing
well tend to be those with strong and more open
democratic institutions.

Equally as important are public-private partnerships
between the private sector and civil society, including
with women peacebuilders and women human rights
defenders, in line with resolution 2331 (2016).

It is true that we have seen some progress in terms
of women’s empowerment and gender equality in some
fields. Yet, according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union’s
latest report on women in parliament in 2021, the global
proportion of women parliamentarians has increased by
only 0.6 per cent to reach 26.1 per cent. Such progress is
slow and is not distributed evenly across the peace and
security agenda.
In August, the long-delayed Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons will be held. It is crucial that we push
not only for a role for women in the negotiations for a
good outcome but also for the equal, full and meaningful
participation of women in the Conference and the arms
control and disarmament processes in general.
In the disarmament and non-proliferation
processes, women are still underrepresented and do not
play an active role in the decision-making process. That
historical underrepresentation of women in nuclearrelated diplomacy must change. That call is in line with
resolution 1325 (2000) and the Secretary-General’s
Agenda for Disarmament, which calls for gender parity
and for the full and equal participation of women in all
decision-making processes related to disarmament and
international security.
As we celebrate International Women’s Day today,
we have to be reminded that the world cannot strive to
live in peace and security if women are not empowered,
including economically, and if their full, equal and
meaningful participation is not guaranteed in all fields
and at all levels.
In order to achieve that goal, the role of Member
States should be complemented with that of other
stakeholders. No one can do that alone. If we are
to be successful, we have to work on building
strong partnerships. Cooperation and coordination
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
24/31

In conclusion, I would like to wish all the women
around this table and all the women around the world
who are participating in peace and security a happy
International Women’s Day.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Council this month and for convening this important
debate today.
I would like to begin by expressing our support to
all women and girls facing the devastating humanitarian
situation in Ukraine.
Since gaining independence, gender equality has
been a central component of Israel’s democracy. That
principle is enshrined in our 1948 Declaration of
Independence and has been integrated into numerous
laws and policies, beginning with the 1951 law on
women’s equal rights. With a record number of nine
women serving as ministers and nine women serving as
directors-general of governmental ministries, women
represent one third of Israel’s Government. The Chief
Justice of our Supreme Court is a woman and three of
her four predecessors were also women.
Although that is not enough, the number of women
in pivotal roles in the Israeli Government is constantly
rising and we are most certainly heading in the
right direction.
Here at the United Nations, we have been vocal
supporters of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions. In fact, we were the first country in the
world to implement parts of resolution 1325 (2000)
into our domestic legislation. Last year, following the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of that landmark
resolution, we appointed our first-ever special envoy
for women and peace and security. Over the past year,
she has been working alongside the Israeli authority for
gender equality and a broad spectrum of civil society
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

organizations to formulate a comprehensive national
action plan for Israel based on resolution 1325 (2000).
The idea of fostering positive cooperation to
harness women’s economic empowerment and inclusion
has been a cornerstone of Israel’s development policies
throughout our history. Back in 1961, well before
gender equality was brought to the forefront, thenForeign Minister Golda Meir founded the Mount
Carmel Training Center, which focuses on the economic
empowerment of women.
The Center — which is part of Mashav, Israel’s
international development cooperation agency — trains
women from throughout the world in key areas such as
agriculture, education, health, food security and more.
To date, more than 30,000 women from around the
world have been trained at the Mount Carmel Center
and have gone on to make a positive impact in their
local communities.
It is particularly apt that the United Arab Emirates
lead this important discussion today, as we see our
country and our other Abraham Accords partners as the
embodiment of countries that have chosen peace and
partnerships as a vehicle for both the greater economic
inclusion of women and a better, brighter future for the
entire region. We see those new partnerships as a way
to increase the participation and positive collaboration
of women in a variety of fields.
In that context, I wish to highlight the landmark
joint events that were held last month at the Dubai World
Exposition and brought together senior women leaders
and entrepreneurs in the field of science, technology
and industry from the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain
and Israel. Those trailblazers showed their unique
perspective concerning how to encourage young women
to enter careers in science and technology and how
to empower them to break glass ceilings and become
leaders in that domain.

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation wishes to express its appreciation
for the convening of this open debate on such a special
day. International Women’s Day serves as an occasion
to take stock of our achievements and see how far we
have come in the struggle for equality.
The role of women in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts is essential, which is why
it is imperative to advance the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. More than
20 years ago, resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirmed the
importance of women’s full and equal participation in
all efforts to maintain and promote peace and security.
Despite the wealth of evidence highlighting the
benefits of investing in women in terms of conflict
prevention and crisis response, the lack of allocation
of sufficient resources and funding has been perhaps
the most significant obstacle to the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Women in conflict situations suffer due to
restricted access to productive assets and resources,
including land, agricultural inputs, finance and
credit and technology, which profoundly affects
their livelihoods. Furthermore, the significant time
burden of women’s unpaid work responsibilities further
hampers their ability to benefit from employment
opportunities, as well as longer-term social, political
and peacebuilding initiatives.

Such positive partnerships can serve as a blueprint
for best practices and a source of inspiration for the
entire international community. In Israel, a country
with a long-standing track record of working to create
positive partnerships for the economic inclusion of
women, we stand committed to share our good practices
and create additional partnerships to that end.

Conflict-affected women often face great difficulties
in accessing public services, social protection and
employment opportunities and are discriminated
against during disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. In addition, women are often absent from
governance bodies and decision-making processes
regarding economic and political reforms, recovery
and reconstruction in their respective countries.
The 2015 global study on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) highlighted
a persistent failure to adequately finance the women,
peace and security agenda. The study recommended
that States, regional organizations and agencies within
the United Nations system allocate at least 15 per cent
of all peace and security-related funding to programmes
that address women’s specific needs and promote
gender equality.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.

Peace and reconstruction processes that include
gender-specific provisions must translate into targeted

22-2815725/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

assistance and tangible reforms to ensure a sustainable
and gender-inclusive peace. However, in some
cases, post-conflict gender inclusion in political and
economic reconstruction does not appear to benefit
from substantial funding. Few donor States have
committed to the United Nations target of 15 per cent
of peacebuilding funding to promote gender equality
and women’s empowerment.
In that context, monitoring funding is critical
to achieving gender equality goals and the effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. International commitments to supporting peace
processes must be translated into gender-inclusive
investments in post-conflict reconstruction. Without
funding commitments, gender provisions will remain
good intentions rather than transformative actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, as we celebrate
International Women’s Day today, let me pay profound
tribute to all the outstanding women around the world
who have contributed to making this world a better
place through their indomitable courage, voice and
leadership. This day constantly reminds us that there
remains a great deal to be done to achieve equality,
freedom and opportunities for women in all walks of
life. I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important open debate.
Women are subject to disproportionate suffering
when conflicts undermine social stability, interrupt
livelihoods and erode economic systems. Despite that
fact, there is systemic exclusion and underrepresentation
of women in conflict prevention and post-conflict
rebuilding processes. The economic empowerment of
women and their participation in the political process
are prerequisites for sustainable peace and development.
In the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), we must continue
our effort to ensure the systematic inclusion of women
in peace negotiations, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction processes to achieve
enduring peace.
As a post-conflict country, in the years subsequent
to the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in
2006, Nepal has made a historic transformation in terms
of ensuring women’s participation in the governance
architecture and their economic empowerment through
constitutional and the relevant legal provisions. The
Constitution of Nepal guarantees 33 per cent of seats in
26/31

08/03/2022

the federal and provincial parliaments and 40 per cent
of seats in local government to women representatives.
We have also implemented targeted incentives for
women, including tax exemption in property ownership
and free or low-interest loans for women entrepreneurs,
to empower them economically.
In 2011, Nepal was the first country in South Asia
and the second in Asia to adopt a national action plan
for the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). Women’s participation in decision-making,
political leadership, peace and security, access to
resources and employment generation are among our
topmost priorities in the national action plan. We also
prepared a second national action plan, which prioritizes
addressing the issues of justice for conflict-affected
women and girls, the improvement of their livelihoods
and the security of women and children.
Investment in the education, vocational training,
capacity-building and professional growth of women
is crucial to ensuring their meaningful participation
in building a peaceful and prosperous society.
More importantly, equality must be guaranteed
by constitutional and legal provisions and must be
implemented through strong institutional mechanisms
with adequate resources. With their exclusive mandate,
the Secretary-General’s special envoys, as well as
United Nations systems, can play an important role in
promoting women’s meaningful participation through
their regular consultation with local women community
leaders and civil society actors.
Nepal is committed to empowering women
politically, economically and socially, with a view to
making our society peaceful and prosperous.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mrs. Mudrenko (Ukraine): While my delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union, I would like to make this statement
in my national capacity. I would like to thank all those
delegations who expressed solidarity and support
for the women and girls of Ukraine during the most
difficult times of war, unprovoked and unjustified,
waged by the Russian Federation. Ukraine was a
member of the Security Council when resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, was adopted
in October 2000.
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

Even against the backdrop of the war, Ukraine
remains committed to further promoting the women
and peace and security agenda in accordance with its
second national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) for the years from 2021 to 2025.
In that context, Ukraine has made notable headway
in establishing procedures to enhance partnerships
between the Government and civil society. Over these
years, Ukraine’s Government cultivated supportive
relations with a flourishing population of young women
entrepreneurs in the private sector and with various
vibrant civil society initiatives.
The all-out Russian invasion of Ukraine, including
from the territory of Belarus, has dramatically changed
our lives and women and children are among the most
vulnerable. Up to 2 million refugees, mostly women
and children, have fled from Ukraine to seek safety.
Every day, women and children lose their lives from
Russian bullets, shells, bombs and missiles.
As of now, at least 41 children have been killed by
Russian occupiers. In the towns and villages occupied
or besieged by Russian troops, suffering has already
reached its height. The critical situation in Mariupol,
Volnovakha, Irpin, Bucha, Vorzel and many other
places should be the subject of immediate attention
and action by world leaders, the United Nations
humanitarian branch and the International Committee
of the Red Cross.
Civilians, mostly women and children, have
effectively been taken hostage. They are not allowed
to leave, and humanitarian aid is not let in. If they
try to leave, Russians open fire and kill them. They
are running out of food and water, and they are
dying. Yesterday in Mariupol, a six-year-old girl died
of dehydration. She was alone in the last moments of
her life, as her mother was killed by Russian shelling
earlier. In the Mykolaiv region, the Russian occupiers
fired at a van with a group of female teachers of the
local orphanage. Three of them were killed today.
There are cases of sexual violence committed
by occupiers. All the arrangements on humanitarian
corridors are being undermined by the Russians.
For instance, in Mariupol the Ukrainian forces
removed mines and roadblocks to ensure evacuation
on a previously agreed route. The Russian forces
immediately shelled and attempted to attack through
that route. All those actions that I have just mentioned
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

Justice will be served sooner or later to all who ordered,
committed and whitewashed those crimes.
The economic inclusion of Ukrainian women who
have been forced from their homes is another important
task. We are heartened by the fact that countries hosting
our refugees are creating a legal framework that will
allow refugees access to social benefits and enable
them to work and earn money to keep their families.
With regard to women’s meaningful participation in
decision-making, I must say that the war has once again
highlighted the role of Ukrainian women in defending
their native soil from the Russian occupiers.
Ukrainian women not only bravely cover the rear
but also often join ranks with the armed forces of
Ukraine and the Territorial Defence Forces. At the
beginning of 2021, there were up to 57,000 women in
the Ukrainian army, comprising 22.8 per cent of the
total, according to the Ministry of Defence.
The number of women in Ukraine’s armed forces
currently is significantly higher. Today Ukrainian
women are showing that they are not afraid to take
up arms to defend their children and land. That was
not their choice until the Russian murderers decided
to deprive their children of their future. It is now the
shared task of the entire international community
to stop Russians from killing Ukrainian women and
children and ensure a safe future for them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Barbados.
Mr. Jackman (Barbados): As we celebrate
International Women’s Day, I have the honour to deliver
today’s statement on behalf of the 14 member States
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). We thank
the United Arab Emirates for convening this meeting,
which focuses squarely on women’s economic inclusion
and the advancement of their full, equal and meaningful
participation in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction. We would also like to
thank the briefers for their thoughtful interventions.
As a region with a long history of activism for gender
equality led by women, the Caribbean Community
wishes to reaffirm its support for an integrated and
holistic approach to the implementation of all four
pillars of resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent
women and peace and security resolutions. We welcome
the critical focus on economic justice for women in
conflict settings, as we commemorate International

22-2815727/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Women’s Day on the theme “Gender equality today for
a sustainable tomorrow”.
The existing challenges in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda are most
acutely observed in the lack of attention to economic
justice for women. Efforts to promote and achieve
gender equality and the empowerment of all women,
including through economic justice, must be central
to peacekeeping and peacebuilding actions across all
conflict-affected countries and regions.
We have seen the transformative power of women
in shaping their societies. Every generation can point
to the critical role of women working at the front
lines in confronting multiple crises. In the Caribbean,
women are at the vanguard of addressing ecological,
environmental, climate, health and economic insecurity.
We are at an inflection point as we witness the erosion
of gender-equality gains, particularly in countries that
are navigating conflict and climate, ecological and
socioeconomic crises.
It is more critical than ever to enshrine the principles
of the women and peace and security agenda and gender
equality, as well as to ensure women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in all aspects of development,
including economic recovery in conflict settings.
We must amplify our efforts to address the
disproportionate impact of intersecting crises on
women and girls in conflict settings. CARICOM
strongly condemns all acts of gender-based violence.
The psychosocial impact of gender-based violence
prevents the meaningful participation of women and
girls in education and economic activity. Perpetrators
of conflict-related and sexual and gender-based
violence must be held accountable. Moreover, victims
and survivors must be provided with psychosocial and
financial support to ensure their recovery and promote
their resilience.
It is our firm belief that women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in peacebuilding, conflict
response and prevention can be facilitated through
effective multilateralism. With growing levels of
hostilities against women, including political violence,
it is important that we actively endeavour to push
for women’s participation in all peacebuilding and
peacekeeping efforts.
A united, coordinated and well-defined framework
is required as we work collectively to achieve the
28/31

08/03/2022

global objectives established in the Convention on the
Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against
Women, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, the women and peace and security agenda and
Sustainable Development Goal 5.
For that reason, we encourage increased
communication and collaboration among international
and regional partners, the private sector and women’s
civil society to close the gaps in promoting women’s
economic inclusion and participation in conflictaffected settings.
In that respect, we must consistently promote and
protect women’s rights and gender equality through
political advocacy, partnership and strategic planning
at all levels. CARICOM sincerely believes that peace
and security are prerequisites for achieving prosperity
and sustainable development. The full implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda deserves
greater attention from the international community and
we remain committed to being a part of the process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. González Hernández (Uruguay) (spoke
in Spanish): Uruguay thanks the Permanent Mission
of the United Arab Emirates for convening this open
debate and providing Member States the opportunity
to share their vision and discuss best practices and
lessons learned.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
(see S/PV.8989) and I will make several comments in
my national capacity.
First, it must be highlighted that although no doubt
remains as to the importance of women’s participation
in political processes to achieve lasting peace, barriers
that prevent their participation persist. Women
face persistent barriers to economic empowerment,
particularly in times of crisis, such as gender gaps
in employment, financial inclusion, reduced access
to education and the disproportionate impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, thereby making it
difficult for women in local communities to become
involved in political peacebuilding processes.
In that regard, all initiatives that promote gender
equality and women’s economic empowerment
in conflict and post-conflict situations through
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

partnerships supported by civil society and the private
sector are essential.

women as agents of change. That is essential for
development and achieving sustainable peace.

From a very early date, Uruguay has supported
efforts in the framework of the agenda and continues
to do so within the United Nations system, together
with other Member States and civil society, to achieve
its full and effective implementation. Accordingly, our
country will launch in April its first action plan that
reflects an inter-agency effort and has concrete goals for
the implementation of the agenda, including in the area
of women’s participation in peacekeeping operations.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.

The participation of uniformed women in the
field remains very uneven and in that regard, Uruguay
has been promoting policies to promote women’s
access to the armed forces and the national police
and increased deployment of female peacekeepers to
peacekeeping operations.
In line with that commitment and in the framework
of the Elsie Initiative, we are conducting an assessment
of the opportunities for women in peacekeeping
operations, which is being developed by the Geneva
Centre for Security Sector Governance, in collaboration
with Cornell University.
The main objective of the study is to provide an
innovative and complete methodology for troop-and
police-contributing countries and to identify and
assess the barriers to opportunities for meaningful
participation by uniformed women in peace operations.
The findings and recommendations of the study are
already being used as an input to national decisions
aimed at overcoming those barriers. We therefore
encourage countries to conduct such assessments in
order to identify barriers to and opportunities for
women’s participation in peacekeeping operations.
Uruguay reiterates its commitment to the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus implementation strategy with a view to promoting
women’s participation in peacekeeping operations
and ensuring women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation throughout the peacebuilding process,
including an integrated gender perspective.
You, Mr. President, can count on Uruguay’s
commitment to continue working to implement
resolution 1325 (2001), strengthen the rights of women
and girls, eliminate the structural obstacles that prevent
them from equal participation in society and empower

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to sincerely congratulate the
delegation of the sisterly United Arab Emirates on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and I wish it every success. I also welcome
Her Excellency Mariam Almheiri, Minister for Climate
Change and Environment of the United Arab Emirates,
and her presiding over this important open debate on
women and peace and security, which coincides with
International Women’s Day.
I would also like to thank Ms. Sima Bahous,
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of
UN-Women, and Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, Managing
Director of the International Monetary Fund, for their
valuable briefings.
Women’s economic inclusion and their participation
in the development process are extremely important
in conflict prevention and recovery from crises. They
require concerted efforts and partnerships at all levels
to promote peace and support women in conflictaffected areas, since women play a significant role in
achieving sustainable development and establishing
stability and societal peace.
The Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to its
international obligations on women’s empowerment,
including resolution 1325 (2001), which stresses the
importance of the equal participation of both genders
at all levels, especially in decision-making, as well
as women’s participation in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The Kingdom of
Bahrain remains committed to supporting all efforts
aimed at the promotion and advancement of women,
especially during these difficult times in our world
today. We also support the noble goal of achieving a
quantum leap in the level of inclusion of women in
peacekeeping operations.
Resolution
1325
(2001)
highlights
the
disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women
and girls and their vital role in conflict prevention and
recovery. Even though women leaders have shown their
ability to adapt and have demonstrated flexibility and
effectiveness in such circumstances, women remain
excluded from decision-making in conflict areas across

22-2815729/31

S/PV.8989 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

the world. Their roles are sometimes merely symbolic.
Therefore, further technical and financial support must
be provided to women leaders in order to increase their
substantive participation in relevant areas.
In that regard, we stress the need for all parties to
armed conflict to respect international law, especially
those principles related to the rights of women and girls
and their protection, including the obligations deriving
from the 1949 Geneva Conventions and its 1977
Additional Protocol, as well as the 1977 Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. We note in that
regard that there is a collective responsibility to put an
end to impunity and hold accountable the perpetrators
of crimes committed in times of conflict, especially
those committed against women and children.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, under the leadership of
His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, focuses
as a national priority on achieving the highest levels
of social security and supporting the participation
of women in all fields. Our Government, under His
Royal Highness Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa,
Crown Prince and Prime Minister, continues to make
every effort to launch projects and programmes for
ensuring the inclusion of women as an active element
in comprehensive development.
Through the participation and cooperation of
relevant private and public parties and societal sectors
and with the support of the Supreme Council for
Women, led by Her Royal Highness Princess Sabeeka
bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa, spouse of His Majesty the
King, the Kingdom of Bahrain has managed to achieve
qualitative effects and sustained progress in gender
equality and women’s advancement, replicating our
successful national experiences and sharing our best
practices at the regional and international levels.
In that regard, Princess Sabeeka bint Ibrahim Al
Khalifa’s Global Award for Women’s Empowerment,
which was launched by UN-Women with the cooperation
of the Supreme Council for Women, represents an
international forum for demonstrating the efforts and
contributions of Governments, corporations, civil
society organizations and experts, as well as relevant
achievements, with respect to women and girls’
empowerment worldwide.
The forum highlights success stories and
innovations, while establishing a new approach
30/31

08/03/2022

that aims to bridge the gender gap for the benefit of
women of all ages and in various fields. It ensures that
such initiatives are sustained during times of peace
and stability, as well as during conflicts, disasters
and epidemics.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates
its support for all international efforts for the promotion
and advancement of women that aim to achieve gender
parity in development and humanitarian areas and to
strengthen women’s contribution as active partners in
security and peace at all levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
wishing all women friends and colleagues happy
International Women’s Day.
I thank the United Arab Emirates for arranging this
important open debate on the women and peace and
security agenda and for its excellent leadership of the
Council this month.
I also thank the Executive Director of UN-Women,
the Managing Director of the International Monetary
Fund and other briefers for their informative and
valuable remarks.
Women’s economic inclusion and full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in socioeconomic
activities is a major prerequisite for sustaining peace.
The women of Bangladesh played an exemplary
role in our nation-building, which inspired us to lead
the efforts for the adoption of landmark resolution 1325
(2001) in the Security Council and to advance the women
and peace and security agenda at the United Nations.
Since our independence, we have been promoting
women’s participation in all spheres of life and society.
Women’s empowerment is one of the 10 special initiatives
of our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina. In terms of the
economic empowerment of women, Bangladesh has
consistently been at the top in the region.
Bangladesh
has
prioritized
public-private
partnerships for women’s empowerment and women’s
inclusion in its economic activities. We have taken
several initiatives to promote the private sector and
women entrepreneurs. All ministries in Bangladesh
have introduced gender-responsive budgeting. Based
on the experience of Bangladesh and the existing
22-28157

08/03/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8989 (Resumption 1)

challenges of the contemporary world, we would like to
highlight a few points.

including through climate-resilient investments, as
well as adaptation and mitigation measures.

First, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has had a disproportionate effect on women. Many
women lost their jobs and income due to the pandemic.
That has compounded the existing challenges faced
by women in conflict-affected countries and should
be factored in while developing and implementing
COVID-19 pandemic response and recovery plans.

Fourthly, the economic empowerment of women
and sustaining peace are complementary. In that regard,
we highlight the role of United Nations peacekeeping
missions in promoting women’s empowerment as
part of their mandate. The peacebuilding component
of peacekeeping missions should be strengthened
in a manner that facilitates women’s economic
empowerment and resilience.

Secondly, public-private partnerships can advance
skills development and entrepreneurship for women,
including in small and medium-sized enterprises. In
Bangladesh, our Government has adopted womenfriendly industrial policies, introduced quota provisions
for women in the allotment of plots in the Bangladesh
Small and Cottage Industries Corporation industrial
estates and started the Women Entrepreneurship
Development Programme to promote the products and
services of women entrepreneurs across the country.
Those initiatives can be practised in other settings to
promote women’s economic empowerment.
Thirdly, as a climate-vulnerable country we would
like to emphasize that climate change and natural
disasters lead to additional challenges for women.
Women’s reliance on agriculture and natural resources
have made them more vulnerable to climate change.
Women are also disproportionately impacted by climateand disaster-induced displacement. Partnership with
and the empowerment of local government institutions
and local non-governmental organizations can help
build resilience in women and girls in such situations,

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Bangladesh’s
long-standing commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda.
The President: The representative of India has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Dubey (India): I am constrained to take the
floor again only because one delegation chose yet again
to misuse this forum to make frivolous remarks against
my country, which deserve our collective contempt
and sympathy.
The entire union territories of Jammu and Kashmir
and Ladakh were, are and will always be an integral
and inalienable part of India, irrespective of what the
representative of Pakistan believes or covets. That
includes the areas that are under the illegal occupation
of Pakistan.
With regard to his other remarks, we will treat them
with the contempt they deserve.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

22-2815731/31
