16

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

research between the Organization of African Unity
and the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity and commends his
efforts in strengthening such co-operation;
2. Notes with deep appreciation the increasing
participation of the Organization of African Unity in
the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and its constructive contribution to that work;
3. Commends the continued efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote multilateral cooperation among African States and to find solutions
to African problems of vital importance to the international community and takes note with satisfaction
of the increased collaboration of various United Nations agencies in support of those efforts;
4. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism,
racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
5. Recognizes the importance of continued close
association by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, where appropriate, with the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity to promote social and
economic development and to advance intra-African
co-operation in this vital field;
6. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations to work closely with the Organization of African
Unity towards the establishment of the new international economic order in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly;
7. Reiterates its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts, on behalf of the international
community, to organize and mobilize special economic
assistance programmes to various African States experiencing grave economic difficulties due to abnormal
political, humanitarian and geo-economic circumstances;
8. Calls upon all Member States, regional and
international organizations and organizations of the
United Nations system to give favourable consideration to those special economic assistance programmes
and accord them full and generous support;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Organization of African Unity informed periodically
of the response of the international community to
those programmes and to co-ordinate efforts with any
similar programmes initiated by the Organization of
African Unity;
10. Requests the Secretary-General and the organizations within the United Nations system to ensure
that adequate facilities continue to be made available
for the provision of technical assistance to the General
Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity as
and when required;

11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with
regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and, in

this connexion, draws attention once again to the
Assistance Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism
and Apartheid established by the Organization of African Unity;
12. Calls upon the United Nations bodies, in particular the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council, the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Jndependence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid
and the United Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to associate closely the Organization of African
Unity with all their work concerning Africa;
13. Calls upon the United Nations Development
Programme, in particular, to arrange for the meeting
between the Organization of African Unity and the
organizations within the United Nations system to be
held in New York during the twenty-sixth session of the
Governing Council of the Programme, in June 1979,
and requests that the meeting deal with relations between the Organization of African Unity and the organizations within the United Nations system as well
as assistance to liberation movements;
14. Reiterates its invitation to the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the
United Nations system to continue and expand their
co-operation with the Organization of African Unity
and, through it, their assistance to the liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution
and on the development of co-operation between the
Organization of African Unity and the organizations
concerned within the United Nations system.
68th plenary meeting
1 December 1978

33/28.

Question of Palestine
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 3236
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 3375 (XXX) and
3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/20 of 24 November 1976 and 32/40 A and B of 2 December I 977,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, 1
!)

Having heard the statement of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian
people/ 0
I. Expresses its grave concern that no just solution
to the problem of Palestine has been achieved and
that this problem therefore continues to aggravate the
Middle East conflict, of which it is the core, and to
endanger international peace and security;
tn Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/33/35
and Corr. I).
20 Ibid., Thirty-third Scss1·io11, Plenary Mectini:s, 59th meeting,
par::s. 73-112.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Reaffirms that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East cannot be established without the achievement, inter alia, of a just solution of the problem of
Palestine on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
the right of return and the right to national indep~ndence and sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Calls once more for the invitation of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the
Palestinian people, to participate, on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX), in all
efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle
East which are held under the auspices of the United
Nations, on an equal footing with other parties;
4. Declares that the validity of agreements purporting to solve the problem of Palestine requires ~hat
they be within the framework of the United N at10ns
and its Charter and its resolutions on the basis of the
full attainment and exercise of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, including the right of return
and the right to national independence and sovereignty
in Palestine, and with the participation of the Palestine
Liberation Organization;
5. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People as contained in paragraphs 55
to 58 of its report; 18
6. Expresses its regret and concern that the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolutions 31 /20 and
32/40 A have not been implemented;
7. Notes with regret that the Security Council has
not taken the action it was urged to take by the General Assembly in paragraph 4 of its resolution 32/40 A;
8. Once again urges the Security Council to consider and take as soon as possible a decision on the
recommendations endorsed by the General Assembly
in its resolutions 31/20 and 32/40 A and in the
present resolution;
9. Authorizes and requests the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, in the event that the Security Council fails
to consider or to take a decision on those recommendations by 1 June 1979, to consider that situation and
to make the suggestions it deems appropriate;
10. Decides to include the item entitled "Question
of Palestine" in the provisional agenda of its thirtyfourth session.
73rd plenary meetinR
7 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/20 of 24 November 1976 and
32/40 A and B of 2 December 1977,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, 21
21 Jbid., Thirty-third Session, S11pp/cmc11t No. 35 (A/33/35
and Corr. I /Rev .1 ) .

17

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned
to it by the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to keep
the situation relati11g to the question of Palestine under
review and to report and make suggestions to the
General Assembly or to the Security Council, as may
be appropriate;
3. Authorizes the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to
continue to exert all efforts to promote the implementation of its recommendations, to send delegations or
representatives to international conferences where
such representation would be considered by it to be
appropriate, and to report thereon to the General
Assen:bly ,it its thirty-fourth session and thereafter;
4. Requ<'sts the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, established under General Assembly resolution 194 ( III) of 11 December 1948,
to co-operate fully with the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and
to make available to the Committee, at its request, the
relevant information and documentation which the
Commission has at its disposal;
5. Decides to circulate the report of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to all the competent bodies of the United
Nations and urges them to take necessary action, as
appropriate, in accordance with the Committee's programme of implementation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People with all the necessary facilities for the performance of its tasks, including summary records of its meetings.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1978
C

The General Assembly_
Recalling its resolution 32/40 B of 2 December
1977,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, 22
Noting, in particular, the information contained in
paragraphs 47 to 54 of that report,
1. Takes note of the establishment, within the Secretariat of the United Nations, of a Special Unit on
Palestinian Rights in accordance with paragraph I of
General Assembly resolution 32/40 B;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the Special Unit on Palestinian Rights continues to
discharge the tasks assigned to it in paragraph 1 of
resolution 32/ 40 B in consultation with the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and under its guidance;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to consider. in consultation with the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
2~ I bid.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

18

the strengthening and the possible reorganization and
renaming of the Special Unit on Palestinian Rights;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the full co-operation of the Department of Public Information and other units of the Secretariat in enabling
the Special Unit on Palestinian Rights to perform its
tasks;
5. Invites all Governments and organizations to
lend their co-operation to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
and the Special Unit on Palestinian Rights in the performance of their tasks.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1978
33/29.

The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "The situation in
the Middle East",
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject,
in particular resolutions 3414 (XXX) of 5 December
1975, 31/61 of 9 December 1976, 32/20 of 25 November 1977 and 33/28 of 7 December 1978,
Taking into account the decisions of the Conference
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to 30 July 1978, concerning the situation in the Middle East and the question of Palestine,23
Deeply concerned that the Arab territories occupied
since 1967 have continued, for more than eleven
years, to be under illegal Israeli occupation and that
the Palestinian people, after three decades, is still deprived of the exercise of its inalienable national rights,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force
is inadmissible and that all territories thus occupied
must be returned,
Reaffirming also the urgent necessity of the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region,
based on full respect for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as for its resolutions
concerning the problem of the Middle East including
the question of Palestine,
Convinced that the early convening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East with the participation
of all parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, is essential for the
realization of a just and lasting settlement in the
region,
1. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of
Palestinian and other Arab territories, in violation
of the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of
international law and repeated resolutions of the
United Nations;
2. Declares that peace is indivisible and that a
just and lasting settlement of the Middle East problem
must be based on a comprehensive solution, under the
auspices of the United Nations, which takes into account all aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in particular the attainment by the Palestinian people of all
its inalienable national rights and the Israeli with2s See A/33/206.

drawal from all the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories;
3. Reaffirms that until Israel withdraws from all
occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, and
until the Palestinian people attains and exercises its
inalienable national rights, a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, in which all countries
and peoples in the region live in peace and security
within recognized and secure boundaries, will not be
achieved;
4. Calls anew for the early convening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East, under the auspices
of the United Nations and the co-chairmanship of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America, with the participation on an equal
footing of all parties concerned, including the Palestine
Liberation Organization in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX) of 10 November
1975;
5. Urges the parties to the conflict and all other
interested parties to work towards the achievement of
a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of
the problems and worked out with the participation
of all parties concerned within the framework of the
United Nations;
6. Requests the Security Council, in the exercise
of its responsibilities under the Charter, to take all
necessary measures in order to ensure the implementation of relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
including General Assembly resolution 33/28 and the
present resolution, and to facilitate the achievement
of such a comprehensive settlement aiming at the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up
the implementation of the present resolution and to
inform all concerned, including the Co-Chairmen of
the Peace Conference on the Middle East;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Security Council periodically on the development of the situation and to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a comprehensive
report covering:, in all their aspects, the developments
in the Middle East.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1978
33/44.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independem•e to Colonial
Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 24
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular reso24 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.1 ).
