S/2020/572

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 June 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 24 June 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations; Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security; and Mr. Koen
Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa, European Union External Action Service,
as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the
Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Russian Federation,
Tunisia (on behalf of the three African members of the Security Council — the
Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference convened
on Monday, 22 June 2020, on the situation in the Central African Republic. A
statement was also delivered by the representative of the Central African Republic,
Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Central Africans Abroad.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-08402 (E) 300620 050820

*2008402*

S/2020/572

Annex I
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix
It is my pleasure to present the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2020/545). I am glad to be joined by Ms. Sylvie
Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic;
Commissioner Smaïl Chergui of the African Union (AU); and Mr. Koen Vervaeke of
the European Union (EU).
At the outset, I strongly condemn the ambush of a joint patrol of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic
in Nana-Mambéré prefecture yesterday allegedly by the Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation armed group. This cowardly attack resulted in the death of two national
soldiers and seven injured. I express my heartfelt condolences to the families of the
killed and to the Government and people of the Central African Republic. I wish
the wounded a prompt recovery. I encourage the national authorities to continue
taking the necessary measures to apprehend and bring to justice the perpetrators
of such inacceptable attacks. I also wish to reiterate my solidarity with the people
and Government of the Central African Republic, whose challenges have been
compounded by the pandemic that has affected us all.
The political situation remains fragile, dominated by the preparations for the
presidential and legislative elections scheduled for December 2020. Political parties
are forming coalitions, increasing public statements, announcing candidacies for the
presidential elections and challenging legal frameworks for the elections. However,
as the report before the Council observes, political tensions were amplified by an
attempt by a group of parliamentarians from the presidential majority to extend the
tenures of the President and the National Assembly in the event that the elections
cannot be held within constitutional timelines due to “unforeseen circumstances”.
The proposal was rejected by the Constitutional Court on 5 June, which has helped
to de-escalate political tensions.
To encourage political dialogue and support an environment conducive to
peaceful, free and inclusive elections, the Special Representative, Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, continued to work closely with partners, including the group of five plus
in Bangui. As part of these efforts, there were several joint engagements with
the Government, the presidential majority, opposition parties and civil society
organizations, which are helping to ease tensions among stakeholders. However, it
is important that national actors increase their efforts to engage directly in an effort
to find constructive and consensual solutions to these political and other issues
and refrain from any destabilization activity. In that context, there is a need for the
Council and the broad international community to be vigilant and remain engaged
as we approach these crucial elections in December 2020.
In that regard, important progress has been made with respect to the electoral
preparations, including the launch today of the voter registration process. MINUSCA
continues to support the electoral preparations as mandated by the Council.
However, the issue of the participation of refugees is still not resolved; securing
their franchise is essential for the full inclusivity of the electoral process, and
therefore for the credibility of the electoral outcomes. The Government has engaged
in consultations with neighbouring countries to advance that process, with support
from the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS). There is also
progress regarding the funding for the elections, with the generous contributions
of partners, including the European Union and the United States. However, the
2/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

$41.8-million basket fund of the United Nations Development Programme still faces
a funding gap of $10.5 million, which does not account for the costs of conducting
elections in neighbouring countries to accommodate Central African citizens who
are refugees. I would encourage partners to provide technical and financial support
for the elections, as well as electoral observers, as they are essential for the further
consolidation of democratic order in the Central African Republic.
The security situation remains volatile due to continued threats posed
primarily by armed groups and militias against civilians, humanitarian workers,
State authority and peacekeepers. Some of the armed groups, including signatories
of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, have acknowledged the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire,
while, at the same time, using violence for expansionist aims.
In the north-east, violent clashes between rival factions of the Front Populaire
pour la Renaissance de la Centrafrique, which began in April, have exacerbated
communal tensions in the region and led to mass population displacement. To protect
civilians and mitigate serious criminal activities by armed groups and militias,
MINUSCA reinforced its forces in the area and launched military operations in Ndélé
and in the Sibut-Grimari-Kouango triangle, in the Ouaka and Kemo prefectures,
in May. These ongoing operations, as well as arrests, have helped to stabilize the
situation. We will continue to combine our approach to the protection of civilians
with support for the rule of law and the fight against impunity.
In the north-west, the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation armed group
continues to expand and challenge State authority. While claiming the protection of
its community against attacks by anti-balaka elements, the expansion of the Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation armed group contributed to the deterioration of the
security situation in that region. In response, MINUSCA is conducting two military
operations to protect civilians, combined with criminal investigations, in order to
mitigate the threat posed by that armed group and to prevent its further expansion.
While MINUSCA maintains its robust posture, it is also engaging with
national and local stakeholders to facilitate dialogue, reconciliation and social
cohesion and to advance the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, in close coordination with the
guarantors and other facilitators of the agreement.
Implementation of the Political Agreement has become more challenging
in the present context, although I welcome the significant progress that has been
made, particularly by the Government. The adoption of political reform legislation
as required by the Political Agreement, the meetings of the follow-up and monitoring
mechanisms, the ad hoc high-level engagements between signatories and the
deployment of the special mixed security units in the west are encouraging signs
of progress.
However, I am deeply concerned by continued violations of the agreement,
mainly by some signatories. Our main concern at the moment is the tensions
between the Government and the leader of Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, who
announced that his armed group would suspend participation in the follow-up and
monitoring mechanisms of the Political Agreement and has adopted an aggressive
response that does not align with his commitments.
In order to preserve the viability of the Political Agreement, MINUSCA is
working closely with the guarantors and other partners and engaging with the parties
to encourage and facilitate dialogue, while maintaining a robust posture to protect
civilians and mitigate threats posed by armed groups and militias.

20-084023/28

S/2020/572

Our partnership with the African Union, the Economic Community of the
Central African States, the European Union and other international partners remains
crucial, particularly at this delicate juncture for the peace process and in the electoral
context. We have adapted our strategic engagement, taking into account the new
context of working during a global pandemic. Two weeks ago, we held a joint United
Nations-AU-ECCAS-EU high-level video-conference with President Touadera to
encourage and support efforts to advance the political process. We will continue to
jointly engage with other stakeholders to advance peace and stability.
The continued armed clashes and the coronavirus disease pandemic are further
exacerbating the humanitarian situation and making the work of the humanitarian
community in the Central African Republic more challenging. Some 2.6 million
people in the Central African Republic are still in need of humanitarian assistance
and protection. This is more than half of the population. I appeal to donors’ generosity
to continue supporting the 2020 humanitarian response plan to help to address the
critical humanitarian needs in the Central African Republic. Furthermore, the
partial closure of the borders with Cameroon and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has contributed to an increase in prices for imported goods, including basic
food items. This situation could lead to negative socioeconomic impacts, affecting
the most vulnerable population.
Although the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is impacting our
operations, MINUSCA continues to ensure business continuity with a view to
performing its mandate, while taking a series of mitigation measures to protect
United Nations personnel and prevent the spread of the virus. For example, our
uniformed personnel adapted their patrols and operations to ensure that civilians
are protected. The Mission’s contingency plan includes an integrated framework to
ensure a consistent and coordinated response across the United Nations system in
the Central African Republic, taking into account the fluid nature of the situation.
The Mission is also strictly complying with the Government’s response plan, while
supporting national efforts to mitigate the risks of the pandemic. This includes
information awareness, delivery of sanitary equipment and building the capacity of
the State authorities and civil society. Ensuring the effective participation of women
in the COVID-19 response efforts is crucial.
I wish to conclude by underscoring the need for continued support to the
Central African Republic at this sensitive and complex juncture. The pandemic is
exacerbating existing vulnerabilities. Despite great strides in the implementation
of the Political Agreement, it remains fragile, and the upcoming elections will be a
major test for all of us. We must therefore redouble our collective efforts in support
of peace and stability in the Central African Republic, including by making full
use of our respective leverage. The continued active engagement and support of
the Council is still needed, as it remains essential to mitigate the risk of a strategic
reversal of the hard-won gains made since MINUSCA’s deployment.
I would like to conclude by commending the leadership of the Special
Representative, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, and express my admiration for the commitment
and dedication demonstrated by the women and men serving with MINUSCA, who
continue to advance the mandate provided by the Council in a very challenging
context. I also wish to pay tribute to MINUSCA personnel who lost their lives while
serving the cause of peace in the Central African Republic.

4/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Annex II
Statement by the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Smaïl Chergui
I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council in the presence of Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Republic, Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon. The invitation extended to us
is once again another demonstration of the growing partnership and cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in the area of peace and security
in Africa.
At the outset, allow me to express the African Union’s solidarity with the
Government and people of the Central African Republic in their efforts to fight
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global pandemic. Since the outbreak of the
virus in the Central African Republic in March of this year, the Government has
taken a number of measures to contain the spread of the virus. We commend the
Government’s relentless efforts despite many challenges. I wish to also take this
opportunity to salute the solidarity shown by some African countries by providing
testing kits and other forms of assistance. The African Union, through the Africa
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, will continue to lead the way in
providing a consistent response across the continent.
Although the pandemic has delayed the implementation of some important
provisions of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, the preparations for the elections have continued uninterrupted. On
5 June, the Constitutional Court of the Central African Republic issued a ruling that
there will be no extension of the presidential mandate due to the coronavirus, ending
a debate that had pitted the ruling party against the opposition. The decision of the
Constitutional Court is a demonstration that the institutions of the Central African
Republic are coming of age, and this is a development that should be welcomed.
Meanwhile, I am pleased to note that, following the Court’s decision, the
Government as well as political stakeholders are now engaged in the preparations
for the elections in accordance with the electoral calendar. Although the country,
particularly the National Electoral Authority, will still require support for its
electoral process, there is no doubt that it will be possible to hold the upcoming
elections within the constitutional deadlines. In that regard, it is important for the
Government to submit to the parliament an organic law that will ensure the renewal
of the National Electoral Authority’s term, which expires on 23 December 2020, so
as to avoid a vacuum.
In that same context, we welcome the promulgation by President Touadera
on 11 June of the law establishing the pension plan granted to former Presidents,
which is part of the recommendations of the Political Agreement. This will go a
long way towards the promotion of national reconciliation. We further welcome the
meeting held in January between the President of the Central African Republic,
Faustin Archange Touadera, and the four former Presidents — Mr. Michel Djotodia,
Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza, Mr. François Bozizé Yangouvonda and Mr. Alexandre
Ferdinand Nguendet. It is our hope that other important legislation regarding political
reforms will be submitted to the parliament ahead of the elections.
After three months of suspension due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Executive
Monitoring Committee of the agreement was able to hold its eighth session, on
22 May, to take stock of the implementation of the Agreement. The general consensus
is that significant progress has been made, in particular, with regard to the adoption
and enactment of all the laws provided for in the agreement, preparations for the
launch of the major disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, and
20-084025/28

S/2020/572

the installation of special mixed security units camps in the north-eastern and southeastern parts of the country.
Allow me to highlight some important achievements, notably, first, the
deployment of the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic and defence
and security forces in several localities, including Birao and Ndélé; secondly, the
deployment of the first group of the African Union (AU) military observers in
Bangui, which will later be deployed at the same time as special mixed security unit
elements in the north-west; thirdly, the restoration of State authority and deployment
of prefects and sub-prefects; fourthly, collaboration between the Armed Forces of the
Central African Republic and peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in
several provinces of the country to protect populations and restore order and State
authority; fifthly, improved collaboration and permanent consultation among the
Government, guarantors and facilitators in the search for solutions to inter-communal
conflicts through facilitation and mediation; and sixthly, the facilitation of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the launch of several quick-impact projects.
As part of the continuous and concerted joint efforts of the AU, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the United Nations and the European
Union (EU) in support of the peace process, ECCAS Secretary-General Mr. Ahmad
Allam-Mi, United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations JeanPierre Lacroix, European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy Mr. Josep Borrell and I held a virtual meeting with the President of
the Central African Republic, Faustin Archange Touadera, on 8 June to take stock
of the progress and challenges. The AU, ECCAS, the United Nations and the EU
recommitted to redoubling their efforts to assist the CAR to consolidate peace.
Despite progress on the political front, there has been an increase in security
incidents involving some of the signatory armed groups to the peace agreement.
Incidents were reported in Ndélé, Bambouti and Obo, where armed groups clashed
with each other, in some instances exacerbating existing intercommunal violence,
particularly in the north-eastern and north-western parts of the country.
The AU is also deeply concerned by the recent coordinated attacks perpetrated
by armed men, on 9 June, in the prefectures of Nana-Mambéré and Ouham-Pendé,
in particular in Bouar, against the special mixed security unit training camp, and in
Pougol, against the checkpoint of the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic
and MINUSCA, localities of the north-west of the country, which caused several
injuries, including to two peacekeepers and members of the special mixed security
unit who were in the process of being deployed following their training in May.
As mentioned on numerous occasions, the AU, as one of the two guarantors,
with ECCAS, of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, is determined
to continue its efforts to reach out to all the signatories who still profess their
commitment to the agreement in order to understand what is behind the resurgence
of violence. We shall leave no stone unturned.
The crisis in the Central African Republic has impacted the region and
we will continue to encourage the involvement of the neighbouring countries in
implementing the agreement. We welcome the establishment of joint committees by
the Central African Republic and some of its neighbours. It is more urgent than ever
to take appropriate measures to guarantee not only the free movement of goods and
people, but also the fight against all forms of trafficking, which could jeopardize
peace and security in the region.
The humanitarian situation in the country demands the attention of the
international community. More than 697,000 internally displaced persons, in
6/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

addition to 616,000 refugees from the Central African Republic in neighbouring
countries, still require immediate assistance. In the time of COVID-19, their plight
is even more precarious.
In conclusion, one year on from the signing of the peace agreement, progress
has been recorded in its implementation, elections are being prepared and there is no
doubt that the Government has expanded State authority across the country. Despite
security challenges, I believe that the majority of signatories to the agreement remain
committed to the accord. The active partnership between the AU, United Nations,
ECCAS and the EU on this matter has yielded tangible results. The AU, however, is
under no illusions: the task ahead remains fraught with many difficulties. In the end,
a peace process is always a marathon, not a sprint.

20-084027/28

S/2020/572

Annex III
Statement by the Managing Director for Africa of the European
Union External Action Service, Koen Vervaeke
I am honoured once again to brief the Security Council on behalf of the
European Union (EU). I am thankful for the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mankeur Ndiaye, and of the Special Representative of the
African Union (AU) for the Central African Republic, Matias Matondo.
I would first like to start by expressing the solidarity of the European Union
in the fight the Central African authorities and population are conducting against the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The Central African Republic was the first country to
benefit from the humanitarian air-bridge launched in May by the EU and its member
States. We have also reoriented our programmes to better support the authorities.
This pandemic hits the Central African Republic in the middle of an electoral
process of critical importance. Despite the adverse circumstances, we would like
to pay tribute to the authorities, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the United
Nations Development Programme for the important progress made in the preparations
and we welcome the commitment by the authorities to adhere to the constitutional
time frame. Our significant financial support for the organization of these elections
and our decision to deploy a mission of electoral experts and mobilize additional
support testify to our trust in, but also to our expectations of, this process. It is
essential to reinforce its inclusivity and foster dialogue, and for all political actors to
act responsibly, resisting those trying to destabilize the process, including through
disinformation campaigns, also targeting international partners. We will remain
particularly vigilant.
In such a context, it is critical that the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic remains
a priority. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/545) gives a clear picture of
the accomplishments in the implementation of the peace process as well as of the
remaining challenges. I would, in particular, subscribe to one of the assessments
made in the report, indicating that “While advances were made in implementing
the agreement, progress was undermined by a resurgence of violence perpetrated
by armed groups” (S/2020/545, para. 10). The latest attacks by an armed group in
the west of the Central African Republic are unfortunately another illustration of
the double game played by some armed groups. I would like to present my sincere
condolences to the Central African Republic authorities and to the families affected
regarding the death of several soldiers, and we hope for a speedy recovery for
those wounded.
Dialogue and confidence should certainly be strengthened between the
parties; the inclusivity of the process reinforced, in particular with women and youth
being given a stronger role; and some key elements of the agreement accelerated —
I am thinking, in particular, of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation, whose independence must be ensured, and of the decentralization
process. The stalled disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process must
be relaunched, with armed groups abiding by their own commitments to disarm
and demobilize. The special mixed security units, whose operationalization benefits
from significant EU financial support, represent another opportunity that members
of armed groups should seize.
But when parties and, in particular, armed groups severely violate the
provisions of the agreement, killing civilians, reinforcing their positions and
opposing the expansion of State authority, I align myself with the call of the
8/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Secretary-General for “stakeholders to take a firm stance regarding the sanctions
to be applied” (ibid., para. 47), as foreseen under article 35 of the agreement. A
year and half after the signing of the agreement, it is high time for this sanctions
regime finally to be defined and applied. These violations are unacceptable and
cannot continue without a firm reaction; the credibility of the agreement would
otherwise be at stake, with the population losing trust in the process. I welcome in
that regard the arrests by MINUSCA together with the Armed Forces of the Central
African Republic, upon request of the Special Criminal Court, of several members
of armed groups suspected of war crimes and crimes against humanity, and, more
recently, the actions conducted against the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
armed group. I would like to pay tribute, on this occasion, to MINUSCA’s work. The
fight against impunity and the strengthening of justice are indispensable for lasting
peace and reconciliation.
In this overall challenging context, I would like to end by reiterating the full
commitment of the EU to supporting the Central African Republic in its peace,
stabilization, democratization and development process, supporting the strengthening
and expansion of State authority, notably as part of the ongoing security sector reform
with our military EU Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic, as
well as our forthcoming civilian EU Advisory Mission, which will be deployed as
soon as COVID-19-related sanitary conditions allow.
In these efforts, we are more than ever committed to closely cooperating
and coordinating with the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States, as well as with all partners involved, including
in particular the neighbours of the Central African Republic, which have a critical
role to play.

20-084029/28

S/2020/572

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
Belgium thanks the briefers.
We welcome the Central African Republic’s rapid and measured response to
fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and are mindful of the additional
stress this pandemic places on the country’s population and institutions. In order to
tackle the pandemic more efficiently, however, there is a need to reinforce internal
solidarity and coordination and to improve coordination with international partners,
including the European Union (EU). We also salute the efforts of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) aimed at mitigating the spread of COVID-19, in line with its mandate,
under these challenging circumstances.
However, COVID-19 should not distract from the need to fully implement the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
We welcome the adoption of the law creating the Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation, which will facilitate the country’s transitional
justice process. All parties must commit themselves to the peace process and
prioritize efforts for the full and proper implementation of the peace agreement
through dialogue. Violations of the agreement are unacceptable and should not
go unchallenged. Appropriate measures should be considered, as foreseen in the
agreement itself. Attacks against civilians, including crimes of sexual violence, and
against humanitarian and United Nations personnel are unacceptable. In this regard,
we remind spoilers that the Security Council can also impose sanctions, as it did
very recently.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and efforts to
reform the security sector have to continue, with the help of MINUSCA, and the EU
Military Training and Advisory Missions in the Central African Republic. Progress
on the operationalization of the special mixed security units also remains essential.
In this regard, we believe it is important to continue efforts to establish the next unit
in the north-east as soon as the security situation allows.
Finally, we see the upcoming legislative and presidential elections as an
important milestone in the peace process. Only a peaceful, inclusive and transparent
process will make them credible and can pave the way towards the sustainable
stabilization and democratization of the Central African Republic. We welcome
the progress made by the Government to organize these elections in line with the
electoral calendar and call on all political actors to respect the democratic process
and refrain from disinformation, hate speech or other destabilization attempts. We
believe it is important to maintain the planned electoral calendar and have full
confidence that these elections can be organized in a smooth and timely manner. It
is why the EU is ready to shoulder almost half of the expected costs of the elections.
We call on all partners of the Central African Republic to follow suit and mobilize
additional resources for the organization of these important elections.

10/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Annex V
Statement by the acting Deputy Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations, Yao Shaojun
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Ambassador Chergui, African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, and Mr. Vervaeke, Managing Director
for Africa at the European External Action Service, for their briefings. I also
welcome the participation of the Foreign Minister of the Central Africa Republic in
this meeting.
The current political situation in the Central African Republic is generally
stable. Progress has been made in implementing the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. China welcomes the efforts of
the Government of the Central African Republic to engage in inclusive dialogue with
armed groups, and commends the passage of several laws by the National Assembly,
including on the creation of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparations and
Reconciliation. At the same time, we still see severe challenges arising from continued
violent attacks by armed groups, which seriously endanger the safety of civilians,
and the pandemic has added new complexities. The international community needs
to continue to provide support to the Central African Republic for lasting peace and
development there.
Holding successful elections is a priority task for the political process in the
Central African Republic this year, and it is essential for the maintenance of peace
and stability in the country. We noted that the National Electoral Authority revised
the election calendar according to the latest developments, and hope all parties in the
Central African Republic will enhance communication and coordination, and work
together to carry forward the preparation process as scheduled. Differences related
to the elections should be resolved through peaceful dialogue and consultation. The
international community needs to create an enabling environment for the smooth
conduct of elections, and provide the necessary support while respecting the
ownership of the Central African Republic.
Achieving sustainable peace and stability in the Central African Republic will
require a holistic approach. The current focus should be on maintaining security
and stability. We are concerned about the continuing violent conflicts among
armed groups, and call on all parties to the conflict to positively respond to the
Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire. We call on all relevant parties to
show political will and continue the implementation of the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. From a long-term perspective, the international community should assist
the Government of the Central African Republic in improving its capacity to protect
the security of its people, provide social services and promote economic and social
development, in order to help the country achieve lasting peace through sustainable
development. We will continue to support the work of the Special Representative
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and hope that MINUSCA will strengthen
coordination with other United Nations agencies and regional and subregional
organizations in order to create synergies.
The Central African Republic is also facing the serious challenge of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The international community must
continue to provide material, technical and personnel-related support. China recently
delivered the second batch of medical supplies to the Central African Republic,
including 150,000 surgical masks and 30,000 testing kits. During the Extraordinary
China-Africa Summit on Solidarity against COVID-19, held last week, President
Xi Jinping emphasized that China will continue to do whatever it can to support
20-0840211/28

S/2020/572

Africa’s response to COVID-19. We will start ahead of schedule the construction
of the headquarters of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention this
year. We also pledge that, once the development and deployment of the COVID-19
vaccine has been completed in China, African countries will be among the first to
benefit. China will continue to work with the international community and to help
the Central African Republic and other African countries to overcome the pandemic
and to make new contributions to peace, stability, development and prosperity in the
Central African Republic.

12/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Annex VI
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We would like to thank the briefers for the information provided today and for
their efforts in the maintenance of peace and security in the Central African Republic.
The fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is a global
endeavour. Its impact is overarching in the Central African Republic owing to the
multiple challenges that the country faces. We express our solidarity with the people
of the Central African Republic and welcome the measures adopted by President
Touadera to mitigate the spread of the pandemic.
We acknowledge the Government’s efforts to continue maintaining, with the
support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the Economic Community of the
Central African States, high-level contact with the leaders of armed groups.
With regard to accountability, we welcome the approval of the various laws
required by the provisions of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic and the creation of the Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation.
We commend the progress made by the strategic committee on elections, and
we are pleased with the presentation of a revised electoral calendar that complies
with the constitutional deadlines set by the National Electoral Authority.
Nevertheless, preparations for the next elections constitute a real challenge
for the Central African Republic as a result of the increased political tensions and,
certainly, the impact of COVID-19.
To create the right environment, one that is conducive to free, transparent,
fair and inclusive elections, the security situation in the Central African Republic,
where armed groups signatories to the agreement continue to perpetrate violent acts
against civilians, humanitarian workers and peacekeepers, needs to be addressed.
Before concluding, we would like to draw attention to the humanitarian
situation. It is necessary to redouble our efforts to support the country in these very
difficult times and to contribute to the humanitarian response plan to assist the
most vulnerable.
To conclude, we would like to acknowledge the role of MINUSCA and the
guarantors of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic for the efforts made in the quest for a lasting and sustainable peace
in the Central African Republic.

20-0840213/28

S/2020/572

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I wish to thank you, for President, for having convened today’s meeting, and
I should also like to express my gratitude to the speakers for their valuable insights.
As has been expressed by many today, the full implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is the only
path towards lasting peace in the Central African Republic. I should like to highlight
three developments.
First, it is good to hear that the preparations for the upcoming elections are in
full swing. I hope that this work can continue safely in respect of the ongoing health
crisis. The Government of the Central African Republic has demonstrated its ability
to utilize innovative solutions in difficult circumstances, for example, the payment
of civil-servant salaries using mobile networks.
Secondly, the law establishing the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Reconciliation has finally been promulgated. That is great news. I hope that the
next steps necessary to operationalize the Commission will follow swiftly, including
the naming of commissioners. The Commission will be an invaluable tool in the
fight against injustice and impunity, and assist in national reconciliation. I hope that
the health crisis will not hinder the continued capacity-building of justice and the
rule of law in the country.
Thirdly, but perhaps most important, violence and the abuse of human rights
in the Central African Republic continue, with new hotspots emerging. Although
the number of human rights abuses has decreased, it is important to remember that
the monitoring and reporting of incidents has, unfortunately, been affected by the
pandemic. Attacks on civilians and the abuse of human rights are direct violations of
the peace agreement and as such are unacceptable. The most visible of such actions
by some armed groups, spoilers, if you will, has been the announcement by the
group Retour, réclamation et rehabilitation of the suspension of the armed group’s
participation in the agreement’s follow-up and monitoring mechanisms, expanding
the area of its activities and directly attacking the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and national forces. Retour, réclamation et rehabilitation, together with five other
groups, has also been listed in the Secretary-General’s report on patterns of conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2019/280). In that light, I fully support the call made by
the Secretary-General in paragraph 97 of his report (S/2020/545) “to take a firm,
unequivocal stance regarding the application of sanctions under article 35 of
the Agreement”.
I should like to end my statement by commending the robust cooperated
response of MINUSCA, the authorities of the Central African Republic and partners
to protect civilians from armed group violence and support the peace agreement.

14/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank our briefers for their presentations and to welcome the
participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic and
express to her our condolences following the terrible attack that just took place in
her country.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, I would like to express France’s solidarity with the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic in the face of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and its humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences. In
that context, France has strengthened its bilateral support to the Central African
Republic in the health sector and underlines that humanitarian access must remain
a priority. That is why we have contributed, jointly with the European Union, to the
organization of a humanitarian air bridge to several African countries, including the
Central African Republic. France also welcomes the efforts made by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to continue delivering on its mandate, and I take this opportunity to
reiterate our full support for the Special Representative, Mankeur Ndiaye.
Secondly, I would like to welcome the progress made in the implementation
of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. The implementation of the agreement must continue, under the leadership
of President Touadera and his Government, because it remains the only path to lasting
peace in the country. I am thinking, for example, about the continued deployment
of the special joint security units, the effective creation of the Commission on
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation and the implementation of the
decentralization process.
However, France remains very concerned by the violations of the peace
agreement committed by some armed groups, in particular attacks against civilians,
humanitarian personnel and security forces, grave violations against children,
sexual violence and unilateral declarations of withdrawal from the agreement. Our
message must be clear: those who engage in such acts must be brought to justice
and the measures provided for in article 35 of the agreement must be implemented.
On our initiative, the Security Council recently sanctioned Abdoulaye Miskine, an
armed group leader; it must continue to sanction those who deliberately hinder the
return of peace.
I would like to welcome the progress made in the preparation of the 2020-2021
presidential and legislative elections. The elections must be held in a peaceful,
inclusive and transparent manner and according to constitutional deadlines. In that
context, France calls on all actors in the Central African Republic to engage in an
inclusive dialogue on all questions related to the holding of the elections. France
also cautions against attempts to destabilize the country’s institutions and against
disinformation campaigns.
Lastly, France calls on the partners of the Central African Republic to contribute
without delay to the funding of the elections. In addition to our contribution through
the European Union, we will therefore provide an additional €300,000.

20-0840215/28

S/2020/572

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
Let me extend a particularly warm welcome to His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic. Like others, we also want to start
by strongly condemning yesterday’s ambush and extending our condolences to the
people of the Central African Republic and to the families of those who were killed
or wounded.
I would like to focus on three brief points.
First, on the elections and the political situation, we fully agree with the
assessment expressed by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix that the presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for the end of this year are absolutely crucial.
We commend all actors, and particularly the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
the Government of the Central African Republic, for their ongoing efforts to ensure
free, fair, inclusive, credible and transparent elections within the constitutional time
frame. In that context, we would also like to welcome and commend the Constitutional
Court’s decision on this issue and the time frame. We call on all actors in the Central
African Republic to engage constructively in the political process before the elections
and to resolve potential difficulties through an inclusive dialogue.
Election campaigns must be conducted in a reasonable and responsible
manner, given the highly fragile security situation. Although it is important that
there be active and meaningful participation on the part of all societal groups in the
Central African Republic, including women who have been internally displaced and
refugees outside the country, all of this must be guaranteed.
Another important factor that obviously influences the election and campaign
is the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Many of the previous speakers
alluded to that issue. Let me just say that this is also, from our point of view, crucial to
the safety and the conditions for the elections. We very much welcome the European
Union’s substantial contribution of $13 million to the United Nations Development
Programme basket fund in support of the elections. We believe that the international
community needs to provide even more help to the Central African Republic, and
we listened to what Under-Secretary-General Lacroix said about the funding gap
of approximately $10.5 million. In that context, let me just say that Germany is
planning to contribute €500,000 additional to support democratic elections.
My second point concerns the implementation of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We would also agree with
others who have said that the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/545) gives a very
clear picture of, on the one hand, the accomplishments made in the implementation of
the peace agreement and, on the other, of the remaining challenges. This is certainly
not a sprint but a marathon, but a marathon very much worth running.
Germany welcomes the progress achieved, particularly the legislative progress
in implementing the peace agreement that has been made, such as the official
establishment of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation
in April. It is important that the Commission become operational as soon as possible.
We also welcome the ongoing work of the Special Criminal Court. For Germany to
fight against impunity, the rule of law, transitional justice and reconciliation remain
essential elements in achieving sustainable peace and stability.
At the same time, we remain, as others, very deeply concerned about the
ongoing violations of the peace agreement committed by various armed groups. In
16/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

this conflict, the recent exit of the rebel group Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
from the peace agreement sets a very negative precedent. The expansion of the group
and its challenges to State authority are serious threats that we follow with growing
concern. We believe that if other groups were to follow suit, this could be harmful
to the peace process as a whole. We are also worried about the lack of progress on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and call on both the armed groups
and the Government of the Central African Republic to resume their efforts.
My last point is on the humanitarian situation. We remain very concerned
about the ongoing human rights violations and conflict-related sexual violence.
Attacks against the civilian population and infrastructure, internally displaced
persons and humanitarian workers must certainly stop. Germany is one of the
largest donors to humanitarian aid in the Central African Republic, and we feel that
it is heartbreaking to see the people suffer not only from acute food insecurity but
also from the toll taken by the COVID-19 pandemic, which is inflicting additional
socioeconomic harm. Germany therefore supports the COVID-19 response by United
Nations agencies and the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement in humanitarian
emergencies with additional funding of €300 million. The funds can be used for all
countries covered by the United Nations and International Committee of the Red
Cross appeals — the Central African Republic, of course, being one. We therefore
must step up international support, and we commend the timely and recent efforts
by the Peacebuilding Commission to address the impact of COVID-19 in the region.
We would like to seize this opportunity to once again reiterate our support
for the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and call on the armed groups
to translate their rhetorical commitment into action on the ground. Finally, we feel
that we need to continue to continue to support the authorities of the Central African
Republic in their commendable work on the elections, the political situation, the
implementation of the peace agreement and current challenges.

20-0840217/28

S/2020/572

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
At the outset, allow me to thank the briefers, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations; Ambassador Smaïl Chergui, African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security; and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa at the European External Action Service. I also welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic.
Before I begin, allow me to offer my heartfelt condolences to the families of
the victims of the ambush on the joint United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and Armed
Forces of the Central African Republic patrol yesterday in Nana-Mambéré prefecture.
Allow me to focus on three points.
First, we need to ensure the implementation of the Bangui agreement by
all parties. Allow me to congratulate you, Madam Minister, and the people of the
Central African Republic, on the first anniversary of the Bangui Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in February. The
Agreement remains the primary framework for restoring and sustaining peace in
the country. We join the Secretary-General in commending the efforts made by
the Government and other signatories to utilize the Agreement’s implementation
mechanisms, as well as their proactive and constructive engagement to build trust.
National ownership is the key to success. The presence and ability of the Government
to enforce the Agreement are indeed crucial. We welcome all efforts to enhance the
Government’s capacity and acknowledge MINUSCA’s crucial role in ensuring the
country’s stability.
Secondly, upon hearing the updates from the briefers, it is apparent that the
role of MINUSCA is more important than ever, as it must support Central African
stakeholders in creating an environment conducive to a peaceful electoral process
this year. MINUSCA should continue its efforts to win the hearts and minds of the
people, including through community engagement.
We are concerned about the humanitarian situation in the country, including the
impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the country. The situation requires
ongoing humanitarian support from international partners. We commend MINUSCA’s
continued efforts to carry out its mandate despite virus-related restrictions.
In addition, we are deeply concerned about the number of attacks against
MINUSCA’s uniformed and civilian personnel. We also concur with those who have
emphasized the importance of making the safety, health and security of peacekeepers
a top priority. We have to ensure that they are safe during the COVID-19 pandemic.
There are some Blue Helmets who have contracted the virus. We wish them a speedy
recovery and hope they can soon resume their noble duties. As the Council’s largest
contributor of peacekeepers to MINUSCA — with 358 peacekeepers, including
18 women — Indonesia will continue to make the safety, health, and security of
peacekeepers a top priority.
Thirdly, given what has transpired in the region, we need to provide the
necessary support and space for democratic elections to take place in the Central
African Republic. As the country prepares for the elections, we urge partners to
increase their financial assistance.

18/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

As an archipelagic State, Indonesia has witnessed first-hand the logistical
complexity of organizing democratic elections. The democratic process is anything
but easy. It is a vast logistical undertaking that requires thorough planning to
anticipate all challenges, especially amid the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath.
We look forward to hearing updates on the preparations leading up to the election
and MINUSCA’s role in supporting the country.
We should continue to pursue the path of peace in the Central African Republic
and the region, as laid out last year. For its part, Indonesia renews its commitment as
a true partner for peace, including in the Central African Republic.

20-0840219/28

S/2020/572

Annex XI
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
At the outset, I would like to thank today’s briefers for their informative
presentations. I would also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Republic to our video-teleconference.
Despite a number of challenges, the parties to the conflict in the Central
African Republic managed to achieve tangible progress in advancing the political
process launched in February 2019. We see a gradual improvement in the security
and human rights situation and a decrease in the level of armed violence. National
armed forces and internal security forces are expanding throughout the territory of
the Central African Republic. Considerable progress was also made in the training
and deployment of special mixed security units. We encourage the authorities of
the Central African Republic to resume the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme for combatants as soon as
the restrictions related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) are lifted.
Given the current challenging circumstances, all parties should strictly
comply with the provisions of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and refrain from undermining the political situation
in the country. Russia, for its part, will continue to use its influence to encourage the
signatories to refrain from all forms of violence in the interests of restoring peace
and security to the country.
We commend the steps by the Central African Republic authorities to curb
the spread of COVID-19 and would like to echo the Secretary-General’s call for all
political actors to resist any temptation to politicize the pandemic.
We strongly believe that it is in the interest of the Central African Republic to
fulfil the critical task of organizing and conducting peaceful, free and transparent
presidential and legislative elections as an important milestone in the further
stabilization and normalization of the country. We are pleased to note that a revised
electoral calendar, published on 29 April, adheres to constitutional timelines.
We welcome President Touadera’s efforts to de-escalate political tensions,
including his decision to launch a frank dialogue with the country’s political actors
and partners in order to best prepare for the elections. We are encouraged by the
fact that the National Assembly adopted several important laws that conform with
the Agreement.
The Russian Federation is ready to continue to provide comprehensive
assistance to the Central African Republic with a view to resolving the crisis,
including by facilitating security sector reform. We are convinced that increasing the
combat readiness and professional training of the national army and law enforcement
agencies will effectively counter the activities of illegal armed groups, ensure the
protection of civilians and help restore State authority in all parts of the country.
We will continue to follow closely the process of national reconciliation,
acting in coordination with the Central African Republic authorities, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the country’s international partners. It is high time to render our collective
support to Bangui to overcome the current challenges.

20/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting to discuss the situation in the
Central African Republic.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of South Africa, the
Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and my own country, Tunisia (A3+1).
We would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations; Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union (AU) Commissioner for
Peace and Security; and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of the
European Union External Action Service, for their briefings and insights on the
situation in the Central African Republic.
We welcome the progress made thus far in implementing the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Central African Republic. Our delegations are
encouraged by the continued commitment of the Government and other signatories
to utilize the Agreement’s mechanism despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
outbreak. We also welcome the Government’s efforts to improve its relations with
neighbouring countries through holding bilateral commissions and tackling the
illegal exploitation of natural resources.
We commend the role played by the AU and the Economic Community of
Central African States in supporting the implementation of the Agreement, including
through the use of programmatic funding by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to
strengthen the role of women in advancing the Agreement. We continue to encourage
all parties to fully implement the Agreement in order to help extricate their country
from the cycle of continuous conflict.
We are fully aware of the challenges ahead as the country prepares for the
forthcoming presidential and legislative elections scheduled for December while it
responds to the health emergency posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. We commend
the National Electoral Authority for publishing the revised electoral calendar
to facilitate elections within the constitutional timelines while adapting to the
challenges of COVID-19.
On the security front, our delegations are concerned about the resurgence
of violence perpetrated by some armed groups, particularly in Birao, Bria, Ndélé
and Obo — in direct violation of the Agreement. Regrettably, in some areas, the
violence has not only displaced civilians but also resulted in civilian and peacekeeper
casualties. Equally concerning are the violent attacks on the Central African Armed
Forces and humanitarian workers, which constitute violations of international
humanitarian law.
The A3+1 also remains concerned about the humanitarian situation in the
Central African Republic amid the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. We
deeply regret that violent confrontations among armed groups are still taking place,
thus deepening the divide between signatory armed groups along ethnic lines
and fomenting intercommunal tensions. Armed groups should utilize the dispute
resolution mechanisms provided for in the Peace Agreement in order to resolve
their differences.
It is possible that COVID-19 could exacerbate the conflict. The A3+1
therefore welcomes the Government’s quick response to contain the pandemic. We
also welcome the support extended by the United Nations and other international
and regional partners. We encourage the international community to provide further
20-0840221/28

S/2020/572

support to address the root causes of insecurity in the Central African Republic in
line with the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and in accordance with the
aims of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We welcome that the Central African Republic authorities have undertaken
essential political reforms, including the adoption of appropriate legislation,
in line with the terms of the Peace Agreement. The recent adoption of the law
establishing the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation
attests to the determination of the Central African authorities to adhere to the
Agreement requirements.
This is a significant step towards achieving stability and social cohesion. It is
in that context that we welcome the desire of the Government and other signatories
to utilize the Agreement’s implementation mechanisms to that end.
It is our hope that further advances in the composition of the special mixed
security units and in the process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation will be made in the coming months, in line with the requirements of the
Peace Agreement.
We applaud MINUSCA’s efforts to promote the participation of women in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement, mainly through local monitoring and
implementation mechanisms. We continue to encourage the meaningful and sustained
participation of women in the peace process, as well as in the forthcoming elections.
We welcome MINUSCA’s commitment to protecting civilians from armed
group violence, as well as the valuable support it extends to the Central African
authorities in order to hold accountable the perpetrators of serious crimes and other
human rights abuses, including the use of sexual violence.
Finally, we commend MINUSCA and other regional and international
partners for facilitating the implementation of the Political Agreement and assisting
the Central African authorities in organizing free and fair national elections. To that
end, we welcome the generous support already provided by all partners, including
through the Peacebuilding Commission. We call on all stakeholders to demonstrate
resolve and work together for the successful holding of the forthcoming elections,
which, in our view, are crucial for the stability of the country.

22/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Annex XIII
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I want to start by thanking our briefers. We share much of their analysis. I join
others in paying tribute to the peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, especially those
who lost their lives. I also want to express our solidarity with the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic as they face the twin threats of continued
violence and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
The 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic remains the only viable framework for sustained peace in the
Central African Republic, and it must be protected. While condemning the repeated
violations of the peace agreements by members of some signatory armed groups,
we welcome the recent progress, including ongoing high-level engagement and the
legislation adopted by the National Assembly.
The Central African Republic is at a crossroads as it approaches the presidential
and legislative elections later this year. As many here said today, those elections
must be a turning point. In that regard, I want to underline three points.
First, the elections must be held in a peaceful, free and transparent manner,
and within constitutional deadlines. All Central Africans must have the chance to be
heard. The United Kingdom is in the process of reviewing its financial support to the
elections, and we hope to make a contribution shortly.
Secondly, as certain signatories withdraw participation, we must not be
complacent about the risks to the Peace Agreement. We stand ready to impose
appropriate measures, including sanctions, in line with article 35 of the Agreement,
in response to violations.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom reiterates the Secretary-General’s call for a
ceasefire amid the COVID-19 pandemic in order to allow health and humanitarian
needs to be met. We recognize that the secondary impacts of COVID-19 will require
support to address the longer-term fallout from the pandemic.
In conclusion, while challenges still remain in the Central African Republic,
we should reflect on how far the country has come. Let us all today recommit to
ensuring that this year marks a turning point for the Central African Republic and
leads to long-term stability and prosperity for the people, because they deserve it.

20-0840223/28

S/2020/572

Annex XIV
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations, Cherith
Norman-Chalet
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Commissioner Chergui and
Managing Director Vervaeke for their briefings today.
First and foremost, today we wish to congratulate the Government of the
Central African Republic on its efforts to advance preparations for credible, free
and fair elections. We were especially heartened by the Constitutional Court’s recent
decision emphasizing that “any slippage of the electoral calendar should derive from
broad national consultations seeking a consensual solution.”
We further commend the Government for issuing two decrees that are
crucial for the timely holding of the elections. The first set the voter registration
period, which starts today and ends on 28 July, with the final voters list released in
September. The second decree specified that the Central African diaspora will be
allowed to vote overseas in 13 countries, including the United States.
According to the Secretary-General’s most recent figures, the United Nations
recognizes there are approximately 697,000 internally displaced persons in addition
to the 616,000 Central Africans registered as refugees in neighbouring countries.
Today we reaffirm our support for efforts aimed at enabling and encouraging the full
participation of refugees and internally displaced persons in the elections.
The United States remains committed to helping the Central African Republic
hold credible and timely elections that will confirm the legitimacy of the elected
Government, improve the long-term stability of the country and reinforce the
democratic progress achieved by Central Africans in recent years. We also continue
to support the United Nations Development Programme’s role in providing, together
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINUSCA), essential assistance, and we will conduct
complementary programming ourselves. However, the United States remains deeply
concerned that some armed groups continue to interfere with the implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
with the resurgence of acts of violence perpetrated by armed groups in Birao, Bria,
Ndélé, and Obo.
Following the Secretary-General’s 23 March call for a global ceasefire to fight
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we note that the Front populaire pour
la renaissance de la Centrafrique, the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain,
and the Retour, réclamations et réhabilitation armed groups publicly declared their
adherence. However, the Secretary-General has observed that those declarations have
yet to translate into action on the ground. It is deeply troubling that the same armed
groups professing a commitment to a ceasefire are conducting military operations
against their competitors and unarmed civilians.
As we have said before, MINUSCA’s top priority, as directed by the Security
Council, is the protection of civilians. There is no contradiction between protecting
civilians and using MINUSCA’s good offices to support the success of the peace
agreement. Indeed, the two efforts are mutually reinforcing.
Finally, we understand MINUSCA suffered its first fatality from COVID-19
on 11 June, and we would like to take this opportunity to express our sincere
condolences to the entire Mission and to the late staff member’s family.

24/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic, Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, at today’s meeting.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Ambassador Chergui and
Mr. Vervaeke for their insightful briefings.
It is encouraging to see the positive developments in the Central African
Republic with respect to the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation. We commend the efforts made by the Government to that end. It
is vital that this momentum be maintained, especially at the present crucial juncture,
with important elections approaching. We are therefore deeply troubled by the
reported violations of the Agreement, which may undermine recent achievements,
and the ongoing acts of violence committed by armed groups threatening the safety
and livelihood of civilians.
Against this backdrop, we would like to stress the following points.
First, we call on all signatories to fully respect the Agreement and work
towards a favourable political climate by building trust and constructively engaging
in dialogue. This approach will pave the way for the success of the upcoming
presidential and legislative elections, which is a critical juncture for bringing peace,
stability and sustainable development to the people of the Central African Republic.
We support the call of the Secretary-General for a ceasefire in response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and urge all parties to heed this call.
Secondly, we stress the importance of maintaining support for Central African
Republic, both technically and financially, so that it can continue its peace process
and electoral preparations as well as strengthen its capacity to protect civilians,
address humanitarian challenges, minimize the impact of COVID-19 and so forth.
We commend and express our support for the contribution of the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African States, as the guarantors of the
Agreement, as well as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and other international and regional partners
for their work.
Thirdly, we would like to emphasize the importance of ensuring the safety
and security of peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. They are on the ground to
help and should never be the target of attacks.

20-0840225/28

S/2020/572

Annex XVI
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic, Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon
[Original: French]
This is a rather sensitive period for the Central African Republic, and it is
important for me to be able to address the Security Council. Through me, the Central
African Republic has the honour of addressing the Security Council at this crucial
time, when humankind is fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Before I begin my remarks, I would like very humbly to extend my warm
and heartfelt congratulations to the President on his country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to thank all previous speakers
for the encouragement they have given to the Government of the Central African
Republic. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the President for
convening this important meeting of the Security Council and to express, on behalf of
the people and the Government of the Central African Republic, our gratitude for the
kind attention we have received and for the unwavering esteem in which my country
is held. Allow me also to reiterate our confidence in Secretary-General António
Guterres as well as our complete gratitude for his sustained commitment to peace and
development in the world. We are above all grateful for the constant and multifaceted
support the United Nations has extended to the Central African Republic.
My thanks also go to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of the European
External Action Service, and Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). I particularly thank Mr. Ndiaye for the work carried out by MINUSCA
and all the contingents represented therein, who, despite the diversity of their
nationalities, are working together in the service of peace.
As MINUSCA is the expression of tremendous international solidarity,
the Central African Republic, through me, wishes to pay a vibrant tribute to the
peacekeepers who have fallen on Central African soil. I would also take this
opportunity to call on the Security Council to support the renewal of MINUSCA’s
mandate in order to meet the many challenges that remain, including this year’s
specific challenges, namely, the presidential and legislative elections and the return
to peace.
On 6 February 2019, the Central African Republic took a major political step
forward with the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic (S/2019/145, annex), whose first anniversary we
celebrated this year and which indisputably testifies to our determination to make
progress and transcend inertia and resistance to stability and to our desire to achieve
prosperity for the Central African people. It is important to recall that the Agreement
was drawn up on the basis of, on the one hand, the 2015 popular consultations,
which led to the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation, and the demands of the
armed groups, on the other hand. The proper implementation of the Agreement,
which was reached after lengthy negotiations, requires that we — the Government,
the 14 armed groups, the facilitators, the guarantors, the countries of the subregion
and the international community — work synergistically to address the challenge of
achieving lasting peace. The successful implementation of the Agreement requires
the firm and unanimous support of the international community.
26/28

20-08402

S/2020/572

Silencing the guns in the Central African Republic, in line with campaign
organized by the African Union for this year, is not only achievable but inevitable.
The crusade for peace, within which we have been building, for more than four years
and through a multisectoral strategy, our gradual return to stability and the rule
of law, is a commitment by the Government that has been implemented under the
leadership of the President of the Republic and Head of State, Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera. It is therefore incumbent upon all of us who wish to promote the culture
of peace — the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States and all States members of the Security Council — to make
the Central African experience a successful model for conflict resolution in Africa.
The Government of the Central African Republic has consistently demonstrated
its good will in the implementation of the main provisions of the Political Agreement,
in particular through the formation of an inclusive Government and the adoption
and promulgation of the laws called for therein, including those on decentralization,
the status of former Heads of State and the regulation of political parties. The
Government of the Central African Republic has also consistently demonstrated its
good will by making progress in the restoration of the State, including the recruitment,
training and redeployment of defence and security forces; undertaking efforts to
mobilize the countries of the subregion; supporting the work of the facilitators and
guarantors of the Political Agreement that has contributed to stability in the country;
and participating in the joint commissions initiated in 2019 with Cameroon, the
Congo and Chad, and in other joint commissions planned for 2020. Despite the
fact that we had to postpone some recent meetings owing to restrictions stemming
from COVID-19, these meetings are still being planned, specifically those with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan.
With the support of the international community since 2015, several initiatives
have been undertaken by the Government as part of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation (DDRR) process. Following the pilot programme in
September 2017, a full DDRR programme was launched in December 2018. In April
2019, these efforts resulted in the implementation of the programme in the northwest, with the disarmament of combatants from a number of armed groups and their
reintegration into the socioeconomic fabric of the country, the special mixed security
units or the national defence and security forces, including the armed forces. In
Ndélé, in the north-east, the full DDRR programme is being operationalized. In fact,
the teams responsible for implementing the programme in the north-east arrived in
the area this weekend and were due to begin their work today. With regard to the
special mixed security units, the legal framework associated with their concept of
operations has also been set up. On 12 May 2020, the first contingents of these units,
which were trained in Bouar, officially received their certificates of completion.
Despite its stated commitment to implementing the recommendations of the
Political Agreement and the tireless struggle for the return to peace, the Government
continues to face several challenges, including many forms of violence resulting
from the non-compliance with or outright violation of the provisions of the
Agreement by armed groups that are signatories thereto. As a consequence, there
has been a resurgence of violence in the hinterlands and a rearming of certain armed
groups, in particular the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique, the Front populaire
pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique and the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
group. Nevertheless, the Government remains committed to continuing its efforts
aimed at engaging in constructive dialogue with all actors, combating impunity and
strengthening the rule of law, including through arrests and the redeployment of the
judicial administration.

20-0840227/28

S/2020/572

In the light of the multiple violations of the Agreement by recalcitrant armed
groups, a majority counterweight to build peace is imperative. To remain passive
would mean disassociating ourselves from the counterbalancing effort; it would be
tantamount to choosing not to oppose the violence of others. We cannot be spectators
of human interactions of a nature that discourages our ideals and values nor can we
be mere witnesses to the fatalities suffered by the Central African armed forces
during the recent cantonment operation in the west of the armed group Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation.
The Government of the Central African Republic is also showing its
determination to organize inclusive, free and transparent elections. I therefore
take this opportunity to express the Central African Government’s thanks and
encouragement to the European Union for funding the elections in the country. I
would also take this opportunity to appeal to international partners and other friendly
countries to mobilize resources in order to preserve the efforts made and strengthen
the democratic foundations in memory of the victims. Respect for the constitutional
deadline for the upcoming elections is a collective commitment by all — and one
that it is important to keep.
Despite the difficulties relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, the National
Electoral Authority is working hard to do everything possible to ensure that the
constitutional deadline is met. Dismemberments at the national level have been
finalized and voter-registration operations are being initiated. To this end, the
electronic equipment, the software for managing the electoral register and all related
equipment have been purchased and delivered. The resources mobilized for this
purpose have already surpassed the 50 per cent mark.
Progress has also been made in the promulgation of decrees establishing the
period for establishing the electoral lists and the list of countries where Central
Africans abroad will be allowed to participate in the presidential elections. All of
that is sufficient evidence of the Central African Republic’s firm commitment to
moving forward in holding the 2020-2021 elections. In addition, the law on the
National Electoral Authority is being drafted at the legislative level, and it will be
taken up at an extraordinary session of the National Assembly starting on 25 June.
It should also be noted that the Government is allowing Central African refugees
to participate in the vote, subject to the agreement of the countries concerned to
take the steps necessary to ensure the exercise of the civil rights of Central African
refugees present on their territories.
I would conclude by reiterating the request of my country, the Central African
Republic, for a strengthening of multifaceted support of MINUSCA, in particular in
terms of its equipment and human-resource capacity. We make this request because
we must compel peace, which would be possible if MINUSCA had a more robust
mandate. I hope that the international community will remain mobilized alongside
the people and the Government of the Central African Republic and continue to
support us in our efforts to restore our country and achieve the complete lifting of
the embargo that still hangs over us — a people who aspire only to genuine peace.

28/28

20-08402
