S/PRST/2005/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 March 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5136th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 March 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the conclusions of the London Meeting
on supporting the Palestinian Authority on 1 March. The Council supports the
objectives of the London Meeting to help the Palestinian leadership strengthen
the institutions needed for a viable and independent Palestinian State.
“The Security Council hopes that the London Meeting will be part of the
longer-term process of international support to the Palestinian people and the
Palestinian Authority and a contribution to helping both sides implement the
road map endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003) and
agreed to by the parties as the path towards a lasting comprehensive negotiated
settlement to the Middle East conflict, based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002).
“The Security Council stresses the crucial importance of security, good
governance and development of the Palestinian economy. In this context, the
Council welcomes President Abbas’s comprehensive plan presented at the
London Meeting for strengthening the Palestinian Authority’s institutions in
these three areas.
“The Security Council stresses the key role of the international
community in assisting the Palestinian Authority in taking forward this plan.
The Council welcomes the international community’s commitments to respond
to the plans of the Palestinian Authority by providing financial and political
support. The Council recognizes the important role of the ‘Quartet’ in
international efforts aimed at providing assistance to the Palestinian Authority
in the fields of security, economic development and governance.
“The Security Council supports the proposals for follow up to the
London Meeting and looks forward to their early implementation.
“The Security Council supports the Joint Statement of the ‘Quartet’ issued
following the meeting of the ‘Quartet’ in the margins of the London Meeting,
and looks forward to the ‘Quartet’s active engagement over the forthcoming
period, while recognizing also the important role of other interested parties.

05-26389 (E) 090305

*0526389*

S/PRST/2005/12

“The Security Council reiterates its call for full respect by the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority of understandings reached
at the Sharm el Sheikh summit on 8 February, in particular that all Palestinians
will stop all acts of violence against all Israelis everywhere and that Israel will
cease all its military activities against all Palestinians everywhere.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to ensure continued progress in the peace process towards full
implementation of the road map in direct contact with the ‘Quartet’. It stresses
the need for concerted and sustained action by the Palestinian Authority to
fulfil its security-related commitments and welcomes in this context President
Abbas’s commitment to exert every effort towards that end. The Council
stresses also the need for Israel to implement its road map commitments.
“The Security Council reiterates its demand for immediate cessation of
all acts of violence, including all acts of terror, provocation, incitement and
destruction.
“The Security Council reiterates its commitment to the vision of two
states, Israel and Palestine, living side-by-side in peace and security.”

2
