A/65/PV.88

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records
:

Sixty-fifth session

88

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 3 May 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/65/691/Add.10)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping
with established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/65/691/Add.10, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/65/691/Add.9,
Kyrgyzstan has made the necessary payment to reduce
its arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of
the Charter. May I take it that the General Assembly
duly takes note of the information contained in that
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/65/L.72)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 32nd and 33rd plenary meetings on 18 October
2010, the Assembly considered agenda item 15 in a
joint debate with agenda item 14, entitled “Global
Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations”, and that, at
its 34th plenary meeting on 21 October and its 52nd

and 68th plenary meetings, on 23 November and
16 December, the General Assembly adopted
resolutions 65/5, 65/11 and 65/138, respectively.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Paraguay to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.72.
Mr. Dos Santos (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour and a privilege for the Republic of
Paraguay to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.72,
entitled “International Day of Friendship”, under
agenda item 15, “Culture of peace”. The draft
resolution enjoys the sponsorship of many Member
States that represent the most diverse cultures and
traditions of all regions of the world. We wish to
extend our gratitude and appreciation to them all for
their support.
Through the draft resolution, which was agreed in
open, transparent and inclusive informal consultations,
we wish to make a further declaration in support of
peace and a decisive contribution to the noble aim of
the United Nations and its Members by achieving
broad and deep understanding among the various
cultures.
Our delegation would like to share the reasons
that led us to promote this initiative and why we
believe it important to observe an International Day of
Friendship. More then 50 years ago, in a small town in
Paraguay called Puerto Pinasco, situated far from the
capital, a group of residents developed the idea of
celebrating a day devoted to friendship and decided to
make 30 July that day.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-32039 (E)

*1132039*

A/65/PV.88

Commemorating that special day went from
Puerto Pinasco to other towns and cities until, very
soon the tradition spread throughout the entire country,
highlighting values such as solidarity, reconciliation
and understanding and making friendship a way of life
for Paraguayan society. That celebration was so
beneficial that it prompted the wish of the people and
Government of my country to share the positive
experience with all States Members of the United
Nations.
We believe in the goals of the International Day
of Friendship, which, in short, are, first, well-deserved
international recognition of the relevance and
importance of that noble sentiment in the lives of
millions of human beings in order to promote dialogue
among people, culture and countries; and, secondly, but
no less important, to complement and contribute to the
efforts already undertaken by the United Nations to
promote a culture of peace.
For humankind, unique in its origin and diverse
in its cultural expression, dialogue is the only way to
seek peace and to overcome the injustice and violence
that demean it.
For those reasons, the delegation of Paraguay
fervently calls for appropriate support for the adoption
of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.72, entitled
“International Day of Friendship”.
I give
Secretariat.

the

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/65/L.72, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Bangladesh,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Czech Republic, Haiti,
Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Republic of Korea, San Marino, Saudi Arabia and
Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.72?
Draft resolution A/65/L.72
(resolution 65/275).

2

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil, who wishes to make a
statement following the adoption of resolution 65/275.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to take advantage of this opportunity to
congratulate the Mission of Paraguay and all the
sponsors of resolution 65/275, which establishes
30 July as the International Day of Friendship.
In that regard, I would like to point out that
Brazil attributes great importance to the dawn of an
international culture of peace, friendship and
democracy, to which we are firmly committed.
Similarly, we fully support efforts undertaken by the
United Nations system, regional organizations and
Member States to implement programmes of action
that promote peaceful coexistence and the ideals of
friendship and mutual understanding.
Brazil is a nation with a large multicultural and
ethnically diverse population that has managed to build
a society based on the principles of conviviality and
mutual cooperation. We firmly acknowledge such
ideals, examples of which are harmony and stability in
relations with our neighbours. Because of the special
meaning of peace and friendship for Brazil, we will
continue to support initiatives undertaken within the
framework of the United Nations to strengthen
international relations in their multicultural and human
dimensions.
We therefore welcome the initiative to designate
30 July as the International Day of Friendship,
convinced that its celebration will promote universal
values of coexistence and cooperation.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered this item in a joint debate
with agenda items 13 and 115 at its 52nd plenary
meeting on 23 November 2010. Under this item, at its
60th plenary meeting, the Assembly adopted resolution
65/94.

11-32039

A/65/PV.88

I now give the floor to the representative of
Hungary to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): It is an honour for me to
appear before the General Assembly today to
introduce, on behalf of the members of the European
Union (EU), the draft resolution on the participation of
the European Union in the work of the United Nations,
contained in document A/65/L.64/Rev.1. I would like
in particular to thank the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy for being here today at a moment of great
significance for the European Union.
As my colleagues will recall, the member States
of the European Union brought this issue to the
attention of the General Assembly last September. At
that time, the General Assembly concluded that more
time was required to give consideration to all requests.
Following that decision, the European Union and its
member States launched a further phase of
consultations to reach out to all of the United Nations
membership through informal consultations of the
whole, meetings with regional groups and bilateral
encounters.
The process of consultations continued until the
last moment, including last night. Today, I have the
pleasure to announce that, on the basis of those very
extensive consultations with, among others, the
Caribbean Community, the members of the European
Union wish to introduce an oral revision to the text,
which we believe could lead to a decision by consensus
on the draft resolution.
The changes concern only the annex. In that
connection, paragraph 1 (b) of the annex would read as
follows:
“Invited to participate in the general debate
of the General Assembly, in accordance with the
order of precedence as established in the practice
for participating observers and the level of
representation”.
Paragraph 1 (d) of the annex would read as
follows:
“Permitted to present proposals and
amendments orally as agreed by the Member
States of the European Union; such proposals and
amendments shall be put to a vote only at the
request of a Member State”.

11-32039

Paragraph 1 (e) of the annex would be deleted.
The current paragraph 1 (f) of the annex would
then become paragraph 1 (e) and read as follows:
“Allowed to exercise the right of reply
regarding positions of the European Union as
decided by the presiding officer; such right of
reply shall be restricted to one intervention per
item”.
Finally, paragraph 3 of the annex would read as
follows:
“The representatives of the European Union
shall not have the right to vote, nor to co-sponsor
resolutions or decisions, nor to put forward
candidates”.
For ease of reference, we have distributed copies
of those changes to all delegations in the Hall.
The changes I have just described qualify further
the capacity for action of the European Union at the
United Nations, reflected in the modalities. In no way
do they increase this capacity for action. They are fully
respectful of the intergovernmental nature of the
United Nations. The member States of the European
Union are grateful to all those who have engaged with
them in the discussions in order to work towards the
adoption by consensus of the draft resolution, as orally
revised.
I would like to confirm here and now that this
final text is a product of a joint effort by a very broad
spectrum of the United Nations membership.
The essence of the draft resolution is to allow the
representative of the European Union to intervene on
behalf of its 27 member States among representatives
of other major groups and to enable them to contribute
effectively to the work of the United Nations. The text
now before the Assembly, as orally revised, provides
assurances that concepts are clear, the language is
simple and it responds to concerns expressed in the
course of consultations.
Among other things, we have sought to address
the following questions. First, the text ensures respect
for the intergovernmental nature of the United Nations.
As we have agreed from the outset, the United Nations
is, and should remain, an organization of States. The
European Union will remain an observer in the General
Assembly.

3

A/65/PV.88

Secondly, the text ensures that the modalities
granted to the European Union will not negatively
affect the capacity of individual States Members of
United Nations to address the General Assembly. The
goal of the draft resolution is to provide a more orderly
framework for the coordinated action of EU member
States at the United Nations. The outcome would be
that, in general, the number of interventions from EU
member States would be diminished and more space
would be freed up for delegations from other regions.
Thirdly, the draft resolution also addresses the
request by many United Nations Members that other
regional organizations be granted modalities such as
those sought by the EU. The text explicitly
acknowledges that possibility in cases where an
organization’s
member
States
have
agreed
arrangements
that
allow
that
organization’s
representative to speak on behalf of the organization
and its member States. The General Assembly would
have to decide on each case on the basis of explicit
requests from the member States of the organization
concerned.
Fourthly, we have also acted on the request from
several General Assembly members to remove
references to the Lisbon Treaty. The focus of the draft
resolution before the Assembly is squarely on the
United Nations.
The European Union is firmly convinced that the
answers to the challenges we face, not only as the
international community but also as representatives of
the millions of people sharing the limited resources of
our planet, can be found only through effective and fair
multilateralism. The United Nations is at the core of
the system of global governance. The European Union
wishes to bring its full weight to bear in supporting and
strengthening it.
Let me conclude by thanking once again the
representatives of all States Members of the United
Nations for their constructive engagement in the
negotiation of this draft resolution, and I respectfully
ask for their support for the adoption by consensus of
the draft as revised orally by me.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1, as orally
revised.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

4

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1, entitled
“Participation of the European Union in the work of
the United Nations”, as orally revised, I wish to put on
record the following statements of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution, the Assembly would decide to adopt the
modalities set out in the annex to the draft resolution
for the participation of the representatives of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer, in the
sessions and work of the General Assembly and its
committees and working groups, in international
meetings and conferences convened under the auspices
of the Assembly and in United Nations conferences.
In accordance with the modalities set out in the
annex to the draft resolution, the representatives of the
European Union, in order to present positions of the
European Union and its member States as agreed by
them, shall be allowed to be inscribed on the list of
speakers with the priority equivalent that is given to
the representatives of major groups in order to make
interventions; invited to participate in the general
debate of the Assembly; permitted to have its
communications relating to the sessions and work of
the General Assembly and to the sessions and work of
all international meetings and conferences convened
under the auspices of the Assembly and of United
Nations conferences circulated directly, and without
intermediary, as documents of the Assembly, meeting
or conference; permitted to make proposals and submit
amendments; and allowed to exercise the right of reply.
The representative of the European Union shall
be ensured seating among the observers and shall not
have the right to vote or put forward candidates.
Further, a precursory explanation or recall of the
present draft resolution will be made only once by the
President of the General Assembly at the start of each
session. It is noted that the representatives of the
European Union will continue to be seated in the
observers’ area of the General Assembly, where they
are currently seated. It is estimated that additional
requirements amounting to $10,000 would arise under
section 28D, “Office of Central Support Services”, for
the installation of the necessary representative units,
including sound engineering work.

11-32039

A/65/PV.88

Although provision has not been made in the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 for
such alterations of the General Assembly Hall, the
Secretariat will seek to identify areas from which the
anticipated additional requirements of $10,000 could
be redeployed within the provisions approved for
section 28D for the biennium 2010-2011.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1, as orally revised, no
additional appropriations would be required under the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote before the voting, may
I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
On 14 September 2010, the General Assembly
had before it a draft resolution (A/64/L.67) of an
unprecedented nature submitted by the European Union
(see A/64/PV.122). The draft resolution effectively
would have created a new category of non-State
observer with a unique complement of rights and
privileges. At that time, CARICOM expressed its
concern that more time should be allowed for the draft
resolution to be further considered in open, transparent
and inclusive negotiations of the whole before decisive
action could be taken.
While that time was afforded, albeit by force of
vote, negotiations of the whole were not. CARICOM
thus engaged in good faith with our counterparts in the
European Union, articulating always that the
parameters for the conferral of any special privileges to
a non-State observer remained the supremacy of the
Charter and strict observance of the rules of procedure,
as well as the established practices of the General
Assembly.
We shared many of the concerns of other Member
States that requested clarifications on, first, the
speaking privileges being sought; secondly, the criteria
that the draft resolution could be establishing for other
regional integration movements; and thirdly, the value
of the European Union draft resolution as a precedent
for other non-State observers.

11-32039

As small States, we specifically examined how
the draft resolution could impact the negotiating
dynamics for our countries. Could that lead to a
marginalization of small States in the General
Assembly and beyond? As our understanding evolved
and some of our concerns were affirmed, we made
proposals to improve the text, but never abandoned our
preference for open, transparent and inclusive
negotiations. Each step in our efforts was documented
for the benefit of the wider membership.
Our principled approach has always been that a
draft resolution of such magnitude and importance
ought to be adopted by consensus, with sufficient time
for careful consideration by the membership of the
Organization and in keeping with the usual in-depth,
transparent and inclusive exchange of views. Because
of its possible implications, CARICOM has always
maintained that the proposal now contained in
A/65/L.64/Rev.1 deserves the fullest consideration, and
has been adamant in its readiness to engage in
consultations in a spirit of openness, friendship and
mutual respect, mindful of the commitments derived
from the African, Caribbean and Pacific StatesEuropean Union revised Cotonou Partnership
Agreement and from the European Union-Latin
America and Caribbean relationship for consultation on
matters of mutual interest. Such open consultations are
also established practice in this Organization.
Most importantly, the CARICOM representatives
to the United Nations have been mandated by their
heads of State and Government to be actively engaged
in the consultative process, including with other
Member States, with a view to contributing to the
achievement of the broadest possible consensus on the
EU draft resolution, and to ensure that the principles
and practices that undergird the United Nations and its
intergovernmental character are preserved. Accordingly,
CARICOM has laboured long and hard in pursuit of
those objectives and has held fast to those principles.
Today, we have before us a text much improved
from the draft that was presented eight months ago. It
is a text that confirms the intergovernmental nature of
the United Nations, while allowing for reasonable
changes to the participation of the European Union
observer in the work of the General Assembly so as to
enable the transition of the role of spokesperson from
the EU rotating presidency to the EU observer.
Allowing thus for that transition of spokesperson
should in no way be interpreted as prejudicing the

5

A/65/PV.88

primacy of Member States or the sovereign equality of
all.

Ambassador Moses regrets that she is unable to deliver
this statement herself.

Notwithstanding the imperfections of the draft
resolution, CARICOM can now consider the text, as
orally revised, to be acceptable.

Draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1 is important not
just for the European Union (EU), but for all States
Members of the United Nations, and particularly for
the smallest of us. Nauru sees serious risks that the
draft resolution will change the nature of the United
Nations, to the detriment of small States, which do not
enjoy the political and economic influence of large
developed countries. We hope that this will not
eventuate.

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Africa wishes to reiterate
the inestimable value and, indeed, the critical
importance of working towards consensus through
negotiation as a vital tool of the General Assembly. We
therefore acknowledge the perseverance that the
European Union (EU) has demonstrated in negotiating
with Member States and groups to finalize draft
resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1. We want to state that the
African Group joins the consensus on the draft
resolution. We congratulate the EU delegation and its
spokesperson on this historic occasion. We look
forward to similar events in the future, as Africa views
the draft resolution as setting a precedent for other
regional organizations.
Africa will remain engaged in the process of
implementation of the draft resolution in all of its
ramifications.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The Arab
Group has followed with great attention the discussions
and negotiations connected to draft resolution
A/65/L.64/Rev.1 before the Assembly today,
concerning the participation of the European Union
(EU) in the work of the United Nations. Indeed, from
the outset, the Arab Group was a party to those
negotiations, during which it expressed concerns that
found their way into the final text of the draft
resolution.
Accordingly, since the draft resolution has
covered the concerns of the Arab Group, we believe
that it will set a precedent enabling the League of Arab
States and other regional organizations to enjoy the
same rights and privileges set forth therein.
In conclusion, I also wish to express the
appreciation of the Arab Group for the reaffirmation by
the EU negotiators that, in the future, the EU will
support requests made by any regional organization,
including the League of Arab States.
Ms. Crossen (Nauru): I have the honour to read
out this statement on behalf of Ambassador Moses,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Nauru to
the United Nations, who is currently out of the country.

6

At the outset, let me state that Nauru will
continue to value and welcome the contribution of EU
States members of the United Nations, both in their
individual capacity and when they speak as one
through the EU rotating presidency. We also appreciate
the contribution of the EU observer organization.
Nauru would also like to commend the members
of the Caribbean Community for their tireless and
constructive engagement with the EU, which has led to
amendments to the draft resolution. However, we wish
to put on record a number of our remaining concerns
with the draft resolution.
First, while not our primary concern, there are
unresolved legal issues in relation to the draft
resolution, which we hope will not cause further
difficulties in the future. We of course understand that
the EU considers that the draft resolution has no legal
issues and is consistent with the Charter of the United
Nations and the rules of procedure, and that the Office
of Legal Affairs supports that position. We respect the
opinion of the EU on that matter, but we do not share
it.
To provide one example, under the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, only Member
States may be accorded the right of reply. Therefore,
there appears to be an inconsistency with the rules of
procedure to grant an observer the right of reply. While
the Holy See and Palestine have both been granted the
right of reply by resolutions of the General Assembly,
these cases are clearly distinguishable. The Holy See is
a non-Member State; Palestine is a non-Member entity.
In contrast, the EU is an intergovernmental
organization made up of member States. The EU is a
completely different type of observer from the Holy
See and Palestine and a completely different type of
legal entity. In the light of these differences, we regret
that the EU placed considerable weight in its advocacy

11-32039

A/65/PV.88

on drawing analogies with the rights granted to the
Holy See and Palestine.
In our view, granting an observer organization the
right of reply could be interpreted as rewriting the rules
of procedure in an ad hoc manner, without any
consideration of the judiciousness of an unplanned
approach to the rules of procedure. My delegation is
uncomfortable with this. We do not consider it a
prudent way for this body to conduct its business.
The second area of concern is protecting the
intergovernmental nature of the United Nations. We see
granting an observer that is an intergovernmental
organization rights that are exercised by States as
potentially undermining this important principle.
Simply asserting in the preambular paragraphs that this
is not the case cannot change the reality. This is deeply
troubling to Nauru, and we trust that all Member States
will actively ensure that the intergovernmental nature
of the United Nations is not undermined by the
adoption of the draft resolution.
The third area of concern is safeguarding the
sovereign equality of all Member States, as provided
for in Article 2 of the Charter. With respect, it eludes us
how the EU does not understand Nauru’s concern that
the adoption of the draft resolution would have an
impact on this fundamental principle. Please allow me
to once again explain by focusing on the general
debate.
In the general debate of the General Assembly,
the representative of every Member State is entitled to
speak, yet only two observers — the Holy See and
Palestine — are invited to speak. Pursuant to the draft
resolution, in addition to the right of every EU member
State to speak, additional time would be permitted to a
representative of the EU observer organization to speak
and put forward the agreed views of the 27 members of
the EU, whose representatives would already have
already spoken.
For Nauru, this can only be characterized as
granting the EU a twenty-eighth voice in the general
debate — an additional voice to reinforce the views
that its members have already expressed and an
additional voice that all other countries not members of
the EU would not enjoy. We see this as privileging 27
countries above all other countries.
For small States such as Nauru, this is a major
concern, given our modest ability to influence

11-32039

international affairs that have profound implications
for our country. The discussions that we have in this
house are already dominated by the issues of concern
to countries with greater influence. The adoption of the
draft resolution would risk further entrenching this
position, and again we trust that all States will actively
work towards preventing the erosion of the equality of
voice of Member States.
The fourth area of concern is the precedentsetting nature of the draft resolution. The draft
resolution contemplates granting additional rights to
other regional organizations that are observers in
relation to their participation in the United Nations.
The only proviso is that the regional organization has
agreed arrangements that allow that its representative
to speak on behalf of the organization and its member
States. Nauru would have preferred to have had a
thorough discussion of the issues that may arise and the
appropriate principles to apply in relation to
consideration of other observer organizations seeking
additional rights.
The final matter I wish to raise is the process that
has led up to today. Nauru had joined other countries in
calling for open and inclusive negotiations on the draft
resolution, in line with standard practice. This would
have enabled all delegations to both put forward
proposals and to consider the proposals of others, in
the interest of reaching consensus and addressing the
concerns of all Member States.
If we analyse the various iterations of the draft
resolution following the process adopted by the EU, we
do not see substantive changes that reflect an
understanding of our concerns, as articulated by us in
written statements at both consultations. The revised
draft resolutions released by the EU provided more
clarity, but the substance of the operative paragraphs
did not change.
In closing, we would like to reiterate that this is
an important draft resolution, as it governs how we
conduct ourselves, and its ramifications will endure.
Mr. Chipaziwa (Zimbabwe): I would commence
by referring to paragraph 1 of draft resolution
A/65/L.64/Rev.1 presented by the European Union,
which states very clearly that “the General Assembly is
an intergovernmental body whose membership is
limited to States that are Members of the United
Nations”. The draft resolution, instead of strengthening
the United Nations system, threatens to undermine it,

7

A/65/PV.88

however stealthily. This delegation objects to the
creation of a new category of observer.
We humbly submit the following oral amendment
to sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph 1 of the annex, as
orally amended by the European Union (EU).
Currently, it reads that they should be allowed to
exercise the right of reply regarding positions of the
EU as decided by the presiding officer. What we are
proposing is that “presiding officer” be struck and
replaced by “in accordance with rule of procedure 73”.
If we, as the General Assembly, value our own
rules of procedure, it will be seen clearly that, in
according the right of reply to an observer and
non-member of the General Assembly, we would be in
violation of our own rules of procedure. Therefore, it is
our considered view that the draft resolution is a rude
violation of rule 73.
My delegation is also very grateful to the
European Union for the consultations it conducted in
its various representations throughout this process. My
delegation cannot and will not minimize the
contribution of the European Union to the United
Nations system. However, we find it not possible to
join the requested consensus in favour of the submitted
draft resolution.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): In
September 2010, the Islamic Republic of Iran was
among those delegations that supported the motion to
defer action on draft resolution A/64/L.67, entitled
“Participation of the European Union in the work of
the United Nations”, in order to allow the general
membership to reach a consensus text through open
and inclusive consultation on the draft resolution and
its ramifications for the overall integrity and
functioning of the United Nations. Our main concern,
which was shared by many other delegations, was that
the
draft
resolution
would
undermine
the
intergovernmental nature of the United Nations by
granting to an observer certain rights and privileges
that are attributed to States. That would have
institutional, legal and political implications both for
the Organization and for individual Member States. In
other words, the issue at stake was the integrity and
functioning of the United Nations as an
intergovernmental organization, which could not be
taken lightly.
Now, after a few months of extensive
negotiations and consultations, we are happy to see that

8

our main concerns have been addressed in the orally
revised text. This has been achieved as a result of a
compromise between the European Union and those
many delegations that had persistently expressed their
concern with regard to the legal and institutional
implications of the draft resolution for the integrity of
the United Nations and its intergovernmental nature, as
well as for the individual sovereign Member States.
Therefore, in the light of the foregoing, the delegation
of the Islamic Republic of Iran has, in principle, no
objection to draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1, as orally
revised today.
I would, however, like to add that we share the
concern raised by the delegation of Zimbabwe with
regard to the new paragraph 1 (e) of the annex, as
orally revised, and we support the necessary
amendment to ensure that the modality sought for in
this paragraph would not contradict rule 73 of the rules
of procedure.
The Acting President: The representative of
Zimbabwe has submitted an oral amendment to draft
resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1, as orally revised. In
accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the
Assembly shall first take a decision on the oral
amendment submitted by the representative of
Zimbabwe.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to the
adoption of the oral amendment?
I call on the representative of Hungary to speak
on a point of order.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): As I have already had the
pleasure of underlining that the essence of the draft
resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1 is to allow the observer of
the European Union to intervene on behalf of its 27
member States, among representatives of other major
groups, to enable them to contribute effectively to the
work of the United Nations, the European Union does
not and will not seek membership of the General
Assembly. The modalities foreseen in the draft
resolution are in accordance with the rules of
procedure and the Charter.
The right of reply is an essential tool of debate,
including in high-level meetings, and is a corollary of
the right to speak. As stated in the draft resolution, this
right would be exercised only when the positions of the
European Union have been questioned.

11-32039

A/65/PV.88

The rules of procedure make no reference to
observers. However, the General Assembly has the
sovereign right to rule and grant modalities to
observers, as it has already done twice before. This
possibility of the right of reply without limitation has
been granted to two other observers. I also remind the
Assembly that the rules of procedure and the Charter of
the United Nations do not make legal distinctions
among observers.
The European Union has been granted the
possibility of exercising the right of reply in the
Commission on Sustainable Development. Thus, the
phenomenon that a representative — even that of the
European Union — enjoying the right of reply in
different bodies of the United Nations is not alien to
the practice.
Last but not least, the document before us
represents a very delicate balance and the result of
joint work of a very broad spectrum of the
membership. Their contribution was a collective effort.
We think it should be honoured, and we are very
grateful to all Member States that contributed to this
joint effort. We thank all Member States and all groups
that expressed support for our proposal. Therefore, the
European Union Member States will vote against the
oral amendment presented by the representative of
Zimbabwe and respectfully asks all those delegations
that support the European Union’s draft resolution to
join its members in voting no.
The Acting President: Since there is no
agreement, we shall take a decision on the oral
amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Cuba, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua,
Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic

11-32039

of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic,
Latvia,
Lebanon,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Yemen
Abstaining:
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Burundi, Chad, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, Guyana,
Kenya, Malaysia, Namibia, Nigeria, Philippines,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa,
Togo, Uganda, Zambia
The oral amendment was rejected by 142 votes to
6, with 20 abstentions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1,
entitled “Participation of the European Union in the
work of the United Nations”, as orally revised. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,

9

A/65/PV.88

Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
None

10

Abstaining:
Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted by 180 votes to none, with 2
abstentions (resolution 65/276).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): I speak again on behalf of
the countries of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) to present our understanding of how
resolution 65/276, just adopted, should be interpreted.
In the operative part of the resolution on the
intergovernmental nature of the General Assembly,
paragraph 1 contains a reaffirmation of the
intergovernmental nature of the General Assembly and
the explicit statement that “membership is limited to
States that are Members of the United Nations”.
CARICOM interprets that paragraph as a clear
recognition of the priority of Member States over the
European Union observer in all activities of the United
Nations. CARICOM understands this paragraph as a
standing limitation on the European Union observer
that prohibits encroachment on the rights and
prerogatives of Member States and constrains the
European Union to enjoy only those rights that are
specifically and explicitly delineated in the resolution.
With regard to the ability of other regional
organizations to obtain similar status, paragraph 3 is
understood by CARICOM as allowing other regional
organizations to obtain rights and privileges identical
to those set forth in the annex to the resolution. The
conferral of identical rights is not dependent on a
duplication of the European Union’s modalities of
integration, nor is it premised on the achievement of
any perceived level of integration. As long as the
members of an organization allow the representatives
of that organization to speak on their behalf on any
matter, that organization may avail itself of an identical
set of rights and privileges. However, no other
organization can attempt to claim rights and privileges
beyond those enumerated in the annex, as CARICOM
understands such rights to be the absolute maximum
that a non-State can enjoy in the United Nations.

11-32039

A/65/PV.88

CARICOM notes that in the annex to the
resolution, on the matter of speaking among
representatives of major groups, the Secretariat’s
description of this privilege is at variance with our
understanding. CARICOM understands the right of the
European Union to speak among representatives of
major groups, as set out in paragraph 1(a) of the annex,
to mean that, in regular plenary meetings of the
General Assembly, the European Union will be allowed
to make interventions prior to individual member
States on the speakers’ list while not taking priority
over other major groups that are represented by States
Members of the United Nations. The accepted priority
of States over observers will dictate that, in a speakers’
list containing multiple major groups, the European
Union will not be able to speak prior to any major
group represented by a full State Member of the United
Nations.
With regard to participation in the general debate,
the resolution invites the European Union to participate
in the general debate of the Assembly subject to three
limitations: first, the order of precedence; secondly, the
practice for participating observers; and thirdly, the
level of representation.
The order of precedence speaks to the fact that
Member States enjoy priority over observers when
speaking in the general debate. The practice for
participating observers is a reflection of established
practice in the general debate, where a precedent has
been set for the speaking slots typically available to
observers and the fact that such practice, once
established, can be disturbed only in exceptional
circumstances.
The level of representation is a reflection of the
established rules of protocol whereby heads of State,
heads of Government, ministers and heads of
delegation are arranged according to their respective
protocolary rank. CARICOM’s interpretation of
paragraph 1(b) of the annex to the resolution is that the
Secretariat must take each of these three factors into
account when determining at what time and on what
date the European Union will be invited to address the
general debate.
With respect to the level of representation,
CARICOM interprets the seventh preambular
paragraph as containing an exhaustive list, in order of
rank, of the two individuals who may represent the
European Union at the general debate, namely, the

11-32039

President of the European Council and the High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy.
On the matter of the presentation of proposals
and amendments, paragraph 1(d) of the annex to the
resolution limits the European Union to making only
oral proposals and amendments. As such, the European
Union cannot make written proposals or amendments
under any circumstances. The paragraph also
proscribes the European Union from being able to put
proposals and amendments to a vote. This limitation is
entirely consistent with the fact that the European
Union itself lacks the ability to vote and that, as a
non-State, it should not be in a position to force
Member States to conduct votes on any item.
CARICOM interprets paragraph 1(d) of the annex in
tandem with rule 78 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, which sets forth the procedure for
submitting and voting on proposals and amendments.
As such, for an oral proposal of the European Union to
be voted upon, it must first be adopted and reproduced
in written form by a Member State and circulated to all
delegations not later than the day preceding the
meeting.
On the right of reply, the unfettered right of reply
as contemplated by rule 73 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly is a right enjoyed only by States
Members of the United Nations, as the rule states. The
right of reply extended to the European Union is more
circumscribed. Where decision 34/401 on the
rationalization of the procedures and organization of
the General Assembly defines the exercise of the right
of reply as allowing two interventions per item, the
European Union will be allowed only one intervention.
Similarly, CARICOM understands that the presiding
officer will strictly construe the opportunities for the
European Union to exercise this circumscribed right
and will extend it only in cases that clearly reflect
explicitly stated collective positions of the European
Union.
On the rights not enjoyed by the European Union,
CARICOM understands and accepts this resolution as
containing the full and exhaustive list of rights
conferred by the General Assembly on the European
Union. Without an enabling resolution, observer
entities, particularly non-State observers with no path
to full membership in the United Nations, enjoy no
rights beyond the ability to attend and observe
meetings at the United Nations. Accordingly, such

11

A/65/PV.88

resolution must be strictly construed in the light of the
General Assembly’s status as an intergovernmental
body of States with sovereign equality. Unless a right
is clearly and explicitly delineated in this resolution, it
cannot be enjoyed by the European Union nor inferred
by any presiding officer. Accordingly, CARICOM
interprets this resolution as excluding the following
rights, inter alia, of Member States: first, the right to
raise points of order, in accordance with rule 71;
secondly, the right to move any procedural motion,
including, but not limited to, the right to (a) move
adjournment of debate, rule 74; (b) move closure of
debate, rule 75; (c) move suspension or adjournment of
the meeting, rule 76; and (d) move that parts of a
proposal or amendment be voted on separately, rule 89;
and thirdly, the right to challenge any decisions of a
presiding officer of a meeting is likewise not allowed.
This is CARICOM’s understanding of how the
resolution just adopted should be interpreted.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): Japan voted in favour of the
draft resolution on the participation of the European
Union in the work of the United Nations. Japan
welcomes the development of the European Union
under the Treaty of Lisbon, as Japan and the European
Union are global partners that jointly engage on global
issues.
Japan believes that the resolution must be
implemented in the spirit of, and in accordance with,
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
with the consent of Member States and while genuinely
taking into account the fact that the United Nations is
an organization comprised of equally sovereign
Member States.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation wishes to briefly explain its
position on resolution 65/276, which has just been
adopted. Although I shall not go into detail about the
underlying substance of the resolution, I will make
some necessary clarifications.
In spite of the motion for postponement that had
been made in respect of the resolution at the
Assembly’s previous session, the consideration of the
motion was in fact limited to a few meetings in which
Member States could express their views in general
statements. That was evidenced by what happened this
morning. The concerns expressed by States and the
amendment proposed by the delegation of Zimbabwe
are valid, and we must be consistent.

12

The provisions of paragraph 1 (e) of the
resolution’s annex are inconsistent with rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, which in rule 73
establish that once the list of speakers has been closed
only a member may be accorded the right of reply.
With a view to preventing negative precedents and
future difficulties, we would have preferred to have
been given more time to hold consultations in order to
reach consensus on this important issue.
Ms. Zainul Abidin (Malaysia): Malaysia
welcomes the hard work of, and effort expended by, all
delegations in reaching the current stage in the
discussions on resolution 65/276. In September 2010,
when the initial draft resolution (A/64/L.67) was first
presented (see A/64/PV.122), Malaysia joined other
delegations in requesting more time for us to look into
its ramifications.
The resolution sets a precedent within the United
Nations system; whether it is good or bad remains to
be seen. However, we understand that change is
necessary in this international world of ours if we want
to remain relevant. The fact that the resolution can
potentially pave the way for other regional
organizations can only mean that change is brewing.
Today, we are heartened by the fact that the
commitment of delegations resulted in a hammeringout of the key sticking points of the resolution. The
resolution is not perfect, but it is something that can be
lived with, in the spirit of compromise. It was because
of that compromise and my delegation’s respect for the
delegations involved in the late-night negotiations that
Malaysia voted in favour of the resolution.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina supported the adoption of the draft
resolution proposed by the 27 Members of the United
Nations that are members of the European Union
(resolution 65/276). We did so in particular in the light
of the oral revisions made to the text during this
meeting, which made it possible to achieve broad
support among Members of the Organization. That
consensus and support are essential to the
implementation of a decision of such calibre.
In that regard, we wish to expressly recognize the
efforts made by all members of the Assembly to reach
this important agreement.
Clearly, the prerogatives granted to the
representatives of the European Union will be

11-32039

A/65/PV.88

exercised in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the General Assembly’s rules of
procedure.
Finally, Argentina wishes to place on record that
it understands that the resolution does not set a
precedent for other cases.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
like to acknowledge the work of the European Union in
reaching agreement on resolution 65/276. In addition,
my delegation would like to thank the countries of the
Caribbean Community for their efforts to ensure that
the text reflected the concerns of countries that are not
among their members.
In our view, the resolution could have been
debated in greater detail by the Member States. We
believe that the resolution still contains elements that
will compromise the future work of the United
Nations, in particular aspects related to the
Organization’s intergovernmental nature. We share
some of the concerns raised this morning by the
delegation of Nauru.
Finally, we wish to place on record that our
delegation has made observations specifically on
paragraph 1 (e) of the resolution’s annex, while we
support the other provisions of the resolution, as they
represent the culmination of arduous discussions and
dialogue.
We, like some other delegations, believe that the
language of that paragraph could be misinterpreted. In
that regard, rule 73 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly seems to us quite clear in setting out
that the President may accord the right of reply to any
member. We therefore interpret the paragraph as
meaning that the President can accord the right of reply
only to a Member State, not to an observer.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I now give the floor to the Observer of the Holy
See.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): At the outset,
I would like thank delegations for their active
participation in the discussions on resolution 65/276.
Through the cooperation of various Member States,
observers and other regional bodies, the resolution was
continually improved throughout the various rounds of

11-32039

negotiations so as to ensure proper respect for rights
under the Charter of the United Nations and the rights
of Member States and observers. In that regard, I
would also like to thank the delegation of the European
Union
for
its
constructive
engagement
in
acknowledging and respecting the rights of observers
of the General Assembly in the resolution.
The practice of non-Member State participation
in the work of the United Nations is one that dates back
to shortly after the creation of the United Nations. It is
a practice that has encouraged and fostered greater
participation by States in the work of the United
Nations. The role of observer States not only provides
a means of ensuring that this body is truly
representative of the people, but also has marked the
first step towards greater participation in the United
Nations by many of the member States of the European
Union.
It is therefore important that, when considering
new requests for participation by intergovernmental
organizations, due respect is not only given to the
General Assembly membership and the United Nations
Charter but also, as is done in the resolution just
adopted, to the rights accorded to observer States and
entities. My delegation therefore welcomes this
recognition in the resolution.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): I have asked for the
opportunity to speak because of a statement by a
Member State in the Hall.
The European Union (EU) member States are
grateful for the support of all Member States and
participating observers. Due to the contribution they
have made over the past weeks and months, the text of
resolution 65/276, which has just been adopted, is very
clear. Its implementation should be carried out very
precisely, according to its text and respectful of the
practice of the United Nations. It is not for us, or for
anybody else, to provide unilateral interpretation. That
would not be helpful for the clarity of the work of this
body.
The EU believes in the transparency and the
constructive approach that led to the overwhelming
support for the adoption of the resolution.
The Acting President: In view of the decision
just taken by the Assembly with regard to the

13

A/65/PV.88

participation of the European Union in the work of the
United Nations, I have been informed that Lady
Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, has
requested the floor. As there is no objection to that
request, I now give her the floor.
Lady Catherine Ashton (European Union): I
will be very brief. I simply want to take the
opportunity to thank all delegations for the
extraordinary efforts that they have made to help get
this resolution (resolution 65/276) into the best
possible shape. I have had the privilege, in the past 24
hours, of meeting with many of them, and they have
been extremely generous in giving me their thoughts,
their ideas and, most important, their support.
I hold the United Nations very dear. I believe in
its role. I believe in the collaboration between the

14

European Union and the United Nations. And I have
made it part of my remit to ensure that the European
Union works as closely as possible with the United
Nations as we seek to rise to the challenges that we
face across the world. I pledge, through this resolution,
that what the Assembly will hear is a clearer voice to
the United Nations from the European Union, but one
that is also extremely and absolutely respectful of the
United Nations in every possible way.
As I began, I would like to express an enormous
thank you to all those who have contributed to and
supported this effort, as well as to everyone who has
participated in this debate.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
120.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

11-32039
