2229th

United Nations

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING

A. S S E >1 B LY

Wednesday, 1 May 1974,

SIXTHSPECIAI SESSION

at 4 p.m.

Official Records

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Agenda item 3:
Appointment of the Credentials Committee (concluded) . .

in making this announcement, to suspend this meeting until
these documents are available.

Page
1

Agenda item 7:
Study of the problems of raw materials and development
(continued)
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Sixth Special
Session

The meeting was suspended at 5.5 p.m. and resumed at
8.5 p. m.
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Before
proceeding to the consideration of the Ad Hoc Committee's
report on agenda item 7,1 should like to ask representatives
to accept my apologies for the delay, which was totally
beyond our control, and to thank them for their patience.

1

President: Mr. Leopoldo BENITES (Ecuador).
AGENDA ITEM 3

8. I now invite Mr. Diallo of Upper Volta, the Rapporteur
of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Sixth Special Session, to
present the report.

Appointment of the Credentials Committee (concluded)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Con­
sultations have been held with the representatives of Saudi
Arabia, who has informed us that, in the light of the
decision taken at the 2228th meeting, held yesterday, on
draft resolution A/L.726 submitted by the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic, he will not press for a vote on his
draft resolution jA/L. 727/.

9. Mr. DIALLO (Upper Volta), Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Sixth Special Session (interpretation
from French): I have the honour to present to the General
Assembly the report on the work of the/Id Hoc Committee
of the Sixth Special Session [A /9556j.
10. I should like to stress the very special importance of
the fact that all Member States have spared no effort to
attain general agreement on the very specific problems
whose importance escapes no one. I think we should be
very gratified by the seriousness which all have shown in
the search for ways and means of ensuring the urgent
establishment of a new international economic order. It is
now up to the Member States, individually and collectively,
to ensure, on the basis of the permanent machinery, the
urgent and specific implementation of the political deci­
sions adopted by the General Assembly.

2. During the consultations the representative of Saudi
Arabia pointed out that he reserved his right to submit a
draft resolution of the same nature in the future should
that be necessary.
3. I wish personally to thank the representative of Saudi
Arabia for the co-operation and understanding he has
extended to us at this time.
4. That concludes our consideration of agenda item 3.

II. The report which I am now submitting for the
consideration of the General Assembly contains many
mistakes of translation and also many typing errors, which
will be corrected on the basis of the original text in English.
Therefore, I should like to request delegations to be so kind
as to accept the texts they have before them, which are not
as perfect as they should be because of the situation of
which everyone is aware.

AGENDA ITEM 7
Study of the problems of raw materials and development:
(continued)
REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE
OF THE SIXTH SPECIAL SESSION (A/9556)
5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I have
to inform the General Assembly that it has not yet been
possible to circulate the documents resulting from the final
meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Sixth Special
Session. The Secretariat is working very hard to distribute
those documents to representatives and I am told that they
are expected to be ready at 7 p.m. Accordingly, it will not
be possible to resume consideration of the item before that
hour.

12. Paragraph 19 of the report contains the two draft
resolutions which the Ad Hoc Committee recommends to
the General Assembly for adoption.

6. In the circumstances, if I hear no objection, I propose,
with apologies to representatives for the unavoidable delay

"Establishes an Ad Hoc Committee on the Special
Programme, composed of thirty-six Member States

13. Following informal consultations held this afternoon,
a modification has been made in draft resolution II in
paragraph 19 of the report. Operative paragraph 6 of
section X of that draft resolution, which relates to the
Special Programme, would read as follows:

1

A/PV.2229

2

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

appointed by the President of the General Assembly,
after appropriate consultations, bearing in mind the
purposes of the Special Fund and its terms of reference".
It is my understanding that it is your intention, Mr. Presi­
dent, to start the necessary consultations as early as
possible.
14. That is the report I submit to the Assembly for its
consideration, and in so doing I express the hope that the
Assembly will adopt it in the same spirit in which the Ad
Hoc Committee adopted its decision this morning.
15. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): lam
informed that during consultations held prior to this
meeting on the procedure to be followed at the plenary
meeting, it was considered appropriate that representatives
wishing to make statements should have the opportunity to
do so after the adoption of the draft resolutions recom­
mended by the Ad Hoc Committee. If 1 hear no objection, I
shall take it that the Assembly agrees to follow that
procedure.
It was so decided.
16. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
invite the General Assembly to consider document A/9556.
First we shall take a decision on draft resolutions I and II in
paragraph 19, and then on the draft decision in paragraph
20. Draft resolutions I and II, to which I have just referred,
also appear in documents A/AC.166/L.50 and A/AC.166/
L.51.
17. The administrative and financial implications of draft
resolution II are set forth in document A/9557. I should
like to draw the attention of the Assembly particularly to
paragraph 7 of that document.
18. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the General
Assembly agrees to adopt resolutions I and II recommended
by the Ad Hoc Committee.
Draft resolution I and draft resolution II as amended,
were adopted (resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)).
19. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly wishes
to adopt also the draft decision recommended by the Ad
Hoc Committee in paragraph 20 of document A/9556.
The draft decision was adopted.
20. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Several representatives have expressed the wish to make
comments on the decisions just taken by the General
Assembly. I shall now call on them in turn.
21. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): The Soviet Union attaches great
importance to the sixth special session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations, now in its closing stages,
which was convened on the initiative of the developing
countries to consider the problems of raw materials and
economic development.

22. The Soviet Union supports the decisions taken at the
session designed 'to eliminate inequities in international
economic relations which harm the developing countries.
These inequities are the legacy of colonialism, the result of
the domination of the capitalist monopolies which for
many years plundered those countries and even today
continue to pursue that course.
23. The position of the Soviet Union on some of the
specific proposals submitted at this session which do not
fully meet the aims of ensuring equitable international
co-operation and the protection of the legitimate interests
of States, above all of the developing countries, has been set
forth during the debate in the General Assembly and in
consultations among delegations. The Soviet Union will
proceed accordingly.
24. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): The delegation of Sudan, a
member of the Organization of African Unity, the League
of Arab States, the Group of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Group of 77, has fully supported the Algerian initiative
for holding the sixth special session of the General
Assembly on raw materials and development. Indeed, as
early as the Conference of Foreign Ministers of NonAligned Countries held in Guyana in August 1972 the
Sudan delegation impressed on the Conference the import­
ance of the active and positive participation of the
non-aligned countries and the Group of 77 in an interna­
tional effort to construct a new world of peace and
co-operation in place of military pacts and axes of
concentration of power and wealth on one side and poverty
and the denial of basic human rights in the rest of the
world.
25. It was obvious to the countries in rapid expansion,
with high gross national product, rising productivity and
massive reserves, on the one hand, and the poor third
world, on the other, that such a state of affairs could not
continue and that, if a totally new international conception
and a radical change in the whole machinery of interna­
tional co-operation were not to be seriously and sincerely
undertaken by the international community, a crisis-or
even collapse-would not be impossible. The Sudan delega­
tion, however, draws great comfort from the fact that in
April 1974 high-powered ministers have demonstrated the
will and the determination of their countries to undertake
what was overdue long before this special session.
26. The interest of my country and its determination to
make this session a success have been sufficiently and
enthusiastically pointed out by my Foreign Minister in his
address to this Assembly on 18 April [2221st meeting).
27. We in the Sudan are enthusiastic for both the
Declaration and the Programme of Action, not so much for
what we might get from others as for what we can afford to
give to the economy of the world through our enormous
natural resources, namely, land and water, in a world of
free and equitable system of exchange of commodities and
related services.
28. We therefore support:
"... a just and equitable relationship between prices of
raw materials, primary commodities, semi-manufactured

2229th meeting - 1 May 1974

goods exported by developing countries and the raw
materials, primary commodities, food, manufactured and
semi-manufactured goods and capital equipment im­
ported by them and to work for a link between the prices
of exports of developing countries and the prices of their
imports from developed countries." /Resolution 3202
fS-VI), Sect. I, para. 1 (d).J
29. As to the capacity of my country to contribute to the
total well-being of the world, my Foreign Minister has in
two successive sessions drawn the attention of this Assem­
bly to the only one of the many fields where Sudan can and
should play a fruitful role in a food-hungry world, namely,
in food. He rightly claimed that the food problem is an
"artificial one" [2221st meeting, para. 150] and suggested
that:
"The arable land in the Sudan is estimated at about 50
million hectares,"-that is equivalent to 125 million
acres-"but only 6 million hectares"—that is 15 million
acres-"have been developed." [Ibid.]
1 should add that only 15 million acres of land are
developed or semi-developed and, with intensification of
growth and mechanization, the yield of those 15 million
acres alone can easily be more than doubled. With all this
potentiality, ironically enough, the Sudan is still cate­
gorized as a least developed country.
30. What is true for the Sudan is also true for all of Africa,
with the exception of South Africa, where foreign capital
.has been profusely invested.
31. In Africa, reference is made to drought as if it were
only a phenomenon of 1973. Drought has for years been
taking its heavy toll from the millions who live in the belt
extending from Senegal on the Atlantic Ocean, across my
own country, to Ethiopia, Somalia, and beyond them, to
Yemen, across the water. The word "drought" also fails to
convey an idea of the strain it has placed on the already
weak economies of those countries, forcing them to the
point of immobility. Indeed, the word "drought" does not
convey any idea of the extent of the encroaching desert,
which moves towards the southern savannah belt at the rate
of 30 miles in certain years. It is idle to talk in terms of
relief and emergency only, where whole countries, their
people, their cattle, their economy, indeed their very exist­
ence, are subject to the mercy of a brutal, creeping desert.
32. I am in duty bound here to commend the assistance
given to some of the most stricken areas as well as the
attention given to long-range remedies by the SecretaryGeneral and competent units of the United Nations system
and certain Governments and institutions.
33. How can we talk of an international economic order
based on equity and equitable relationships when the
apartheid regimes in South Africa, Namibia, and Zimbabwe
enslave millions of Africans in southern Africa; where
Portugal has not yet rallied to the international demand as
well as to the demand of the African Liberation movements
in Angola and Mozambique for self-determination and
independence—I repeat, for self-determination and indepen­
dence as they are understood in the United Nations—where

3

the Zionist State in Palestine has not yet even acknow­
ledged the right of return of the Palestinian Arabs to their
homeland and has not yet actually withdrawn from the
occupied Arab territories? How could the vital Suez Canal
be assured as a waterway for free passage of trade necessary
for three continents?
34. My delegation submits that a free and developed
Africa is an essential link in the chain of a new international
economic order in its own right and on its own merits as a
rich source of vital natural resources.
35. Everything has been said during this arduous session.
Sufficient good-will has been demonstrated and many good
ideas have emerged, some have been adopted, others are
identified and await their appropriate time. Hence I beg
your indulgence, Mr. President, to summarize in only few
words what my delegation considers should be studied here
both now and later.
36. First, this session is unique in so far as its subjectmatter is of direct importance to each and every country
present here or which will be present in the future. It is
perhaps the first time in the history of this Organization
that each delegation is motivated by enlightened selfinterest in a new economic order on the lines that have just
been adopted. We only have to convince ourselves that our
world will be definitely richer, more stable and peaceful if
we can, in effect, increase international productivity /by
actually increasing the productivity and consumption ofjthe
developing countries along the lines drawn in the docu­
ments adopted today.
37. Second, we must give top priority to the implemen­
tation of the Special Programme in order to salvage the
most hard-liit countries, in particular those on the verge of
economic and human catastrophe and concurrently assist
the development of the categorized developing countries.
The emergency operation should not overlook assistance in
kind, for example, fertilizers, pesticides and food.
38. Third, efforts to implement the Declaration and the
Programme of Action should not cease to evolve. We hope
that these decisions will not, whether deliberately or by
default, meet the fate of many important resolutions of this
Organization. We need not remind ourselves that the old ad
hoc international economic order has reached the point of
crisis by simply waving away certain vital issues instead of
solving them. It is quite conceivable, and indeed horrid to
think, that another shock may go beyond the stage of crisis.
39. Let me express our earnest hope that at the beginning
of the twenty-ninth session we will find ourselves well on
the road of the green part of the watershed.
40. Before terminating, let me pay a tribute to all those
who devoted their time and energy to make our endeavours
a success up to this point in time. You, Mr. President, the
Secretary-General and Mr. Bradford Morse who sit at the
podium, and the hundreds who assist you in the Organiza­
tion, top that list.
41. From the floor, I wish to make a special reference to
the Chairmen of the Group of 77 and of the Non-Aligned
Countries, and those who collaborated with them in

4

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

conducting the work and the arduous negotiations on our
behalf during this session. I beg to acknowledge the very
personal attention that Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, the
Foreign Minister of Algeria, has given to the work of the
session during its last crucial days.
42. Last but not least I can only reiterate the words of
thanks and gratitude expressed from this platform to
President Houari Boumediene who initiated this session,
and to all those countries and leaders who hastened to
contribute or to pledge willingly and generously to what we
officially adopted today as the Declaration and the Pro­
gramme of Action.
43. I hope this intervention adequately explains the
positive and unequivocal support of the delegation of the
Democratic Republic of Sudan to the documents which
have just been adopted here.
44. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The special session of the General Assembly on the
problems of raw materials and development, convened on
the proposal of President Houari Boumediene of Algeria,
will soon be concluded. This is an unusual session. The
convocation of the session and its proceedings fully reflect
the profound changes in the international situation and
demonstrate the tremendous power of the awakened and
united third world. At various meetings of the current
special session, the representatives of numerous third-world
countries have exposed with indisputable facts the ruthless
exploitation, plunder and oppression of the developing
countries and peoples carried out by imperialism, colonial­
ism and neo-colonialism, particularly the super-Powers,
through monopolization, control, the exchange of unequal
values, the shifting of crises and other means. In categorical
terms, they demanded a thorough change in the existing
international economic relations based on inequality,
control and exploitation and the immediate adoption of
measures for the establishment of a just and reasonable new
international economic order. They rightly pointed out that
the widening gap existing between the poor and rich
countries was the result of imperialist and hegemonic
exploitation and plunder. In the world today, it is the poor
countries which feed the rich countries, and the develop­
ment and the prosperity of the latter depend on the
exploitation and extortion of the former. It is the necessary
prerequisite and top priority of the developing countries in
safeguarding their political and economic independence and
developing their independent national economies that they
should terminate the economic monopoly and plunder by
colonialism, neo-colonialism and imperialism, sweep away
these obstacles and take all necessary measures to protect
their economic resources and other rights and interests. To
this end, the developing countries have put forth a number
of correct basic principles which must be observed. The
Chinese delegation fully supports their just demands.
45. During the session the imperialists, and particularly
the two super-Powers, have become most isolated and have
found themselves in a position of being denounced. In
order to extricate themselves from their predicament, they
echoed each other in confounding the right and wrong and
in calling black "white", and tried hard to obliterate the
contradictions and the wide gap existing between the poor

and rich countries, between the developing and the devel­
oped countries and the facts about imperialist and socialimperialist exploitation and plunder of the developing
countries. One super-Power used its traditional means of
coercion and cajolery to divide the third-world countries,
slacken their anti-imperialist struggle and negate the series
of basic principles regarding "nationalization", etc. The
other super-Power resorted to a most wicked means of
exerting gross pressure on many third-world countries,
trying time and again to impose on the session its worn-out
stuff of sham disarmament and detente and the deceptive
talk about using the resources released from the progress of
disarmament for development in an attempt to divert the
orientation of the session and cover up its own true
imperialist features. In a word, the reason why they have
worked so painstakingly to impede the progress of the
session is that they wish to keep the old international
economic relationships intact so as to continue to ensure
their privileges of exploiting, plundering and controlling the
third world. However, in going against the historical trend
and acting perversely, they have played the role of a teacher
by negative example, causing the further awakening and
strengthened unity and struggle of the third-world coun­
tries. Their multifarious tricks have gone bankrupt one after
another. Indeed, they are in a deplorable plight: "flowers
fall off, do what one may".
46. The Chinese delegation supports the two documents,
the Declaration on the Establishment of a New Interna­
tional Economic Order and the Programme of Action,
because these documents basically reflect the earnest
demands and just propositions of the third world. It has
been rightly pointed out, particularly in the Declaration,
that the widening gap between the developing and devel­
oped countries is caused by the old international economic
order based on aggravating unequal relationships; that alien
domination and occupation, colonialism, racial discrimina­
tion, apartheid and all forms of neo-colonialism are the
greatest obstacles to the full emancipation and progress of
the developing countries; and that the inequalities shall be
corrected and existing injustices shall be redressed. The
Declaration also sets forth a series of correct principles
guiding the establishment of a new international economic
relationship, such as affirmation of the permanent sover­
eignty of every State over its natural resources and all its
economic activities, including the exercise of control over
transnational corporations, up to and including national­
ization and the principle of establishing producers' associa­
tions by the developing countries in respect of raw
materials and primary commodities and affirmation of the
inalienable right of all countries to equal participation in
the solving of world economic problems, transforming the
existing international monetary system and changing the
existing irrational relationship between the export com­
modities of the developing and developed countries, etc.
47. On the other hand, there exist some deficiencies in the
two documents. Some formulations are not clear and
forceful enough and the wording in some places is not quite
appropriate. For instance, the term "interdependence"
which appears in the documents might be distorted by the
super-Powers to mean that the developing countries must
depend on the latter and must obtain the latter's approval
for any sovereign act they take to defend their economic
rights and interests. Again take for instance the term

2229th meeting - 1 May 1974

"international division of labour" which appears in the
"Programme of Action". It might be used by the superPowers to push under that name their self-seeking "eco­
nomic division of labour" and "economic integration" and
to maintain the most unjust and abnormal state of
"industrial Europe and North America, but Asia, Africa and
Latin America with their agricultural and mineral produce".
For these reasons, we have reservations on the aforesaid
formulations.
48. We have always sympathized with the difficulties of
the developing countries most severely affected by eco­
nomic crises. We are in favour of adopting the necessary
emergency measures so as to help these countries overcome
their difficulties and promote the independent development
of their national economies through self-reliance. We fully
support such positive propositions contained in the docu­
ment as that regarding the giving of serious consideration to
the cancellation, moratorium or rescheduling of the debts
of the aforesaid countries in the light of their actual
conditions and the provision of commodity-assistance on a
grant basis or deferred payments. We are of the opinion
that efforts should be made for their early realization. The
Chinese Government and people will, as always, continue
their efforts witliin their capabilities and through bilateral
forms.
49. It must be pointed out, however, that the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund [IMF], under the
direction of a super-Power, have pursued the most unjusti­
fied policy of exerting economic pressure on some thirdworld countries. What is more, refusing to comply with the
General Assembly resolution, they have thus far kept intact
the traitorous Chiang Kai-shek clique which has long been
spurned by the Chinese people and the international
community, and have openly pursued the policy of creating
"two Chinas". This is absolutely impermissible. We sternly
condemn these organizations for their policies of hostility
towards the Chinese people and declare that we will not
participate in the activities sponsored by these organiza­
tions.
50. In our opinion, the current special session is an
Assembly of victory. The proceedings of the meetings
reflect the new awakening of the third world and the
deepening of its struggles against imperialism and colonial­
ism, particularly against the two super-Powers. As far as the
numerous third world countries are concerned, the success­
ful conclusion of the session has once again borne out the
truth that "unity means victory". It is a long process of
arduous struggle to terminate imperialist and hegemonic
control, exploitation and oppression, to bring about a
complete change in the old international economic relations
based on inequality and exploitation, and to establish a just
and reasonable new international economic order based on
respect for the sovereignty of all countries and the principle
of equality among the poor and rich countries.
51. However, the really powerful are the third-world
countries and peoples who dare to struggle and dare to win.
By applying the principle of individual and collective
self-reliance and expanding our equal and mutually benefi­
cial economic co-operation in the light of our specific
features and conditions, overcoming temporary difficulties,

5

maintaining vigilance against and frustrating the divisive
schemes and pressures of imperialism, particularly of the
super-Powers, strengthening unity and persevering in un­
remitting efforts, we, the third-world countries, will cer­
tainly be able to terminate imperialist and super-Power
control, monopoly and exploitation and attain gradually a
level of development never reached by previous generations
in the modernization of industry and agriculture. Our
fighting tasks are arduous, and the road ahead is not
smooth, but the future is bright. The Chinese Government
and people will unswervingly stand on the side of the
third-world countries and peoples and work together with
them to win new victories.
52. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic) (transla­
tion from Russian): The German Democratic Republic has
endeavoured both during the preparatory stage and during
the course of the current sixth special session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations to make its
contribution in a spirit of constructive co-operation to the
successful discussion of the international problems of raw
materials and questions relating to economic development.
53. Pursuing the consistent policy of the German Demo­
cratic Republic aimed at support for the developing
countries in their struggle to preserve their political
independence and attain economic independence and to
eliminate any colonial and neo-colonial oppression, exploi­
tation and discrimination, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic has supported the Declaration on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order.
54. This document, which is of great political significance,
calls for radical changes in international economic relations
between States with different social systems, taking parti­
cular account of the interests of the developing countries,
in order to overcome the unequal situation of the States of
Africa, Asia and Latin America in the system of capitalist
world economic relations. Our delegation is confident that
during this session the developing countries have once again
ascertained who is their friend and ally.
55. There is no doubt that fruitful international co-opera­
tion between States with different social systems can be
ensured only on the basis of the principles of peaceful
coexistence, on the basis of the application of those
principles as practical standards of international life. The
Declaration represents a further step in this direction
towards the development of international economic rela­
tions.
56. In principle we agree with the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order. Some measures require still more careful considera­
tion.
57. My delegation considers that the results of the sixth
special session are closely related to the important decisions
taken at the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly
of the United Nations aimed at the strengthening of peace
and international security and at the halting of the arms
race and the use of the resources thus saved in the interests
of social and economic progress.
58. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): When he spoke at the inaugural meeting of

6

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

the sixth special session of the General Assembly [2208th
meeting], the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Argentine
Republic, Mr. Alberto J. Vignes, stated our position in the
face of the historic situation confronted by the United
Nations and ratified the Argentine decision to work
intensely to contribute to the establishment of a new
international economic order which would be more just and
equitable.
59. Our objectives, which are clear and specific, did not
reflect the isolated yearnings of a single country struggling
to meet its aspirations. They were associated with, and they
continue to be associated with, the vital interests of a Latin
America which fits in the third world.
60. We maintained at that time that, as an essential
starting-point, it was necessary for all Governments without
exception to accept the need for new relations based on
profound changes in the rules of the game so far existing
whose main characteristic has been that of promoting the
progress and well-being of a few privileged nations at the
expense and to the detriment of the immense majority of
the peoples which make up the international community.
61. A little more than three weeks have elapsed since we
started our deliberations, harbouring many hopes but also
firmly determined not to become passive accomplices in yet
another failure in the long series of sterile meetings which
have been held during the past 30 years. It is heartening to
observe that, thanks to the tireless work and the tenacious
dedication of many delegations—sometimes in extremely
difficult and uncomfortable conditions-the efforts made
have borne fruit.
62. The development of our work and the results achieved
have confirmed the wisdom of our approach; and, although
it is true that expectations have not been totally satisfied,
we note that we have programmed concrete progress in the
appropriate direction.
63. We are certain that the Governments which have
participated in this special session of the Assembly are
facing the future with the right view, not only of what our
present situation requires, but also with a clear view of the
road still to be followed.
64. We feel that several conclusions should be highlighted
as we are coming to the end of our work.
65. The first and basic one is the excellent and responsible
joint action of the Group of 77. Only the unbreakable trust
and solidarity placed in its representatives and negotiators
made it possible for them successfully to carry out their
mandate. The clear approach to reality and the possibilities
it offered made it possible to arrive at compromises which,
without renouncing the long-range objectives, made pos­
sible a general consensus, the one which was most compati­
ble with the positions of other countries and groups, and, at
the same time, it has made possible the adoption of
agreements relating to special situations which require
immediate action. The Group of 77 leaves this session of
the General Assembly stronger and consolidated.
66. The second conclusion emanates from the content
itself of the documents that we have adopted. We asked for

a new international economic order which our delegation
called "a new relationship". The Declaration and the
Programme of Action have that meaning and that scope.
They contain new rules of the game which are now
becoming, rightly, that new international order. They are
not exceptions to orthodox rules of general application, but
they will become permanent and stable rules. Their gradual
delimitation in relevant forums, assuming that they will be
enlarged in future, are steps which the international
community should already take now and steps to which
others will be added as new advances in international
co-operation make this possible.
67. The third conclusion is that this result, despite the
subtleties in interpretation which might emerge from
statements made by other delegations this evening, has been
the joint effort of all Member States. That is why it is our
hope that all of us will leave this special session filled with a
new spirit and a new determination to build a structural
relationship between countries that will consolidate interna­
tional peace and justice.
68. And to that end we want to state very clearly that my
Government does not consider this is the end of the stage;
quite the contrary, we have now started a process based on
the Declaration that we have adopted and which is starting
to take shape in our Programme of Action. The new
international economic order most certainly will not only
be built with declarations; it should be carried out through
action.
69. The decade of the 1970s began in a very suspicious
political climate. The grave dangers which threatened world
peace and which stemmed from mutual mistrust and the
tendencies to hegemony of the great Powers are gradually
disappearing. The spirit of understanding and co-operation
which inspires all peoples is now relegating to the past the
alarming series of crises and confrontations which were an
outcome of the cold war. This positive state of affairs
which prevails today on the international scene should
continue and should become firmly rooted so that all
mankind may benefit from it.
70. In order to achieve that, it is necessary to bear in mind
at all times that the political element is inseparable from
the economic and social one. It is not possible to conceive
of political detente without parallel achievements or,
perhaps, of greater scope in that essential aspect relating to
economic and social claims of the more backward coun­
tries.
71. It is our conviction that the major achievement of this
Assembly has been in fact re-establishing that ineluctable
parity.
72. Mr. KUI/AGA (Poland): The Declaration on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order and
other documents just adopted by the General Assembly
focus the attention of the international community on the
necessity of reconstructing international economic relations
with the aim of changing the present unjust international
division of labour. The delegation of Poland supports the
progressive principles embodied in the Declaration, which
should govern international co-operation of which one of

2229th meeting - 1 May 1974

the main purposes is the acceleration of the economic
growth of the developing countries.
73. Our views on the difficult and complex problems
which have been considered by the sixth special session of
the General Assembly were presented by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Chairman of the delegation of Poland,
Stefan Olszowski, during the general debate on 22 April
[2224th meeting]. Our activities during the special session
have also been motivated by our desire to add to the notion
of international economic co-operation the proper political
dimensions corresponding to the necessities of our times.
Our practical steps towards the developing countries stem
from our will to continue our constructive co-operation
with these countries. In our programmes for the further
development of economic co-operation we fully take into
account these needs and aspirations. Those programmes of
ours are an integral part of our own national economic
plans.
74. We will continue this policy in the spirit of the
recommendations that we have just adopted and in full
accordance with the principles of international economic
co-operation promoted by us.
75. Mr. HANEKOM (South Africa): There are certain
passages in the Declaration on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order and the Programme of
Action which are unacceptable to my delegation. The
Assembly will know which they are,'so I need not identify
them.
76. Because of this, I wish formally to place on record
that my delegation is obliged to dissociate itself from the
Declaration and the Programme of Action. We regret this,
as we support, and are ready to contribute to, the over-all
objective of securing a new economic order which would
correct the economic imbalances of today and of rendering
aid to the disadvantaged countries. However, we have been
left with no other alternative.
77. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): As this session
of the Assembly draws to a close it is time to take stock.
Much good has. been done. The world community, repre­
sented by its leading statesmen, has devoted several weeks
of intensive attention to the critical situation which has
arisen in the international economic area. We believe that
this was right, proper and useful. Many constructive
suggestions were made on how to cope with the range of
problems in this field.
78. We are-I must confess—disappointed that it was not
possible to emerge from our deliberations with unanimous
agreement on how these problems can best be solved. Over
the years we have negotiated our differences on compli­
cated economic and development questions in various other
appropriate forums. We seriously question what value there
is in adopting statements on difficult and controversial
questions that represent the views of only one faction.
79. Some have referred to the procedure by which these
documents have been formulated as that of "consensus".
My delegation believes that the word "consensus" cannot
be applied in this case. The document which will be printed
as the written product of this special session of the General

7

Assembly does not in fact—whatever it is called—represent a
consensus in the accepted meaning of that term. My
delegation did not choose to voice objection to the
resolution presented to us this evening even though, at the
last moment, it was presented without mention of the word
"consensus".
80. The intent, however, was clear. This was intended as a
consensus procedure, but our objecting at the last second
would only have served to exacerbate the divisions that we
have worked to the best of our ability to bridge during the
past weeks.
81. The document in question contains elements sup­
ported by all United Nations Members. It also contains
elements which many Members of the United Nations
—large and small, and on every continent-do not endorse.
The United States delegation, like many others, strongly
disapproves of some provisions in the document and has in
no sense endorsed them. The document we have produced
is a significant political document, but it does not represent
unanimity of opinion in this Assembly. To label some of
these highly controversial conclusions as "agreed" is not
only idle; it is self-deceiving. In this house, the steamroller
is not the vehicle for solving vital, complex problems.
82. The major concern of my own Government has been
to assure some immediate and effective relief to those
developing countries which have been most adversely
affected by the recent changes in the world economy. While
a Programme of Action has been adopted, we are frankly
not convinced that it will respond to these immediate
needs. 1 would draw the Assembly's attention to the fact
that just yesterday my own delegation advanced a number
of ideas in the Ad Hoc Committee which were addressed
primarily to this area of most critical need. We regret that
the shortage of time made it impossible to obtain agree­
ment. I wish to assure the Assembly, however, that my own
Government is examining carefully what additonal
measures it can take to provide assistance to those countries
which have suffered most.
83. The United States remains deeply concerned about the
need for a co-operative effort to resolve the difficulties
which face the international community on a whole range
of issues, including commodity prices, aid, trade, energy,
food and monetary stability. We remain committed to
seeking solutions to these issues on a co-operative basis and
through true consensus rather than through confrontation.
84. The sixth special session has acknowledged mankind's
common destiny. Our nations met in a global forum to
come to grips with what once were considered national
problems: inflation, economic growth, feeding the hungry
and uplifting the impoverished.
85. The challenge has been to accept our mutual depen­
dence and to agree on an agenda for common action to
improve the quality of life across the globe. Success cannot
be determined by one nation or by one group of nations
seeking to impose its will. Nor will it result from one
session of the General Assembly.
86. Too often in the past this Organization has been the
forum for unrealistic promises and unfulfilled commit­

8

General Assembly — Sixth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

ments. The ideal has been substituted too often for the
attainable, and the results have been often no more than
increased frustration and disappointment. Historically, the
United States has not made commitments that we did not
intend to fulfil. Thus, as Secretary of State Kissinger
recently told the Foreign Ministers of Latin America and
the Caribbean, the United States will promise only what it
can deliver. And we will make what we can deliver count.
87. In this spirit, on behalf of President Nixon, Secretary
Kissinger, in his address to this Assembly two weeks ago
[2214th meeting], pledged the United States to a major
effort in support of development. He stated that the United
States would make a substantial contribution to the special
needs of the poorest nations.
88. We have set forth our specific proposals and commit­
ments to help assure an abundant supply of energy at an
equitable price, to achieve a more stable balance between
raw materials supply and demand, to narrow the gap
between food and population growth, to build a trade,
monetary and investment system that encourages economic
growth rather than economic warfare, and to bring the best
minds of all nations to apply science to meet the problems
that science has helped to create.
89. It is easy to agree to yet another set of principles, to
another programme of action, to more steps that other
nations should take. But each nation must ask itself what it
can do, what contribution it can make. The needs of the
poor will not be met by empty promises; the needs of an
expanding global economy will not be met by new
restrictions on supply and demand; the growing interdepen­
dence of all nations cannot be managed on the basis of
confrontation.
90. There are provisions in the Declaration and the
Programme of Action to which the United States Govern­
ment cannot lend its support. I will deal here only with our
most important reservations.
91. Perhaps the most difficult subject which the Declara­
tion addresses is that of permanent sovereignty over natural
resources. It will be recalled that this problem was
successfully dealt with by the General Assembly in 1962,
when, in a meeting of minds of developing and developed
countries, widespread agreement was achieved on the terms
of resolution 1803 (XVII). The United States delegation
regrets that the compromise solution which resolution
1803 (XVII) embodies was not reproduced in this Declara­
tion. If it had been, on this count the United States would
gladly have lent its support. Resolution 1803 (XVII)
provides, among other things, that, where foreign property
is nationalized, appropriate compensation shall be paid in
accordance with national and international law; it also
provides that foreign-investment agreements by and bet­
ween States shall be observed in good faith. By way of
contrast, the present Declaration does not couple the
assertion of the right to nationalize with the duty to pay
compensation in accordance with international law. For
this reason, we do not find this formulation complete or
acceptable. The governing international law cannot be, and
is not, prejudiced by the passage of this resolution.

92. The United States does not support the provisions of
the Declaration which refer only to the exertion of
economic pressure for some ends, but which do not
condemn generally the exercise of economic pressure. In
this respect, the Declaration contrasts unfavourably with
the Declaration on Principles of International Law concern­
ing Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolu­
tion 2625 (XXV)]. Nor does the United States support the
provisions of the resolution that refer to restitution and full
compensation for exploitation of, and damage to, certain
resources and peoples.
93. Neither can the United States accept the idea of
producer associations as a viable means of promoting
development, or of fixing a relationship between import
and export prices. Artificial attempts to manage markets
which ignore economic realities and the legitimate interests
of consumers as well as producers run the risk of political
confrontation on the one hand and economic failure on the
other.
94. I also wish to make mention of that part of the
Declaration dealing with the regulation and supervision of
the activities of multinational corporations. The United
States is of the view that multinational corporations must
act as good corporate citizens of the States in which they
operate, and that multinational corporations are subject to
the regulation and supervision of the countries in which
they operate, but such regulation and supervision must be
non-discriminatory and otherwise conform to the norms of
international law.
95. The Programme of Action has too many objectionable
features, from our point of view, to permit a detailed listing
and explanation in a brief statement. Among these features
are the emphasis on marketing arrangements for primary
products which exclude the interests of consumers and the
impractical proposals to establish artificial and fixed price
relationships between prices of exports and imports of
developing countries. Our scepticism about commodity
agreements is well known, but we are prepared to consider
them on a case-by-case basis. The current negotiations
within the framework of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade [GATT] and other actions we support can
increase the trade of developing countries, but it is out of
the question for us to allocate a specified share of our
market for the developing countries. We object to the
Assembly's making recommendations now on the provi­
sions related to the link between special drawing rights and
development finance, the provisions to reform the interna­
tional financial institutions, and subsidization of interest
payments and other involved questions that should be left
to the IMF.
96. As this special session of the General Assembly nears
its close, there is one central concern in the minds of all of
us. Many of the less developed nations of the world are
afflicted with the most serious and debilitating economic
ills of their lifetime. There are parallel economic disloca­
tions in the industrialized world, but it is better prepared to
recover.
97. Before the special session began, the United States
delegation said it would negotiate in a spirit of compromise

2229th meeting - 1 May 1974

and conciliation. This is still our attitude. It will continue
to be, as the United Nations and its individual States seek
ways to lighten the burdens of the less developed countries.
98. Unfortunately, the time to consider programmes for
the neediest countries has been short. We nevertheless
regret that ways were not found, even though the hour was
late, to explore varying proposals of substance.
99. I wish to point out an obvious truth. Despite scores of
public speeches, hundreds of hours of detailed discussion
and thousands of hours of consultations, we have not yet
agreed on the kind of co-ordinated action which will
provide the immediate emergency relief that is indispensa­
ble in the present crisis.
100. Words cannot feed the starving nor help the impover­
ished. The sudden increased cost of life is still being borne
by the poor. This moment demands more of us than
words—more of us than promises, which may materialize
many months from now, if ever. Have we measured up to
the challenge?
101. While this Assembly has not been without accom­
plishment, we must not go home in the belief that we have
already met the central task before us.
102. Let us go home, each nation determined to do its
part to meet the immediate crisis that challenges our
interdependent world community.
103. I can assure this Assembly that the United States will
do its share.
104. Mr. GEHLHOFF (Federal Republic of Germany):
For the first time in the history of the United Nations a
special session of the General Assembly has been convened
for the exclusive purpose of discussing economic and
development questions. The United Nations thus is making
a new and determined effort to promote, as set forth in the
Charter, "social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom" and to employ international machinery in
furthering the economic and social advancement of all
peoples. My Government strongly endorses these efforts. It
has been the policy of my Government in the past to foster
economic co-operation with the developing countries and
their integration into the world economy. My Government
is determined to support all measures and actions which
lead to an improvement of the international economic
order.
105. This special session had to face difficult tasks, but,
thanks to the work of all delegations and to the prevailing
spirit of co-operation, it has been possible to make
important progress. I particularly want to express my
delegation's gratitude for the enlightened leadership shown
by the President of the General Assembly and for the
untiring efforts of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee
in bringing about a compromise.
106. Permit me to refer in some detail to the documents
we have adopted. My delegation welcomes the adoption of
the declaration of principles [resolution 3201 (S-VI)j,
which, we are convinced, will pave the way for a new
economic order. My Government recognizes the right of

9

permanent sovereignty of States over their natural re­
sources, including the right of nationalization. Tliis right is
vested in the rules of international law. It should, in our
view, be exercised in accordance with these rules. My
Government considers it necessary to secure fair and
equitable prices for exported and imported goods. Fixed
price relationships, however, are liable to suspend the
market mechanism, which is indispensable for the orderly
functioning of the world economy.
107. My Government has also certain apprehensions re­
garding producer associations. This does not apply to their
existence as such. My Government is concerned, however,
lest the policy of such associations might lead to new
dependencies and might be detrimental to an unhampered
exchange of goods.
108. With regard to the Programme of Action, consider­
able progress has been made during the past few days in
approximating positions which were originally far apart.
The Programme now at hand contains a number of
proposals to which my delegation fully subscribes. On the
other hand, a number of measures are suggested which do
not seem to us feasible or appropriate for achieving the
envisaged aim of closer international economic co-opera­
tion. It is no lack of political will which prompts me to
state this view. On the contrary, it is our conviction that
political determination is best applied when based on
reality.
109. I do not want to expound here the reservations of
my delegation on the Programme of Action. They will have
to be dealt with when the relevant items are discussed in
the competent United Nations bodies. I should like,
however, to refer briefly to some important points.
110. Concerning section I of resolution 3202 (S-VI), I am
obliged to state that conditions in the commodity markets
obviously vary so much that measures in respect to
individual commodities can oe taken only after examina­
tion on a case-by-case basis. We are in favour of structural
adjustments which serve to integrate the developing coun­
tries more closely and equitably into the international
division of labour. Structural measures must not lead,
however, to sacrificing sound and competitive branches of
the economy. The implementation of the code of conduct
for liner conferences has, in the view of my Government, to
be considered at the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly. With regard to freight and insurance, I wish to
emphasize that my Government has no means of establish­
ing or subsidizing freight rates or of influencing insurance
costs.
111. With regard to section II, I have to state the
following. First, the reform of the international monetary
system was the subject of an intensive discussion at the
twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly, the result
of which was reflected in resolution 3084 (XXVIII). We
consider the formulation arrived at, after thorough negotia­
tions, to be a well-balanced compromise. We do not want to
anticipate further decisions in the bodies of IMF entrusted
with this reform. We believe in the necessity of world-wide
measures to check inflation. Isolated measures to prevent a
transfer of inflation are either impossible or unsuited to
check inflation as a whole. My Government does not see

10

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

any possibility of devising means of guaranteeing the real
value of currency reserves. The creation of special drawing
rights as a whole should be based on criteria of a
stability-oriented world-wide need for liquidity. Special
drawing rights established without regard for these criteria
would not be of use to the developing countries either.
112. Secondly, regarding the implementation of the Inter­
national Development Strategy concerning transfer of
resources, I wish to recall the reservations made by my
delegation on its adoption. Moreover, nothing should be
done here to anticipate the results of the examination in
the World Bank regarding the improvement of its decision­
making process. My delegation states that we cannot
influence private credit contracts with the aim of reducing
the external debt of developing countries.
113. The Federal Republic of Germany takes a positive
view of the Special Programme. It will endeavour to
increase further its total assistance to the developing
countries in order to provide additional means for special
measures beyond the scope of the assistance granted so far.
114. We cannot, of course, forestall the budget procedures
applied in a democratic State like ours. In our view, not all
the measures listed under paragraph 3 of the Special
Programme in section X of the resolution are feasible. We
shall concentrate on those items which we consider to be
the most effective; these include the fertilizer and food
assistance programme.
115. I will say a few words on behalf of the European
Economic Community. The Community through the Presi­
dent of its Council stated right at the outset of this special
session [2209th meeting] its awareness of the magnitude of
the problems for which the session was convened and of the
need to find urgent solutions to the present instabilities and
disruptions of trade flows. The objective is to achieve an
international economic system equitable to all nations and
based on their increasing interdependence. The Com­
munity, as well as its member States, have, throughout this
session, endeavoured to take an active and constructive part
in the discussions. The Community and the member States
have been doing so in a spirit of open-mindedness and
wanted to underline their will to further develop a
partnership with the developing countries.
Mr. Kinene (Uganda), Vice-President, took the Chair.
116. With regard to the texts the General Assembly has
adopted, we would like to make the following reservations
and interpretations.
117. First, the European Economic Community and its
member States wish to increase their aid to the developing
countries but cannot envisage the automatic transfer of
revenues from their import policy or their tax systems.
118. Second, the European Economic Community has
regularly improved and extended the generalized prefer­
ences scheme, which it applies. It considers, however, that
the situation of commodities on the international markets
requires other solutions.

119. The European Economic Community has always
accepted the examination of the possibilities for compensa­
tory financing within the competent international bodies; it
considers, however, that this matter should continue to be
dealt with in those bodies.
120. While recognizing that buffer stocks in the frame­
work of commodity agreements can, in appropriate cases,
be a useful factor', it is of the opinion that, since the aim of
such stocks is to assist the stabilization of these markets,
they are in themselves favourable to all countries, in
particular to both producing and consuming developing
countries.
121. With regard to multilateral trade negotiations, the
Community subscribed to the Declaration of Tokyo,1
under the terms of which these negotiations would be
conducted on the basis of the principles of mutual
advantage, mutual commitment and global reciprocity with
respect for the most-favoured-nation clause, while not
expecting reciprocity of commitments from the developing
countries and recognizing the need to take differential
measures in respect of such countries to ensure special and
more favourable treatment for them.
122. With regard, finally, to the emergency measures, the
European Economic Community and its member States are
aware of the critical situation resulting from the latest
developments in the prices of imported products which are,
particularly for some developing countries, essential. They
thus wish to express their determination, in conjunction
with all interested States and international organizations,
forthwith to examine the most effective procedures for an
exceptional international aid project to overcome the
difficulties of such developing countries. The Community
and its member States would, for their part, be prepared to
play an active part in these efforts and to make a
substantial contribution provided the other members of the
Community of nations were willing to join them.
123. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): The two documents
adopted through the consensus decision taken tonight on
the establishment of a new international economic order
are of the highest importance. Through them the States
Members of the United Nations have declared their inten­
tion to achieve a more equitable distribution of the world's
resources and to narrow the widening gap between the
developed and the developing countries. We pay our tribute
to the untiring efforts of the representatives who have been
active in the preparation of these documents, in particular
to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee.
124. In our view this Assembly signifies a milestone in the
history of the United Nations. Member States have demon­
strated a spirit of co-operation that is greatly encouraging.
They have, from sometimes strongly conflicting positions
of interest, made sacrifices with the aim of creating a solid
foundation for the forthcoming efforts to design a more
just and equitable relationship between nations.

Declaration of 14 September 1973 approved by the Ministerial
Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade held in Tokyo.

2229th meeting - 1 May 1974

125. The results of this Assembly will carry with them the
hope that future work in other spheres of United Nations
activities will lead to similar accomplishments achieved
through negotiation and co-operation for the benefit of
Member States.
126. I want now to make just a few brief remarks
regarding some specific points in the documents just
adopted.
127. Our delegation certainly supports the aim of achiev­
ing a more just and equitable relationship between, on the
one hand, prices of products exported by the developing
countries and, on the other hand, prices of products
imported by the same countries, but we do not believe that
it would be technically and practically feasible to establish
a specific link. We do share the belief that producers'
co-operation among the developing countries should be
facilitated within a broader international framework where
the legitimate interests of all countries will be taken into
account.
128. There are some points in the Programme of Action,
and specifically in sections I, II and VIII, on which we
would have wished for further improvements. I want
specifically to mention those on the reimbursement of
receipts from custom duties, taxes, on new investment for
production of synthetic materials and also paragraph 3 (b)
of section I under the title "general trade". We believe
furthermore that it is important that the compromise
wording achieved in the Tokyo Declaration should be
adhered to and that we should avoid changes in the agre'ed
objectives of these negotiations. As regards the paragraphs
on transportation, our position on the code of conduct for
a liner conference has been made clear at the Geneva
conference,2 where for reasons stated there we had to vote
against the code.
129. We have accepted section II on monetary matters in
the Programme of Action on the understanding that any
reform should be based on the concept of global liquidity
needs and on the availability of financial resources and that
it should aim at the creation of monetary stability.
130. As regards the question of an increase in the official
component of the net amount of financial resource
transfers to developing countries, our Minister for Trade
pointed out in the general debate [2219th meetingj that
some additional S8,000 million would be put at the
disposal of the poorer countries if the developed countries
fulfilled the target laid down in the International Develop­
ment Strategy of official assistance equal to 0.7 per cent of
the gross national product within the next year. That, in
our view, is a real aid target.
131. A clear distinction must be made between flows of
private capital and official investments in developing
countries. The development effects of private investment
could be ascertained only after a careful political and
economic analysis on a case-by-case basis.
2 United Nations Conference of Plenipotentiaries on a Code of
Conduct for Liner Conferences, held at Geneva from 12 November
to 15 December 1973 (first part) and from 11 March to 6 April
1974 (second part).

11

132. We regard the Programme of Action as an important
general guideline for the efforts to be made by Member
States and the United Nations family of organizations in
the follow-up of the principles laid down in the Declara­
tion. For our part, we will from now on, in co-operation
with all States Members of the United Nations, do our best
to respond to it.
133. We are indeed very happy that it proved possible,
despite the short time available, to reach agreement on a
special programme, including, in particular, emergency
measures to mitigate the difficulties of the developing
countries most seriously affected by the economic crisis.
Without that accomplishment, the special session of the
General Assembly could not have been said to have
achieved the goals it had been convened to reach.
134. Mr. KARHILO (Finland): The Finnish Government
was among the very first to support the Algerian initiative
to convene the General Assembly in special session to try
for the first time to tackle the problems of raw materials
and development in an integrated and comprehensive
manner. I am now authorized to state that the Government
of Finland accepts, and indeed lends its full support to, the
conclusion of our work as presented in the documents
before the Assembly. My Government particularly wel­
comes the manifestation of a joint and determined political
will by the world community to work together to solve the
economic problems facing us; it welcomes the resolve to
work urgently for the establishment of a new international
economic order, which is expressed in the Declaration
adopted by the Assembly and which has the unreserved
support of my Government.
135. Similarly, Finland gives its support to the Programme
of Action, which in our view is a prerequisite for making
the principles of the Declaration truly meaningful. Some of
the measures recommended in the Programme will present
Finland, an industrialized, but none the less a capitalimporting, country with obvious problems. However, my
delegation sees the Programme as the start of an important
process that will make the new economic order operationalIn the course of that process within the United Nations
system, we shall have an opportunity to elaborate the
problems which arise out of our particular position.
136. In conclusion, I should like to refer to the Special
Programme and the urgent measures contained in section X
of the Programme of Action in favour of the developing
countries most seriously affected by economic crisis. My
Government welcomes the Special Programme as a recogni­
tion of the principle of the interdependence of all nations
which must form the corner-stone of the new international
economic order. It is in that spirit that the Finnish
Government has already committed itself to that Pro­
gramme and has undertaken urgent action to determine
how best it could participate with additional measures in
the implementation cf the Special Programme.
137. Mr. RAE (Canada): The Canadian delegation has
joined in the decision which has marked the conclusion of
this special session. We have done so in order to signify
Canada's firm support for the basic objective of the
session—namely, an acceleration in the rate of development

12

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

of developing countries and a more equitable distribution
of the world's economic resources.
138. It is, however, necessary for my delegation to
comment on certain of the specific provisions of the
documents. I turn first to the Declaration.
139. Our discussion of paragraph 4(e), on permanent
sovereignty and nationalization, revealed general agreement
on the fundamental principle that each State enjoys
permanent sovereignty over its natural resources and all
economic activities within its territory. The problem we
were unable to resolve relates to identifying those legal
principles which are to apply when a State, in the exercise
of its permanent sovereignty, adopts measures of national­
ization. My delegation considers that a State's right to
undertake nationalization must be exercised in accordance
with the generally accepted rules of international law and
practice governing such an act.
140. The Canadian delegation wishes to enter a reservation
with respect to paragraph 4 (f), which, as worded, appears
to be at variance with international practice.
141. With respect to paragraph 4(j), the Canadian delega­
tion supports the objective of just and equitable prices for
goods traded by developing countries and understands that
to be the intention of this paragraph.
142. My delegation is able to support paragraph 4 (s), but
we would expect co-operation among developing countries
to be consistent with their international obligations.
143. With respect to paragraph 4 (t), my delegation
recognizes the right of countries which are exporters of raw
materials to seek an equitable return for their resources,
just as consumers may associate in order to protect their
interests. But in the view of the Canadian delegation the
principle which flows from recognition of the economic
interdependence of States, which is the basis of this entire
Declaration, is the need for mutually beneficial co-opera­
tion between producing and consuming States. This para­
graph does not, in our view, accurately reflect that
principle.
144. I turn now to the Programme of Action.
145. The Canadian delegation recognizes the need for
urgent action to mitigate the immediate difficulties of the
developing countries most seriously affected by economic
crises. Canada considers such action to be vitally necessary,
and it will be recalled that in this special session's general
debate the Secretary of State for External Affairs, the
Honourable Mitchell Sharp, announced a number of con­
crete measures Canada itself is taking in that direction
[2211th meeting/. It is our expectation that other advan­
taged countries and the international community as a
whole will take a similarly positive and forthcoming
attitude.
146. We do have problems, however, with the Programme
of Action contained in the documents we have just
adopted. Had there been a separate vote on the Programme
of Action, my delegation would have been constrained to

abstain. Our reservation stems from the fact that in the
time available to this special session, it was not possible to
refine in the text economic, trade and monetary issues
which will have long-term implications for all members of
the international community. Nor was it possible, again
because of the lack of time, either to harmonize the text of
the Programme of Action with that of the Declaration, or
to reconcile the inconsistencies and contradictions within
the Programme. I think it would be counter-productive to
go into these problems in detail at this late stage.
147. It is my delegation's sincere hope and expectation
that work on these important issues might continue in
other appropriate organizations and bodies, both within
and outside the United Nations. Indeed, we believe that the
discussions begun here, the views we have exchanged, the
hard work we have done, will enable Governments to
address these questions more vigorously in more special­
ized bodies. It is our hope also that these discussions will
give further impetus to bilateral and multilateral steps to
bring immediate relief to those developing countries most
seriously affected by recent economic disorders.
148. I should like to make certain additional comments,
briefly, directed specifically to section X of the Programme
of Action.
149. The Canadian delegation supports section X, the
Special Programme, including in particular the emergency
measures. We do so in the light of our perception of a need
for urgent action to assist the developing countries most
seriously affected by economic crisis.
150. Immediately prior to this special session, the Cana­
dian Government decided to provide an additional $100
million over and above originally projected development
assistance programmes to meet the emergency needs of the
hardest hit developing countries, particularly in the food
and fertilizer areas. These funds are now being disbursed.
We have stressed at this session that a renewed effort of
international co-operation is called for in which full use
should be made of those established and recognized
international institutions which have experience and ex­
pertise in supporting development. The United Nations
Development Programme, [UNDP], the World Food Pro­
gramme, the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development and the regional development banks are
repositories of the technical skills now available to the
international community. As such, they offer a ready
means of securing early and effective action.
151. We support the call for an emergency effort to be
launched by the Secretary-General—who has shown such
concern for all these problems in the course of the past
weeks-as outlined in paragraph 2 of the Special Pro­
gramme. We consider that the scope of this Programme
would have had more attraction had it concentrated on
urgent measures for the emergency period rather than on
more general problems of development. In this connexion
we find less than satisfactory the formula in paragraph 1
linking the time-frame of the Special Fund to the remainder
of the Second Development Decade. Regarding the Special
Fund which is introduced in paragraph 5, some Govern­
ments, particularly those which have not traditionally

2229th meeting - 1 May 1974

offered financial support to existing United Nations institu­
tions, may find this Fund a more attractive channel for
emergency and development assistance to developing coun­
tries most seriously affected by recent economic events. In
our view maximum use should be made of the existing
international development institutions. Canada for its part
has agreed to a contribution of $276 million to the fourth
replenishment of the International Development Associa­
tion.
152. The text of this section does go somewhat beyond
the scope of the special measures which in our view were
first contemplated. In paragraphs 3 and 8, a number of
monetary issues are raised. We would not wish it to be
thought that our positions on a series of ongoing consulta­
tions on monetary issues, under the auspices of IMF, are
prejudged by acceptance of this Special Programme as a
whole. We look forward to an early decision on the
establishment and the operation of the proposed new
special credit facility now under consideration in the IMF
to alleviate the deteriorating balance-of-payments situation
of the developing countries, especially those most seriously
affected by recent economic events. Regarding paragraph 4,
Canada will continue to give sympathetic consideration to
the debt problems of developing countries.
153. Our support for section X as a whole should be seen
as a reflection of our determination to make every effort to
respond to the urgent and immediate needs of developing
countries hardest hit by economic disasters.
154. Finally, may I conclude by observing that the
extensive negotiations which have taken place on these
documents throughout the special session have clearly
shown the possibility for a higher degree of co-operation
between developed and developing, producer and consumer
countries, on the issues with which these documents deal
than has ever been achieved in the past. It is our sincere
hope and expectation that our work together, the progress
made towards co-operation achieved at this special session,
will be carried further into other bodies, both within and
outside the family of the United Nations.
155. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): The spokesman for the European Economic
Community has entered the reservations and expressed the
comments of our group that we felt were necessary for
inclusion in the record. It goes without saying that the
delegation of Belgium and of the Grand Duchy of Luxem­
bourg, on whose behalf I speak also, support the comments
made.

13

since we voted in favour of them at the third session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
[UNCTADJ in Santiago. It is thus that we read the terms of
paragraph 6 which states that "the present Declaration will
provide an additional source of inspiration" in the prepara­
tion of that Charter.
158. With regard to the Programme of Action, I should
like to make the following comments. As far as we are
concerned, section I, paragraph 1 (c), wliich speaks of
producers' associations, must be understood within the
framework of international co-operation explicitly as men­
tioned in paragraph 4 (t) of the Declaration.
159. With regard to paragraph 1 (d) of the Programme of
Action, we continue to believe that the establishment of a
direct link between import prices and export prices would
create serious difficulties.
160. In the Programme of Action, we particularly support
those provisions that are intended to assure a favourable
evolution of the market in raw materials, which is the main
subject of discussion of the present session of the Assem­
bly.
161. However, in order to achieve a harmonious function­
ing of international markets, we must not lose sight of the
fact that an important element in the stability of the
markets lies in regular supply on equitable conditions, as
Mr. Walter Scheel, President of the Council of Ministers of
the European Economic Community stated when he spoke
on behalf of the Community [2209th meeting).
162. We understand, furthermore, that the provisions
contained in section I, paragraph 4(f), covering certain
measures that the developed countries should abstain from
imposing can in no way prejudice the commitments
assumed by Belgium and Luxembourg in an international or
European framework.
163. With reference to section II, efforts to reform the
international monetary system and to finance develop­
ment—as contained in paragraphs 1 and 2-should take fully
into account the work under way in these fields in the
appropriate international forums.
164. By the same token, the provisions covering the
transfer of technology in section IV and the activities of
transnational corporations in section V should also be
carried out in harmony with the work and research now
under way in, respectively, UNCTAD and the United
Nations in these two fields.

156. With regard to the Declaration, the acceptance by the
delegations of Belgium and Luxembourg of paragraph 4 (e),
which speaks to the sovereignty of States over their natural
resources, must be understood in accordance with the
attitude that the States members of the European Eco­
nomic Community adopted during the third session of the
Working Group on the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States.

165. With regard to section VIII, we understand that the
preamble will be drafted in accordance with the termino­
logy of most of the paragraphs, namely, "all efforts
should be made ..We contend, furthermore, that the
assistance required in subparagraph (b) cannot be greater
than that which is normally given to the new industrial
development projects.

157. Moreover, the intentions and principles mentioned in
that Declaration deserve to be clarified within the context
of the discussions on the Charter 1 mentioned before, since
Belgium and Luxembourg adhere to all the principles and

166. And, finally, on section X, entitled "Special Pro­
gramme", including emergency measures, the Belgiam
delegation would like to make the following comments

14

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

which, 1 believe, will make clear how and under what
conditions we accept this part of the Programme of Action.
167. In the course of the debates, we have noted
unanimously that the present economic situation in the
world, flowing from the rise in the prices of certain raw
materials, has seriously affected the fate of certain develop­
ing countries.
168. As far as Belgium is concerned, in the statement that
we made in the plenary Assembly [2212th meeting/, we
said that emergency assistance to these countries is impera­
tive and, therefore, a clear distinction should be made
between the short-term and longer-term efforts. Naturally,
this aid may be fitted into a more general context which is
less temporary but still part of the development policies.
However, Belgium and Luxembourg feel that priority
should be granted today to the solution of problems that at
present threaten the survival of entire populations.
169. Therefore, without underestimating the import of
the Programme of Action which will inspire our long-term
efforts, what is more necessary today is the adoption of
urgent decisions, particularly in the field of essential raw
materials, fertilizers and financial resources in favour of
those countries most directly affected.
170. So far as Belgium and Luxembourg are concerned,
we intend with our partners in the European Economic
Community to participate in all this and we believe that all
those who feel as we do will participate in such concen­
trated and speedy action, because this action will be all the
more efficient if we do not dilute or uselessly delay it.
171. In conclusion, 1 regret that we have been unable to
examine and, hence, to adopt concrete measures contained
in a series of draft resolutions that we believe have been
discussed too hastily. It is a shame, for example, that we
have been unable to decide upon urgent action in the
matter of fertilizers. We can only hope that the Economic
and Social Council will be able to fill this gap.
172. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation from
French): My statement will contain specific explanations
and a number of thoughts with regard to the events of
which our Organization has been the theatre during the
course of the last three weeks, and first of all, the event
itself—the fact that this session has taken place. Surprising
though it may seem, the sixth special session of the General
Assembly, which is about to conclude, is the first one that
has been devoted to international economic relations in the
last 29 years. It was particularly important for us to
succeed in a task as important and novel as this one. It was
clear from the outset that we were about to create
precedents for future special sessions of the Assembly of
this nature-the one for the fall of 1975, for example-as
well as for the work of the Second Committee at regular
sessions of the General Assembly.
173. I cannot fail to hail the consensus that has marked
the adoption of the basic documents that were discussed.
The United Nations has committed itself to the right course
by avoiding any final confrontation, which would not have
failed to create a difficult atmosphere for future delibera­

tions on topics in the economic field. I whole-heartedly and
most sincerely congratulate those who were responsible for
this success, in particular the President of the General
Assembly and the indefatigable Chairman of our Ad Hoc
Committee, who was also chairman of many meetings,
including restricted and confidential plenary meetings,
which have been taking place here over the last four weeks,
and our friend and conciliator the Ambasssador of His
Majesty the Emperor of Iran, without whom we would not
have been able to maintain the serene and constructive
atmosphere so necessary for the progress of our delibera­
tions.
174. The consensus on which this session is about to
conclude does not, however, mean that we have succeeded
in reaching an understanding on all issues. Those who
initiated our session proposed that we examine the first
foundations of a new and more equitable international
economic order. This programme naturally has the approval
of a country such as France, which is not unaware of how
history is made up of revolutions and often positive
reforms, but which also assesses the danger which sterile
confrontations might cause for the most legitimate causes.
The idea of a new order has meaning only if we fully
understand that we must all work at achieving it. And 1 say
"all" without any exception and without ulterior motives
because it is true that no arbiter is here to decide between
us; there is no doctor for civilization, for we are all our own
doctors, entrusted with the task of using reason and
conciliation to contain the selfish inclinations of our very
nature.
Mr. Benites (Ecuador) resumed the Chair.
175. Two or three fundamental rules seem to have been on
our mind in the last few days in certain conditions which, I
hope, will not remain precarious. First of all, the countries
that have numbers on their side finally decided not to use
their automatic majority in their favour. Undoubtedly, they
have understood that the very edifice of the United Nations
would not resist this kind of exercise and that the
importance of the problems on which there exist here dif­
ferences of interest or of ideology made it necessary that
the difficulties which arise should not be decided in an
unrealistic manner. And I say "unrealistic" because it is all
too clear that the structures that serve as the framework for
trade among States and economic entities are only what
they are-they cannot be changed by simple votes—and that
the prestige of our Organization as well as its possibilities
for action would be affected for a long time if an attempt
was made here to force the acceptance of extreme claims
against the will of a considerable minority.
176. That simple rule leads me to mention another, which,
I hope, will continue to be observed-a rule in accordance
with which there is nothing realistic except that which can
be achieved. In other words, we must relentlessly dis­
tinguish between that which is possible and that which is
not, so as to proceed in accordance with stages truly
accepted by those that have the means to implement them.
This simple appeal or, rather, reminder of the laws of
genuine international progress does not, of course, imply
that we can disregard the notion of that which is desirable.
It is clearly necessary for the United Nations to continue to
be a centre for active thought in determining those ideals

2229th meeting - 1 May 1974

that are to guide Member States not only in the fields of
peace, security and disarmament but also, and increasingly,
in determining the conditions in which a more satisfactory
economic order ought to be established.
177. That is the direction in which our Assembly, in our
view, seems to have gone by having achieved this consensus
today. Having hailed the skills of those who have so well
hoped to achieve these results, 1 shall be all the more at ease
mentioning some regret as to the state of mind which at
times prevailed in our discussions with regard to procedure.
What took place in the last few days, the manner in which
at least six important draft resolutions were left out of the
discussions, constitutes a disquieting sign. 1 should be very
happy if authoritative voices would point out the fact that
no one has tried to stifle the discussions that have time and
again been requested by well-meaning delegations.
178. My delegation would like to stress the fact that the
Declaration of principles and the Programme of Action
seem to make a very important contribution to the
definition of a new international economic order, which we
hope to see most sincerely very soon. For example, the
preamble of the Declaration includes a very clear statement
as to the spirit which henceforth will have to prevail in
international economic relations. But this is also the case of
many more concrete sections such as, for instance, those
dealing with the organization of markets or the interna­
tional division of labour.
179. With regard to a number of points, however, my
delegation wishes to express a number of reservations and
believes it is useful to explain how it interprets certain given
provisions.
180. First of all, I shall of course confirm the reservations
and the statements of interpretation made by the represen­
tative of the Federal Republic of Germany as the represen­
tative of a country which at present is exercising the
presidency of the Council of the Community regarding, in
particular, the paragraphs of the Programme of Action on
general trade.
181. As to the Declaration of principles, the French
delegation, with regard to paragraph 4(e) on the exercise of
the right of nationalization, maintains the position which
was explained on behalf of our Government as well as the
other eight Governments of the countries members of the
European Economic Community in the work done on the
preparation of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States.
182. Furthermore, the French delegation cannot associate
itself with paragraph 4 (f).
183. With regard to the Programme of Action, my
delegation would like to say the following.
184. In section I, on "Fundamental problems of raw
materials and primary commodities as related to trade and
development", paragraph 1, "Raw materials", subpara­
graph (b), the French delegation has a reservation on the
word "recovery".

IS

185. In the same section, in connexion with paragraph
1 (c) and (d), we feel, like other States of the European
Community, that equitable relations must be sought be­
tween the prices of exported goods and those of products
imported by the developing countries. However, we believe
that the establishment of a formal link between them
would be difficult to achieve. We should also like to state
that we feel that the role of producers' associations should
be as it was defined in the Declaration on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order.
186. In paragraph 3, "General trade", the French delega­
tion has a reservation on subparagraph (a) (xii), which, in
our opinion, does not duly take into account the needs of
economic development and it wishes to specify, with regard
to subparagraph (a) (v), that we must take into account the
social conditions flowing from the measures envisaged.
187. With regard to section II relating to the interna­
tional monetary system and the financing of development, I
wish to recall the fact that the French Government has
always been in favour of a more active and wider
participation of the developing countries in the interna­
tional monetary system. We believe that, if most of the
provisions envisaged in the Programme of Action go along
the lines of this needed evolution, we must not prejudge the
result of the work under way in the framework of the
financial organizations. In the circumstances, my delegation
has to make a general reservation on paragraph 1 of this
section as a whole.
188. In section II, paragraph 2 (a), the French delegation
interprets the phrase "and even to exceed it" as the
expression of an objective to be achieved, in so far as
possible.
189. For reasons already expressed with regard to the
international financial institutions, my delegation has to
note its reservation on paragraph 2 (cj.
190. In connexion with paragraph 2 (g), if we are to
accept the idea of a renegotiation of debts on a case-by-case
basis, my delegation feels that such measures should only
accrue to the benefit of countries that find themselves in a
crisis, and should not turn into solutions that would tend to
ensure the automatic refinancing of debts.
191. In section IV, "Transfer of technology", the French
delegation would have preferred, in subparagraph (a), to see
the word "directives" rather than the expression "code of
conduct", an expression which prejudges the results of the
work currently under way in other organs of the United
Nations system.
192. The French delegation is unable to take a position on
section V, "Regulation and control over the activities of
transnational corporations", until the studies currently
being carried out in the United Nations have been com­
pleted.
193. With reference to section VII, "Promotion of co­
operation among developing countries", it goes without
saying that the reference in subparagraph^ to existing
international agreements must be understood as applying to
the whole paragraph.

16

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

194. In section VIII, "Assistance in the exercise of
permanent sovereignty of States over natural resources",
the French delegation wishes, with respect to subpara­
graph (a), to refer to the reservation it has made in
connexion with paragraph 4 (ej of the Declaration.
195. As to subparagraph (b), in the view of the French
delegation, the role of the United Nations is to assist the
developing countries in defining and implementing their
own development programmes, in strict respect for the
procedures and decisions of competent bodies, and in the
framework of programmes established by the countries
concerned themselves.
196. With regard to section IX, on institutional arrange­
ments, the French delegation has serious misgivings, from
the standpoint of both legality and effectiveness, as to the
possibility mentioned in paragraph 3 (bj of the Economic
and Social Council meeting on a permanent basis.
197. Paragraph 5 of the same section prompts the same
reservation as the one we expressed in connexion with
paragraphs 1 and 2 (c) of section II.
198. Finally, in connexion with emergency measures,
section X, the French Government believes that the Special
Programme included in the Programme of Action is a very
constructive contribution to the search for and implementa­
tion of solutions to benefit the most seriously affected
countries. If, in view of the wide number of provisions and
commitments in this programme, we do not consider
ourselves bound by all these proposals, my Government,
however, obviously confirms its readiness to participate in
the activities of the international community to benefit
those countries in the spirit just recalled by my German
colleague on behalf of the European Economic Community
and its member States.
199. The reservations and comments I have just voiced on
the documents on which we have reached our consensus
today in no way interfere with the satisfaction which I have
referred to earlier in my statement. The principles which we
have adopted, the action which we have agreed to under­
take to the best of our ability, the assistance which we
envisage giving, to the extent possible and as our own
problems permit, are three elements of a policy which
France will be glad to endorse in the same way as its
European partners. The European Economic Community
does not ignore the responsibilities stemming from its
position in the areas of industry, agriculture and world
trade. France, which is a member of that Community, plays
a role in it, and guides its own action towards as
constructive an effort as possible, welcomes the conclusion
of this session as a positive and essential contribution to the
new spirit of agreement and solidarity which is to prevail
among our States. The times make it necessary for this
spirit to prevail, and it should exist as follows: first, a
short-term concrete solidarity-that is to say, the implemen­
tation of emergency measures, in which, I repeat, France, as
well as Europe, will participate, in spite of the fact that
right now it is one of the countries most seriously affected
by the present crisis—to be accompanied later by a more
effective search for ways and means of preventing further
crises and of controlling the present situation, while

achieving a more equitable economic order in the context
of the principles adopted today.
200. May I in conclusion recall the fact that France was
the first to suggest that our Organization should deal with
one of the most burning problems in the serious difficulties
that occured last fall in the important sector of energy.
That was the starting-point, the first idea; but it needs to be
followed up. The French delegation, in this connexion, has
suggested certain practical procedures which we would not
want to be forgotten.
201. 1 hope no one will take my last few words as
criticism: we have concluded the most general part of our
work, and thus perhaps the easiest of the tasks called for by
the present imperfect economic situation. This imposes
other, more concrete, and thus perhaps even more difficult
tasks, and it would be highly desirable for our Organization
to deal with them as soon as possible, in the spirit of
dialogue which my country has untiringly advocated and
always will.
202. Sir Laurence McINTYRE (Australia): In his state­
ment from this podium on 22 April [2224th meeting], the
Secretary of the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs,
speaking on behalf of my Government, welcomed the
initiative of President Boumediene of Algeria in asking that
this special session be convened, and promised the fullest
possible co-operation of the Australian Government in
working towards the purposes of that initiative.
203. It has been an arduous special session of the General
Assembly, as we all know. In recognizing the essential part
that you yourself, Mr. President, have played in the direc­
tion of our work, I must also pay a full tribute to the
unflagging, patient and ultimately successful efforts of the
Ambassador of Iran to encourage many among us to work
night and day, as he has said, to narrow the differences that
inevitably existed when we assembled here on 9 April and
to bring this session to a generally satisfactory conclusion.
204. There is no point in disguising the difficulties that a
number of delegations have had in reaching the present
substantial measure of agreement. Their difficulty has
arisen over important questions of principle and equally
important matters of substance. There will still be dis­
appointments. No delegation is going to be fully satisfied
with the results of the session. But this, after all, is what the
United Nations is all about. Compromises and concessions
have to be made, if the purposes of this Organization are to
prosper, and compromises have been made in the course of
the numerous discussions and consultations that we have
had over the past few weeks. There was, nevertheless, unity
from the beginning in the conviction that the special
problems of the developing countries most gravely affected
by current trends in the world economic situation were a
matter of urgent and direct concern to all of us, and it has
been this unanimous conviction that has enabled us to
reach decisions and to agree upon targets to which my
Government is able to subscribe—and I have in mind, not
least of all, the special programme of emergency measures
for the relief of the hardest-hit countries.

2229th meeting - 1 May 1974

205. Like other delegations that have spoken tonight, my
delegation has certain reservations about one aspect or
another of the Declaration and the Programme of Action
that we have now accepted, and these reservations I should
like to be allowed to state briefly.
206. Turning first of all to the Declaration contained in
resolution 3201 (S-VI) let me first draw attention to its
paragraph 4 (e), which refers to the right of any country to
full permanent sovereignty over its natural resources and its
right of nationalization. My Government does not question
either of these rights, but it is bound to interpret that
paragraph to mean that any act of nationalization should be
accompanied by lawful measures for prompt, effective and
adequate compensation, as envisaged in resolution
1803 (XVII). Similarly, my Government would interpret
the right referred to in paragraph 4 (f) as a right to be
exercised under law. With regard to paragraph 4 (s) of the
Declaration, Australia fully supports efforts by the develop­
ing countries to strengthen economic co-operation among
themselves. We take it that where such efforts are made on
a preferential basis full regard will be paid to other
principles in the Declaration and to international obliga­
tions.
207. As for the Programme of Action in resolution
3202 (S-VI), my Government will do all it can to help in
bringing about those changes that are desirable and neces­
sary in the existing international economic order, while
fully cognizant of those features of it that have been of
benefit to all countries. In short, Australia's aim will be to
ensure that existing arrangements continue to contribute to
international co-operation and that, where appropriate,
they are improved to reflect the needs of changing
circumstances.
208. Again, as a producer and exporter of raw materials
and primary commodities, Australia is concerned to pro­
mote orderly marketing arrangements which take into
account the interests of both producers and consumers.
There is a place for improving and facilitating co-operation
and consultation between producers of raw materials in
their mutual and individual national interests, while taking
into account the interests of consumers, particularly those
of consumer developing countries. In making these remarks,
I have in mind especially paragraph 1 (c) of section I,
dealing with producers' associations, and paragraph 3(a)
(xi) of that section, dealing with buffer stocks.
209. As regards paragraphs 1 (d) and 3 (a) (viii), of
section I, I must say that we have some doubts about the
practicability or usefulness of seeking to establish prices for
commodities either according to a general set of principles
or through a link with the prices of manufactures.
Similarly, we have doubts about the practical effectiveness
of paragraph 3 (a) (vi), on the matter of reimbursement of
duties and losses on imports from developing countries, and
paragraph 3 (a) (xii) of section I, on investment in the
manufacture of synthetics.
210. We interpret paragraph 3 (b) of section I of resolu­
tion 3202 (S-VI) and paragraph 4 (n) of resolution
3201 (S-VI), concerning preferences and non-reciprocity, in
the context of the Tokyo Declaration on the multilateral
Litho in United Nations, New York

17

trade negotiations. IMF is at present reviewing the formula
for calculation of fund quotas, which inter alia determine
voting patterns. We should on the whole have preferred that
this review be completed before the General Assembly
made any pronouncement on this subject. Hence we have
reservations about paragraph 1 (g) of section II of resolu­
tion 3202 (S-VI) and we also have reservations of a similar
nature about paragraph 2 (c) of the same section.
211. Let me conclude by saying that, notwithstanding
these individual points on which we are not entirely happy,
my delegation has been able to accept both resolutions in
the document before us, whose urgent purposes Australia
supports and subscribes to and will do its utmost to
translate into practical effect in full co-operation with the
international community. I can assure this Assembly that
the Australian response to the problems before us will be
found, as in the past, to be forthcoming.
212. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Saudi Arabia wishes to speak on a point of
order.
213. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I asked for permis­
sion to speak on a point of order because I have discovered
that our minds have become numbed with fatigue. We are
present here physically, but many of us are going to the
cafeteria to take nourishment, others are walking into the
corridors, and I believe it is high time that we took a
decision to adjourn until tomorrow morning. There would
be no financial implications, I am sure, if we extended this
session for two hours between, let us say, 11 a.m. and
1 p.m. tomorrow.
214. We stand on our human rights. We do not belong to a
union. But, Mr. President, in your wisdom, I hope you will
not ask for two who oppose the adjournment. Adjourn­
ment is adjournment, and I hope that my colleagues will
raise their hands so that we may come with fresh minds to
listen to the pearls that are being strewn and be able to
string them, as it were, and keep them in the records rather
than just leave them on the floor without any benefit to us
all.
215. If anybody objects to that and wants to leave, let
him circulate his statement in explanation of vote. For my
part I would rather have our good friend from Algeria talk
to us when we have fresh minds. I believe he is to be the
last speaker, and I would not want him to speak at two
o'clock in the morning.
216. With your permission, Sir, I move that we adjourn
until tomorrow morning.
217. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Saudi Arabia has submitted, in accordance
with rule 76 of the rules of procedure, a motion for
adjournment, which must be immediately put to a vote. If
there is no objection, however, perhaps I may consider that
the motion has been accepted, in the light of the applause
that greeted it, and adjourn the meeting until tomorrow.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 p. m.
74-77052-February 1976-2,200
