A/64/PV.61

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

61

st plenary meeting
Thursday, 10 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 69
Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/64/439/Add.2 (Part I))
The President (spoke in Arabic): If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Third Committee that is before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote. Before we
begin to take action on the recommendation contained
in the report of the Third Committee, I should like to
advise representatives that we are going to proceed to
take a decision in the same manner as was done in the
Third Committee.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 8
of its report. We will now take action on the draft
resolution, entitled “Follow-up to the International
Year of Human Rights Learning”. May I take it that the

Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution as
recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/82).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 69.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Special Meeting at the end of the International
Year of Human Rights Learning
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly, under agenda item 69, will now hold a
Special Meeting to mark the end of the International
Year of Human Rights Learning, in accordance with
the decision on allocation of items taken at its 2nd
plenary meeting and pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 62/171 of 18 December 2007.
In this context, allow me to make a brief
statement.
On the occasion of Human Rights Day, let us
wholeheartedly
reaffirm
that
promoting
and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion, is one of the fundamental
purposes of the United Nations. Human rights stand,
alongside development and peace and security, as one
of the pillars upon which the Organization was

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-64254 (E)

*0964254*

A/64/PV.61

established. We approach this pillar with humility,
mindful of the fact that all Member States have human
rights challenges. And we embrace it with purpose,
knowing that those challenges must be met, both for
the cause of human rights itself and for the benefit of
peace and development. I will continue to work with
Member States to reaffirm our collective commitment
to universality, non-selectivity and the indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated nature of all human
rights: civil and political, economic, social and cultural
rights, and the right to development.
The Human Rights Council was established to
promote universal respect for the protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. As we
move closer to the mandated five-year review, we will
build on the positive experience gained by the Council
to support the further development of that important
organ. I urge Member States to engage in an open,
inclusive and transparent process in order to fulfil the
promise of the Council and to further strengthen human
rights.
On this day in particular, I am eager to add my
voice to all those who fight against discrimination in
all its forms. Discrimination on the basis of race,
gender, language or religion denies the dignity and
worth of the human being. Yet millions of human
beings continue to fight a daily battle against
discrimination that deprives them of access to
education, health services and decent work.
During this session, we will be called upon to
follow up on the outcome of the Durban Review
Conference, at a moment when the scourge of racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
challenges societies around the globe. Today I urge the
United Nations family, Governments, civil society,
national human rights institutions, the media, educators
and individuals to join hands with a view to embracing
diversity and ending discrimination.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation is most grateful to you for
having convened this Special Meeting at the end of the
International Year of Human Rights Learning.
Enshrined as one of the three pillars of the United
Nations system, human rights is one of the most
important matters that the international community
faces today. Their essence is expressed in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the sixty-first
anniversary of which we are now celebrating. Thus, for

2

more than six decades the international community has
made efforts to enable all citizens of the world to have
access to the benefits of the universal principles of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. However, we
must admit that, despite these efforts, the road that lies
ahead as we march towards full enjoyment of human
rights for all is a very long one.
The essential condition for the full enjoyment of
human rights by all is the awareness of those rights and
ownership of them by all individuals. How many of our
contemporaries are not aware of their rights? How
many submit to treatment that is incompatible with
international standards? It goes without saying that
something I am unaware has no affect on me one way
or the other. Lack of awareness of human rights does
not promote their enjoyment.
The truth is that for more than 60 years, or even
65 years, since the adoption of the Charter was
considered, the representatives of Governments, with
civil society organizations involved, have fought
among themselves amid political contradictions of all
sorts in devising basic rules of existence, amid
suspicions, controversies and, finally, division.
Then, one talks of political and civilian rights,
rightly or wrongly, as more important than economic
and social and cultural rights. Let us not forget one
simple truth: a hungry stomach has no ears, and
implanting democracy depends to a large extent on the
satisfaction of basic needs.
We talk of universal versus local specificity. Here
too there is a truth. There is a complementary
relationship between those two concepts; one
reinforces the other. Let us understand each other well
on that.
Cultural diversity is a source of cultural
enrichment if it is not established in spite of our
common sense of human dignity and if it is not used as
a pretext to justify perpetuation of backward policies
that are incompatible with the principles of the equality
and integrity of the human person, from which human
rights arise.
Finally, human rights are the object of constant
controversy between the North and the South, between
Islam and Christianity and, most seriously, between
peoples, through civil society, and their Governments.
Today, the majority of the peoples of the world
still stagnate in poverty, deprived of their most basic

09-64254

A/64/PV.61

rights. I am speaking here of that majority which has
no access to basic health care. Let us think of women
in particular, who are victims of discrimination and of
all types of violence. Let us think about children
deprived of education and, consequently, of any chance
of social mobility. That majority of humanity has no
access to dignity, to freedom or to responsibility.
We must admit this. In our approach to human
rights matters we have often neglected the real stakes.
We must give the peoples of the entire world the means
and the tools necessary to their daily lives by making
them aware of their role in the generation of wealth
and in the decision-making processes that affect their
lives.

methods with the goal of pursuing the de-politicization
effort necessary for the promotion and the full
enjoyment of all human rights by all.
During the Assembly’s sixty-second session, my
delegation took the initiative, on behalf of the African
Group and other sponsors, in the resolution adopted as
62/171, which proclaimed the year beginning
10 December 2008 International Year of Human Rights
Learning. That initiative did not come by chance, out
of nowhere. Rather, it came from a deep conviction
that the sustainability of all economic, social, cultural
and development policies is largely dependant on the
conscious and responsible participation of all citizens.

And yet the world does agree on the catalytic role
of human rights in all development efforts. From that
point of view, the full realization of the universal
principles of human rights and fundamental freedoms
is the most solid foundation for economic, social,
cultural and development programmes and policies.
Without that foundation, those programmes and
policies cannot be carried out in a lasting way. The
same is true for the Millennium Development Goals.

It is true that the international community
observed the Decade for Human Rights Education,
beginning in 1995, at the centre of which was the
Global Learning Programme on Human Rights in
Development to accelerate human rights education.
However, as we look at the results, one crucial
question remains: to what degree do the populations
concerned participate in the creation, development and
implementation of those education programmes? How
is that education useful in their daily lives?

Following the Secretary-General’s report entitled
“In Larger Freedom” (A/59/2005), the international
community decided to enhance human rights so as to
raise them to their rightful place as the third pillar of
the Organization. It was time to restore the proper
meaning of the concepts of dignity and liberty, of the
founding idea of “We, the people” set out in the
Charter of the United Nations. In that vein we
established the Human Rights Council with a universal
periodic review mechanism.

Today, the pressing challenge is how to ensure
that the universal principles of human rights and
fundamental freedoms can constitute a group of values
that determine the social behaviour of individuals in all
corners of the earth. That is why my country, Benin,
took this initiative, which was quickly supported by all
the African countries and other countries, to move
ahead with the process of human rights learning in all
grassroots communities, seeing human rights as the
common heritage of humanity.

Behind that institutional reform agreed by the
international community, there was the idea of the need
to de-politicize the human rights machinery. But when
what is natural is driven off, it returns at a gallop.
Politics re-established itself, to the detriment of the
genuine enjoyment of human rights by all.

Our declared objective — perhaps only one worth
pursuing in this area — is to create a popular,
participatory momentum in the dissemination of the
universal principles of human rights and fundamental
freedoms as a tool for a daily life with dignity and
responsibility for all. There is a functional
complementarity between human rights learning and
human rights education. However, educational systems
based on notably utilitarian models are likely to create
marginalization and discrimination.

Benin, for its part, would like to reiterate its full
support for the efforts of the Human Rights Council to
make the sovereign equality of States inseparable from
the promotion and genuine protection of all human
rights around the world. The review of the Human
Rights Council scheduled for 2010 will, we hope, be an
exceptional
opportunity
for
the
international
community to fine-tune the Council’s rules and
procedures, its mandate, its governance and its working

09-64254

To correct that shortcoming and accelerate the
process of the appropriation of human rights by the
greatest number of people, every person educated in
human rights is called to become, and should become,
a promoter of human rights learning, an agent of

3

A/64/PV.61

human rights diffusion to a wider population.
Education can thus give momentum to learning in the
broader sense. From that point of view, human rights
learning is a process of acquisition, of accumulation of
knowledge and experience, of a generalized and
continuous ownership of human rights through
activities that train and shape the attitudes and
behaviours of individuals in our grassroots
communities.
Integrated into the process of the socialization of
the individual, human rights learning has certain
advantages. My delegation wishes to focus on three of
those.
First, given that human rights learning is guided
by the holistic framework of human rights, it addresses
civil and political rights and economic and
sociocultural rights as equals. Then, as it concerns
activities derived from the profound values and desires
of the community, human rights learning can make use
of cultural and religious traits to attain universal
principles. Lastly, human rights learning is likely to
create a certain harmony between the individual and
the community.
Within this framework we must place resolutions
62/171, 63/173 and now resolution 64/82, just adopted
by the Assembly on the recommendation of the Third
Committee. My delegation was pleased to see this last
resolution adopted during such a solemn meeting,
marking the sixty-first anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, a meeting marking the
end of the International Year of Human Rights
Learning. The symbolism in that is a balm to the heart.
The Assembly’s adoption of the resolution under these
circumstances has placed a special stamp on the
manifest will of the international community to make
all preparations necessary for the people of the world
to take charge of their own destiny.
Furthermore, human rights learning should enable
each individual — each man, woman, child, disabled
person, elderly person, each human being independent
of race, gender and religion — to be aware of the role
that is his in his community with regard to the
production of wealth and wealth-sharing and in the
attainment and enjoyment of human rights and the
human rights of others, including future generations.
Our dearest hope is to constantly broaden the
consensus on the strong potential of this concept, that
powerful catalyst for renewed invigoration of our

4

societies on the road to progressive improvement of
humanity and access to more widely shared prosperity.
Here we pay homage to all Member States, to all
international organizations, to all those driving
non-governmental organizations and to civil society
actors who during this International Year have been
committed to the promotion and dissemination of
human rights at the grassroots level — in short, to
promote human rights learning. May their actions bear
fruit to the benefit of international peace and security
and sustainable human development in bringing to the
podium of human dignity the greatest numbers of
people, including — why not? — all those now living
as well as future generations? That is the calling of
human rights learning.
We invite all of those committed to this to
persevere in their faith in the future of humanity. It is a
part of the universality of human rights and the
diversity of the cultural heritage of our peoples
worldwide. We have everything to win in seeking
together the roads to follow and the methods to use to
achieve the goal in international cooperation and
solidarity.
Mr. Webb (United States of America): I am
delighted to have the opportunity to address the
Assembly on this, the last day of the International Year
of Human Rights Learning, which coincides with the
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights on 10 December 1948.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
conceived as a common standard of achievement for all
people and all nations. It sought to articulate a
universal definition of human dignity and values
which, 61 years later, still form the bedrock of our
collective commitment to human rights. It is an
extraordinary document forged in the ashes of war that
continues to inspire efforts to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms around the
world.
While we ought, rightly, to pause on this day to
celebrate
and
commemorate
the
remarkable
achievements of the past, we must also recall that the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights is best
honoured through action, not rhetoric. Our
commitment today must extend beyond the words of
the Declaration itself to the measure of our efforts to
live up to its principles. Kofi Annan recognized that

09-64254

A/64/PV.61

when he described the Universal Declaration as the
yardstick by which we measure human progress.
The United States believes as strongly today in
the fundamental importance of the principles enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as it did
61 years ago, when Eleanor Roosevelt chaired the
committee of the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights that drafted the Declaration.
President Obama, in his address to the Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session (see A/64/PV.3), recalled the
words of the United Nations Charter committing us to
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women. He pledged that America
will always stand with those who stand up for their
dignity and their rights: for the student who seeks to
learn, the voter who demands to be heard, the innocent
who longs to be free, the oppressed who yearns to be
equal.
Secretary Clinton, in accepting the Roosevelt
Institute’s Four Freedoms Award, remarked that today,
despite facing different adversaries and battles, those
rights are no less relevant and those freedoms no less
precious. The principles put forward by President
Roosevelt are no less deserving of our defence. It was
Eleanor Roosevelt who reminded us that human rights
begins in small places close to home: in the world of
the individual person, the neighbourhood that he lives
in, the school or college that he attends and the factory,
farm or office where he works. Such places are where
every man, woman and child seeks equal justice, equal
opportunity and equal dignity without discrimination.
Unless those rights have meaning there, they have
little meaning anywhere. Without concerted citizen
action to uphold them close to home, we shall look in
vain for progress in the larger world. It is knowledge of
one’s rights first and foremost that informs and
motivates individual action. The Universal Declaration
of Human Rights recognizes the central importance of
teaching and education in order to promote respect for
those rights and freedoms and to secure their universal
and effective recognition on observance. Article 26 of
the Declaration speaks of the role of education in
promoting the full development of the human
personality and in strengthening respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
Today, we mark the end of the International Year
of Human Rights Learning. The 2007 General

09-64254

Assembly resolution proclaiming this Year (resolution
62/171) recognizes that such learning should contribute
to the fulfilment of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights as a way of life for people everywhere,
and expresses the conviction that every woman, man
and child must be aware of all their human rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to recognize their full
human potential.
The United States fully supports efforts to
promote human rights education and learning and
recognizes the critical value of such education in
fostering those rights. The human rights and
fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Universal
Declaration are the birthright of every man, woman
and child. Instilling knowledge and understanding of
those are the first essential steps on the path to
realizing that birthright.
On Human Rights Day 2008, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reported that for
many people the Declaration remained an unfulfilled
promise, as the political will of States to meet their
commitments lagged lamentably behind their pledges.
In that context, she noted that tens of millions of
people around the world were still unaware of their
right and the fact that their Governments were
accountable to them.
At its core, human rights education and learning
is about empowering the next generation to claim their
rights. We laud the progress that many countries have
made in promoting human rights education, as
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/293), from adopting national laws, strategies or
plans of action through developing and instituting
training programmes for public officials, to developing
human rights curricula, incorporating human rights
education in learning and in school programmes and
extra-curricular activities, raising public awareness
through campaigns and conferences, and supporting
human rights education through various regional and
international conferences.
On this Day, the United States takes pride in
pledging, alongside other countries and as a part of the
United Nations-led effort, to continue working to
promote human rights education and learning as an
integral part of its long-standing commitment to
advance the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
people everywhere.

5

A/64/PV.61

Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): My delegation is
pleased to participate in this special meeting to mark
the end of the International Year of Human Rights
Learning. We welcome and fully support the resolution
on the follow-up to the International Year of Human
Rights Learning, adopted by the plenary earlier this
morning (resolution 64/82).
Thailand is firmly committed to the cause of
human rights both at home and abroad. Our
commitment derives from our long tradition of
tolerance, diversity and caring with regard to people of
different backgrounds, as well as our belief in the
dignity of all human beings. Within that context, we
attach great importance to promoting, both in word and
in deed, an enabling environment for a human rights
culture to thrive at the national, regional and
international levels.
Thailand believes that human rights learning is a
lifelong process that extends beyond conventional
classrooms. It is a process that requires leadership and
commitment at all levels. It also needs constant
nurturing and should be based on a deep appreciation
of the values of each society. In the case of Thailand,
for example, the Thai people primarily learn about
their rights, duties and responsibilities, as well as
respect towards each other, through religious and moral
teachings. Because those values are part of the way of
life of the people, they have provided a strong
foundation for human rights learning.
Since the adoption of the Universal Declaration
on Human Rights on this date 61 years ago, human
rights norms and standards have been developed and
cultivated through various global, regional and national
legal instruments. Thailand has consistently and
actively engaged in many of those exercises. We have
placed particular importance and emphasis on reaching
out to specific audiences. We have already translated
the Universal Declaration for particularly vulnerable
groups, including into Braille and a child-friendly
version. We have also published a human rights manual
for the military, as well as soldier cards, to promote
sensitivity to human rights considerations within the
military.
During the past few years, Thailand has also been
seeking to strengthen partnerships and cooperation
from the international level down to the grass roots. A
human rights caravan was launched by the Prime
Minister in March this year with the collaboration of

6

the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand
and the United Nations country team. The caravan will
travel around Thailand to raise public awareness of
basic human rights, especially in primary schools, with
extra-curricular activities in which students and
schoolteachers can participate equally. Interfaith and
intercultural dialogue is also being promoted among
Thai youth in order to enhance mutual understanding
among the different cultures and religions in the
country and to promote solidarity.
Thailand welcomes the decision of the Human
Rights Council in October of this year to focus the
second phase of the World Programme for Human
Rights Education on promoting human rights education
for higher education. We also welcome the fact that the
Programme will attach importance, too, to human
rights training programmes for teachers and educators,
civil servants, law enforcement officials and military
personnel at all levels.
At the regional level, Thailand, as the current
Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), is working closely with our fellow ASEAN
member States to advance human rights in the region.
During the last ASEAN summit, in Thailand in October
of this year, ASEAN took the historic step of
establishing
the
ASEAN
Intergovernmental
Commission on Human Rights, the first human rights
mechanism in the region. This new Commission would
work to enhance public awareness of human rights
among the peoples of ASEAN through education,
research and dissemination of information, among
other things. Thailand and ASEAN are fully committed
to ensuring the effective functioning of this
Commission for the benefit of all peoples in the
ASEAN member States.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate
Thailand’s conviction that human rights learning is
much more than lessons at school, a theme for a day or
simply a catchphrase. Rather, it is a process that
enables each and every human being to live a secure
and dignified life. Whatever methodology we use to
teach people about human rights, we believe that it is
vital that the process of education go hand in hand with
concrete action, in order to develop not only an
intellectual but also a visceral and practical
appreciation of human rights.
Thailand stands ready to continue to work with
all partners and the United Nations to promote a

09-64254

A/64/PV.61

lifelong human rights learning process as a means to
fostering an environment where a culture of human
rights can take firm root, grow and blossom in societies
around the world. We are confident that by working
together, we can fulfil the noble aspirations of the
United Nations Charter to promote social progress and
better standards of life in greater freedom.
Mr. Zhumabayev (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
First, allow me to note the importance of this event
marking the end of the International Year of Human
Rights Learning, which has sought to promote the
expansion of efforts to teach and advocate for human
rights.
Sixty years after the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the issue of respect for
those rights remains a very immediate one on the
United Nations agenda. Recognizing the importance of
such principles as the universality, interdependence and
indivisible nature of human rights, Kazakhstan views
the Universal Declaration as a key component of
international law and a basis for the current
constitution of Kazakhstan. We support the goals of a
comprehensive
human
rights
programme,
as
recommended by the General Assembly, and we note
that human rights education contributes in a major way
to promoting human rights.
Kazakhstan is committed to supporting a common
understanding of the fundamental principles and
methods of human rights awareness efforts. In line
with the World Programme for Human Rights
Education and the Plan of Action for the first stage of
the World Programme (see resolutions 59/113 A & B),
Kazakhstan has designed and carried out a number of
measures aimed at disseminating understanding of
national and international mechanisms for the
protection of human rights.
In the context of implementing the World
Programme for Human Rights Education for the period
2005-2015, Kazakhstan established a national plan of
action on human rights education in the Republic, an
extremely significant event for our country in the field
of formal human rights education. Achieving the
measures set out in the national plan is intended to
create a culture of respect for human rights capable of
enabling all people to enjoy their rights actively and
competently and raising awareness levels among young
people.

09-64254

We should note that this is not the first
programme in the long-standing process of human
rights education. To support initiatives concerning
awareness of human rights issues, we adopted specific
international frameworks for action, such as the
1995-2004 United Nations Decade for Human Rights
Education (see General Assembly resolution 49/184),
which allowed us to develop and establish
comprehensive, effective and sustainable strategies for
human rights education at the national level. The
efforts made in recent years by State bodies and
non-governmental organizations concerned with human
rights have become increasingly high-profile and
effective, aimed at consistently disseminating
information and knowledge about human rights.
Kazakhstan has now adopted a framework
document on the human rights dimension, a national
plan of action for human rights in Kazakhstan from
2009-2012. Within the context of the national plan
Government authorities will regularly use the media to
provide information on the protection of human rights,
including the publication of human rights guidelines, to
the broader public. The mass media will be used for
informal education on human rights. In this regard, the
President’s Human Rights Commission, together with
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
has set up a digital library providing free access to
normative legal documents on human rights guarantees
in Kazakhstan.
We attach particular importance to human rights
learning among officials and those working in
Kazakhstan’s law-enforcement entities. Civil service
standards in Kazakhstan are based on the principles of
the protection of human rights. In this way, those ideas,
enshrined in human rights conventions, will permit the
establishment of specific mechanisms for protecting
human rights at the national level.
Our delegation feels it is essential to increase
children and young people’s direct involvement in this
process. In this regard, the results of a survey showed
that there is considerable interest among students in
more thorough study of human rights in schools. It
should be pointed out that the percentage of children
who know who to turn to if their rights are violated is
higher in the upper than in the lower grades. This is
improving with the inclusion of subjects relating to the
law in the curriculum for countrywide science project
and other competitions, as well as by establishing a
regional project on researching humanitarian law, one

7

A/64/PV.61

of whose main goals is spread knowledge of
international humanitarian law. This month, the
President of the Republic of Kazakhstan’s Human
Rights Commission, together with UNDP in
Kazakhstan, held a meeting with students of the
Kazakhstan Humanitarian Law University on human
rights, with the theme of “International and national
rights protection mechanisms”, in which members of
the Commission, academics, international and
non-governmental organization representatives and
students all participated.
Kazakhstan is a sponsor of the draft resolution
entitled “Follow-up to the International Year of Human
Rights Learning” (A/C.3/64/L.33/Rev.1), and we also
took part in the drafting of the Secretary-General’s
report on the International Year of Human Rights
Learning (A/64/293). In this context, we express our
full support for the draft Declaration on Human Rights
Education and Training. We count on the active
participation of all interested parties in the
development of the Declaration, as well as in the
implementation of its provisions.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): In many ways, today is
an important milestone in the history of the world and
human rights, and for this Assembly, it should be —
and I repeat, it should be — a very important day.
Looking at the sort of participation and lack of
Permanent Representatives here today, I must say it
does not seem to be quite the message we should be
sending to the world. And I specifically mention, with
regret, those who, for so long, have been the arbiters of
human rights but who could today be called the
pallbearers and are not here even for the last rites. Let
me remind them what we are doing here today.
Today we are commemorating the sixty-first
anniversary of the adoption of Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR). The adoption of the
Declaration in 1948, after the conclusion and tragic
experiences of the Great Wars, reflected a strong desire
by the world community to live by the common ideals
of peace, harmony, equity, freedom and the right to
self-determination. Today, the United Nations remains
the uppermost — the most important — body of
morality in the world, and we should have sent a
message of hope to those corners of the world where
people would have anxiously awaited to see a strong,
positive, participatory assertion on the part of this
Assembly for the rest of the world to note about what
we believe about human rights. Instead, we have a

8

shortage of speakers. This is not the sort of message we
should be sending to the world at large. This implied
absence of hope is not what we should be preaching to
the world.
Pakistan — members are entitled to ask — is
observing this day with a one-week-long celebration or
observance. We are trying to promote what the
Universal Declaration means and how to implement it.
We are trying to promote universal respect for human
rights — something we may not have been easily
associated with many years ago.
As is evident throughout the world, there are gaps
between rhetoric and the implementation of
international human rights, and often sincerity of
purpose seems to be lacking. Article 26 of this great
Universal Declaration ordains that every one should
have “the right to education”. Today we give it many
different names — we try to justify this under the
Millennium Development Goals and many other
pursuits — but the origins should not be lost to this
Assembly. I believe that we must reintegrate the full
development of the human personality and strengthen
the respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, which was the basic language of this
Declaration.
One of the means of filling this gap between
rhetoric and implementation is to recognize the role of
education. In Pakistan we recognize the importance of
this, because, unless we acknowledge the importance
of education through different initiatives — it is not
supposed to be iconic or just one-sided — I do not
think we can really promote human rights, because,
unless you fully understand what your rights are, you
cannot be empowered to protect them. Human rights
education has therefore been integrated into our
curricula at different levels. We believe that all human
right are universal and interrelated and should be
indivisible. Realization of and respect for human rights —
be they economic rights, social rights, cultural rights,
civil rights or political rights — come from an
individual’s immediate surrounding and can only be
correctly promoted through education, and preferably
formal education.
In the context of this International Human Rights
Day and beyond our school curricula, in Pakistan we
are organizing a series of activities that corresponds to
the various rights I have just spoken of, and we are
promoting this programme among all segments of

09-64254

A/64/PV.61

society. The theme for commemorating International
Human Rights Day in Pakistan for this year is “Human
Rights and Peace”. We are adding “peace” to it, as that
has played such a very important part in our national
imagination and needs to be promoted. Different
commemorative events, in all parts of the country, from
10 to 17 December, are going to take place. The
Ministry of Human Rights is organizing these events,
which have been arranged in consultation and
coordination with all stakeholders, including our now
vibrant civil society and more vibrant media
organizations.
Pakistan’s constitution is built on the principle of
equal rights and the equal treatment of all citizens and
persons without any distinction. It guarantees
fundamental rights and freedoms, including social,
economic and political justice, freedom of thought,
expression, belief, faith, worship and association.
Whereas the constitutions of many countries in the
world do not mention aspects of this subject in their
respective primary texts — there are many countries of
the world that have introduced into their constitutions
bills of rights or documents of that nature to enhance
and enforce these rights — we have it written in the
main corpus of the constitution. It directs the State to
take appropriate measures to enable women’s
participation in all spheres of life and community
activities and to safeguard the rights and interests of
minorities.
The democratic Government of Pakistan is firmly
committed to protecting those fundamental rights and
to promoting tolerance, understanding and harmony
among all its citizens, religions and sections of the
society. Besides those constitutional guarantees, a
system of separate electorates ensures adequate
representation of minorities in the national and
provincial legislatures as well. Like many of our
neighbouring countries, we have set quotas in
Government jobs, which ensures representation of
minorities in the national fabric and in decisionmaking. The National Commission for Minorities and a
special fund for the welfare and uplifting of minorities
reviews their well-being and addresses any needs
directly. The Government has declared 12 August as
Minorities Day in Pakistan in order to emphasize the
importance of interreligious dialogue, cooperation and
understanding.
Similarly,
interfaith
harmony
committees have been established at various levels to

09-64254

ensure that dialogue and cooperation reach down to the
grass roots.
Pakistan is a State party to several human rights
instruments. The Ministry of Human Rights monitors
and addresses human rights violations and trends, with
special reference to women, minorities and vulnerable
segments of society. Elaborate groundwork has been
done for the establishment of a national commission
for human rights. This body will act in accordance with
the Paris Principles and would help in combating
human rights violations and in fulfilling our
international obligations.
Our media is in the forefront as one of the freest
and most vibrant media in South Asia and the world. A
growing number of private and independent channels
are operating in the country and there has been a
perceptible increase in the number and influence of
civil society in providing alternate views and
safeguarding human rights with one voice. The media
and civil society are now playing a crucial role in
fostering a culture of accountability and transparency.
The independent judiciary in Pakistan has taken
wide-ranging steps to guarantee protection of
constitutional rights for all citizens. It has even taken
suo moto actions in many cases.
The Declaration adopted by this Assembly on the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration last
year provided an opportunity for introspection, and we
all agreed — and I would like to remind delegates, as
there does not seem to be the same vibrancy here this
year — that “[i]n no country or territory can it be
claimed that all human rights have been fully realized
at all times for all” (resolution 63/116). That is a tacit
acknowledgment of our failure, our joint failure. And
we also declared that “[w]e all have the duty to step up
our efforts to promote and protect all human rights …”.
Today again, we all need to reaffirm our
commitment — even to this rather empty Hall — that
we, the States Members of the United Nations,
reiterate — and this should be a message to the world —
that we will not shy away from the magnitude of this
challenge. We reaffirm our commitment to the full
realization of all human rights, which are universal,
indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and mutually
reinforcing. The Government in Pakistan has and will
do all it can to promote and protect human rights for its
people within the framework of this Charter and its
international human rights obligations within this

9

A/64/PV.61

community. We urge the international community to do
so as well.

recognition that human rights education produces
far-reaching results.

Mr. Vigny (Switzerland): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the members of the
cross-regional Platform for Human Rights Education
and Training, namely, the delegations of Costa Rica,
Italy, Morocco, the Philippines, Senegal, Slovenia and
Switzerland.
Our
Platform
is
an
informal
cross-regional grouping of States created in September
2007 within the framework of the Human Rights
Council. We support international initiatives that
promote human rights education and training at all
levels of society.

Secondly, the adoption of a United Nations
declaration on human rights education and training
would send a clear message from the international
community affirming the importance of human rights
education and training. It would provide a definition of
the various principles and responsibilities related to
human rights education and clarify the relationship
between human rights education, learning and training,
as well as the role of human rights education in formal,
informal and non-formal education.

The Platform for Human Rights Education and
Training stresses the complementarities between
human rights learning and human rights education and
considers human rights learning to be an indispensable
part of human rights education. We understand human
rights education to be a broad concept that comprises a
lifelong process of becoming aware of one’s own
human rights and those of others, within formal and
informal settings and within family, society, school,
educational institutions, training, and so on. The
ultimate common goal is to enable each person to know
better and claim more effectively his or her human
rights.
The Platform at present supports two main
initiatives, namely the World Programme for Human
Rights Education and the draft United Nations
declaration on human rights education and training.
Those two initiatives are promoted through regular
Human Rights Council resolutions sponsored by
members of the Platform.
First, the World Programme provides a set of
collective goals and actions that help States to
strengthen their national efforts to promote human
rights education and training. It is an open-ended
programme implemented in continuing phases. Its first
phase, from 2005 to 2009, focused on human rights
education for primary and secondary education. Its
second phase, starting on 1 January 2010, will focus on
human rights education for higher education and
training for teachers and educators, civil servants, law
enforcement and military officials, as defined by
Human Rights Council resolution 12/4. Building on the
foundation laid during the United Nations Decade for
Human Rights Education (1995-2004), this initiative
reflects the international community’s increasing

10

A general understanding of the need for such a
declaration was also reached at the international
seminar on the draft declaration on human rights
education and training held in Marrakech and hosted
by the Government of Morocco in July 2009. The
seminar proved to be a very successful exercise and
provided useful input to the whole process.
Through Human Rights Council resolutions 6/10
and 10/28, the Human Rights Council Advisory
Committee — composed of 18 independent experts —
was given the mandate to prepare an initial draft of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Education and Training. The General Assembly has, in
its resolution of this year on the follow-up to the
International Year of Human Rights Learning
(resolution 64/82), recommended to the Human Rights
Council that it integrate human rights learning into the
preparation of the draft United Nations Declaration,
bearing in mind the complementarities of this initiative
with the World Programme for Human Rights
Education and human rights learning. The Human
Rights Council will consider the draft prepared by the
Advisory Committee at its thirteenth session in March
2010, when the Council will convene a high-level
discussion on the matter, as requested by decision
12/118.
In other words, the United Nations Declaration
will deliver to the international community a clear
message that human rights education needs to be
further strengthened, that human rights education is not
only “nice to have” but that it is also needed to help
prevent human rights violations and to fight in a
sustainable way for the improvement of the human
rights records in our countries. Furthermore, the
Declaration will rouse the necessary political will to
enhance collective efforts on human rights education

09-64254

A/64/PV.61

by promoting international dialogue and cooperation,
raising awareness and addressing gaps in the
international framework on human rights education in
a non-binding, consensual and inclusive manner.
In conclusion, I have the honour to say that the
Platform for Human Rights Education and Training has
been active in the past year and, through its efforts, has
also marked the International Year of Human Rights
Learning. The members of the Platform will continue
to strongly support the promotion of human rights
education, including human rights learning. Today’s
discussion is an important opportunity to enhance the
synergy of all these efforts here in the General
Assembly in New York and in the Human Rights
Council in Geneva.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
for this meeting. I am really sorry that the attendance
was not what we wish it would be. As the Ambassador
of Pakistan said, especially on this very important
occasion, we have to send a signal to the world about
the importance of human rights education.
I would especially like to thank those countries
that have spoken on this occasion. I would wish that by
next year the importance of this occasion will be
realized, with more speakers and more attention given.

09-64254

I now declare concluded the Special Meeting to
mark the end of the International Year of Human
Rights Learning.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 69.
Programme of work
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that at its 57th plenary meeting, held on
4 December 2009, the General Assembly agreed to
extend the work of the Second Committee until
Wednesday, 9 December 2009. However, I have been
informed by the Chairperson of the Second Committee
that, owing to ongoing negotiations, the Chairperson
would like to request an additional extension of the
Committee’s work until Friday, 11 December 2009.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Second Committee
until Friday, 11 December 2009?
There being no objection, it was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

11
