A/65/PV.18

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

18

th plenary meeting
Saturday, 25 September 2010, 6 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 6.30 p.m.
High-level Review Meeting on the implementation of
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States:
Draft resolution (A/65/L.2)
The President (spoke in French): This is the
closing plenary of the High-level Review Meeting on
the implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States. I would like to welcome, once
again, all of our guests who have joined us today. We
have had two full days of rich discussions.
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, who
will present a summary of the round tables and
interactive dialogue that took place over the past two
days.
The Deputy Secretary-General: On behalf of
the Secretary-General, I am pleased to address the

closing plenary of this High-level Review Meeting on
the Mauritius Strategy.
I congratulate all participants on the productive
and thought-provoking discussions they held during the
multi-stakeholder round tables and interactive dialogue
of the past two days. The discussions reflect the
renewed commitment of small island developing States
(SIDS) to address their vulnerabilities and build
resilience through sustainable development.
I also commend the international community for
its continuing determination to support SIDS in this
endeavour. I am very encouraged by the actionoriented suggestions we have heard. It is now my
pleasure to provide a brief overview of the key issues
that were discussed during these past two days.
The Review Meeting reaffirmed the need for the
international community to continue to address and
support the unique and particular vulnerabilities of
SIDS, which were recognized at the Rio Earth Summit
in 1992 and underscored in Barbados in 1994 and again
in Mauritius five years ago.
Substantial progress has been made in
implementing the Mauritius Strategy, which is directly
linked to achieving the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). However, renewed efforts are needed to live
up to promises and commitments made in the recent
past. Economic, environmental and social vulnerabilities
have further worsened in the past 10 years. As a result,
the economic development and progress of SIDS in
achieving the MDGs are threatened by external shocks,
including the adverse impacts of the global financial,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-55116 (E)

*1055116*

A/65/PV.18

food and fuel crises. Climate change further exacerbates
these vulnerabilities, leaving the viability and very
physical existence of some SIDS at stake.
SIDS have demonstrated strong political
commitment to continuing to do their part in building
resilience to their special vulnerabilities. However,
there is a clear need to bridge gaps in implementation
with coordinated and sustainable support from the
international community.
Discussions during this High-level Review
Meeting highlighted a number of priorities, including
defining measurable goals and indicators for monitoring
and evaluation, and strengthening capacities for data
collection and analysis; scaling up resources made
available to SIDS, including for meeting new
challenges; enhancing strategic partnerships and
monitoring and coordination mechanisms, especially at
the regional level and within the United Nations system,
through, for example, the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework and the Commission on
Sustainable Development; strengthening South-South
cooperation, including among SIDS; and placing a
special focus on a number of sub-areas, including
climate change mitigation and adaptation, biodiversity,
natural disasters, sustainable energy, transport and trade,
marine and coastal resources, fisheries, tourism, finance
and debt sustainability.
Highly vulnerable SIDS face a number of
practical challenges, and yet are often not eligible for
special financing or other resources. In this respect, the
discussion today highlighted the need to develop a
SIDS vulnerability index. Middle-income SIDS face
special challenges in the absence of international
support measures commensurate with their high
vulnerability. In this context, it was felt by many
discussants that consideration should be given to
exploring formal United Nations recognition of SIDS
as a special category, to be tied to preferential
treatment and access to concessionary financing, debt
relief, trade, special programmes and development
assistance, without prejudice to the needs of other
vulnerable economies.
The review also highlighted shortcomings in
institutional support for SIDS and constraints to the
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy and the
Barbados Programme of Action. A comprehensive
review of the Strategy and concrete recommendations
for action are needed.

2

Participants have demonstrated their commitment
to advancing the implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy towards the sustainable development of SIDS.
They have agreed on key priorities for action and
proposed suggestions on the way forward.
The United Nations, in partnership with the
members of the Inter-agency Consultative Group on
Small Island Developing States, which includes all
United Nations agencies and other intergovernmental
and regional organizations, is committed to providing
strong, coherent and coordinated support to these
efforts.
The issues facing SIDS are truly global issues
that affect us all. Let us work together to make small
island developing States a model for sustainable
development with lessons and benefits for all. The
Secretary-General and I look forward to seeing
participants’ continuing commitment and leadership in
action.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her statement.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.2, entitled “Outcome document of the
High-level Review Meeting on the implementation of
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.2?
Draft resolution A/65/L.2 was adopted (resolution
65/2).
The President (spoke in French): I am personally
very happy that this Meeting has enabled Member
States to reconfirm their political and financial
commitment to addressing the special vulnerabilities of
the small island developing States. The sustainable
development of those States is inextricably linked to
the sustainable development of all Member States. We
have only one planet, and we must be united to
preserve it and to live in harmony. It is my hope that, in
the months and years to come, States Members of
United Nations will work together to this end. We will
thus show that we all share a common vision of a
world where the well-being of each and every one of us
depends on the well-being of all.

10-55116

A/65/PV.18

I would like to express sincere appreciation to
Ms. Sylvie Lucas, Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg, and Mr. Vanu Gopala Menon, Permanent
Representative of Singapore, who effectively and
patiently conducted the discussions and complex
negotiations in the consultations on resolution 65/2. I
also thank all Member States for their valuable
contributions, without which the outcome document
could not have been successfully completed.

10-55116

I now declare closed the High-level Review
Meeting on the implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 20.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

3
