A/65/PV.111

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

111

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 26 July 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 27 (continued)
High-level Meeting on Youth
Social development
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
Draft resolution (A/65/L.87)
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has before it a draft outcome document,
issued as document A/65/L.87.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.87, entitled “Outcome document of
the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on
Youth: Dialogue and Mutual Understanding”. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.87?
Draft resolution A/65/L.87 was adopted (resolution
65/312).
The President (spoke in French): Before giving
the floor to the speakers, I should like to express
sincere appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Permanent Representative of Austria,
and His Excellency Mr. Jean-Francis Zinsou,
Permanent Representative of Benin, who so ably and
patiently conducted the discussions and complex
negotiations in the consultations on the outcome
document. I also thank all Member States for their

valuable contributions, without which the outcome
document could not have been completed.
Before proceeding, I should like to provide
members with some practical information in order to
allow for maximum participation within the limited
time available. I request that statements be limited to
three minutes when made in a national capacity and
five minutes when made on behalf of a group. I also
appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a
normal speed, so that interpretation may be provided
properly. To assist speakers in managing their time, a
light system has been installed at the speaker’s
rostrum.
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Yayi Boni, President of the
Republic of Benin.
President Yayi (spoke in French): I wish at the
outset to reiterate from this rostrum my deepest
condolences to His Majesty King Harald V of Norway
in connection with the car-bomb attack and the
shootings that took place on Utøya Island — a terrible
tragedy that has devastated his people. My Government
strongly condemns these terrorist attacks.
The High-level Meeting on Youth, which opened
on 25 July, is a way for us to build on contributions
from different backgrounds and to build a shared vision
around dialogue and mutual understanding, as outlined
in the outcome document (resolution 65/312). The
outcome document represents the culmination of the
International Year of Youth, as proclaimed by the
General Assembly in its resolution 65/134. The

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-43012 (E)

*1143012*

A/65/PV.111

International Year has given us an exceptional
opportunity to mobilize in favour of this very
important segment of the world’s population.
Above and beyond the ideals it promulgates in
favour of a culture of peace, respect for human rights
and
solidarity
among
generations,
cultures,
civilizations and religions, the theme of this Meeting
sounds a call to Governments and young people
themselves concerning their responsibility for the
future of our nations.
As we all are aware, young people are demanding
more in terms of democracy, social justice,
participation and integration. These are very deepseated aspirations that run counter to trends of
fundamentalism and extremism.
Because of their enthusiasm and sensitivity, their
great capacity for mobilization and dissent, their
idealism and their strong willingness to take great
risks, young people, in their quest for greater freedom
and greater well-being, represent a powerful driving
force for change in all human societies. Recent events
at the international level have demonstrated this quite
clearly.
We must respond to their aspirations by
intensifying inclusive dialogue and promoting a culture
of peace and international cooperation aimed at
preventing problematic developments that become
outlets for pent-up, legitimate frustrations, which must
be channelled and pacified in order to maintain
stability and harmony within and among States.
We know that the United Nations is not
indifferent to those major challenges. This is clear from
the numerous initiatives that have been undertaken in
recent years under the auspices of the United Nations,
which have enabled us to set international development
goals, backed by projects undertaken at various levels
that are aimed at improving the living conditions of
peoples in all respects.
However, progress towards these international
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, is being achieved unevenly,
highlighting to an even greater extent the inequalities
that characterize today’s world. We need to devote
greater energy and greater determination to closing
these gaps, because we are aware that their continued
existence represents a threat to international peace and
security.

2

To that end, we need to build synergies among
the various existing programmes and harness the
energy of young people, so as to make them both actors
and beneficiaries in the process of the elimination of
these inequalities. Young people need to be taken
account of in all of our policies, strategies, plans and
development programmes at the national, regional and
global levels, because it is only those societies that
give young people opportunities that will be able to
meet the challenges of this century and beyond.
Our faith in young people must be rock-solid. We
must motivate them and ensure that they shoulder their
historic responsibility. That was the focus of the
seventeenth ordinary session of the African Union,
held at Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, from 30 June to
1 July 2011, whose theme was “Accelerating youth
empowerment for sustainable development”. It
resolved, inter alia, that Member States should allocate
sufficient resources to regional organizations for the
purposes of youth-oriented programmes.
In my country, Benin, young people are seen as
the main driving force behind the rebuilding of our
nation, at the core of our social project. In this context,
young people occupy important positions of
responsibility and are invested in a real way in the
future of the country. Such a rebuilding effort requires
that young people have certain crucial touchstones,
namely virtue, a surge of patriotism, and faith in
oneself, in one’s country and in the cardinal spiritual
principles: patriotism, responsibility and leadership.
For all countries of the world young people are,
as members know, an invaluable asset, an inexhaustible
gold mine and a profitable growth area for investment
for sustainable economic and social development. The
twenty-first century will be the century of human
capital, as embodied by young people.
Organized around the various activities carried
out in the context of the International Year of Youth,
the outcome document that this High-level Meeting
just adopted conveys a vision that calls for a
commitment to action and a coordination of efforts to
do away with the obstacles that prevent youth from
flourishing. The United Nations must shoulder a
special responsibility in supporting Governments in
this area. A United Nations agency for youth similar to
UN-Women would be the best way of going about this.
Given the role of employment in ensuring the
social and economic integration of young people, the

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

development of a global employment strategy
according particular attention to eradicating youth
unemployment and underemployment is of immense
urgency. So too are measures to ensure mobility for
young people as an expression of their sense of
freedom. That can be promoted by increasing the legal
channels available for temporary migration — a
measure that could only enhance friendly international
relations, understanding and cooperation.
These various projects, which should be launched
at the conclusion of the International Year of Youth,
could be carried out in the framework of a decade
dedicated to youth aimed at a coordinated and
sustained campaign in this direction. The General
Assembly should pay particular attention to this matter
when examining the report that we have just requested
the Secretary-General to prepare.
We should set up a group of friends of youth,
made up of Permanent Representatives to the United
Nations in New York, in order to monitor the
implementation of the outcome document of this Highlevel Meeting. It concerns the future of humanity,
which will depend upon our capacity to put young
people to work at the service of peace, international
security, and humane, sustainable and equitable
development.
Long live friendship between peoples and
nations! Long live international cooperation for the
health of young people! Long live the United Nations!
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Jean
Asselborn, Deputy Prime Minister of Luxembourg.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
This High-level Meeting on youth is indeed most
timely. Over the past few months, in the Middle East
and North Africa, educated young people — many of
them graduates who nonetheless faced unemployment
and the inability of their leaders to offer them a
future — have mobilized to reclaim rights and liberties
and policies that would ensure social justice and an
equitable sharing of wealth.
I do not want to compare what cannot be
compared, but what is happening today south of the
Mediterranean and in the Middle East marks a step in
the emancipation of youth as political and social
stakeholders in their own right that is as important, in
my opinion, as the events of May 1968 were for the

11-43012

youth of Europe. The international community must
live up to this historic opportunity.
In this context, Luxembourg welcomes the
outcome document of our meeting (resolution 65/312).
I thank the Permanent Representatives of Austria and
Benin for having facilitated the consensus on a text
that encourages us to do more in order to provide
young people, including young women, with the tools
to build a better future.
Luxembourg welcomes the fact that our
declaration reaffirms the World Programme of Action
for Youth, which remains as relevant as ever. We need
to continue to implement it decisively at all levels.
Allow me to highlight a few priorities identified
in that document: first, youth employment; secondly,
the access of youth to basic social services such as
education and health; and thirdly, the effective
promotion and protection of the fundamental rights and
freedoms of young people, including in situations of
conflict.
In Luxembourg, our youth policy is based on the
framework law of 2008. Our policy is intended to be
cross-cutting, as it encompasses all political fields that
have a bearing on the lives of young people. Our policy
aims to be participatory. The Youth Parliament allows
young people to make their voice heard in our national
political debate.
On the basis of a detailed analysis of the situation
of the youth in Luxembourg, a national action plan is
about to be finalized. It will focus on a limited number
of priorities, the first two being support for young
people as they are transitioning from the world of
education to the world of work, and support for young
families.
I would also like to stress that our development
and humanitarian cooperation policy attaches great
importance to education and to vocational and
technical training for young people. With our partners,
whether in Cape Verde, Senegal, Nicaragua, Viet Nam
or the occupied Palestinian territories, Luxembourg’s
development cooperation works to improve youth
employment.
We
also
support
microfinance
programmes
designed
to
enable
access
to
entrepreneurship for young people.
Finally, given our commitment to peacebuilding,
in particular in West Africa and especially in Guinea,
Luxembourg is aware that youth employment is

3

A/65/PV.111

essential to establishing peace and lasting social
cohesion in countries emerging from conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Paul Abena, Minister for
Sports and Youth Affairs of Suriname, who will speak
on behalf of the Caribbean Community.
Mr. Abena (Suriname): On behalf of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), I extend sincere
condolences to the people and Government of Norway
on the tragedy involving young people.
It is a distinct honour to address the General
Assembly on this historic occasion on behalf of the
States members of the Caribbean Community. I also
have the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of the
President of the Republic of Suriname, His Excellency
Desiré Bouterse, who holds the portfolio for youth,
sport, gender and culture within the Community.
CARICOM associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Argentina on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
As we near the end of the International Year of
Youth, this High-level Meeting provides a timely
opportunity to address the vulnerabilities of young
people, the challenges that they face with regard to
progress and development, and how issues such as
poverty, unemployment, health and an inadequate
education system affect them. Such issues are of
particular interest to CARICOM, since young people,
under the age of 30, comprise approximately 60 per
cent of the population of our region.
CARICOM is at the forefront in engaging and
integrating young people within the region by
providing them opportunities to be actively involved
and to further their creativity and talents.
In that regard, I call attention to the Special
CARICOM Summit on Youth Development, which was
held in January 2010 in Suriname. The Summit
endorsed the report of the CARICOM Commission on
Youth Development, launched in 2007 by the mandate
of the CARICOM Heads of Government to undertake a
full-scale analysis of the challenges and opportunities
for youth in the CARICOM Single Market and
Economy.
The
Commission
also
made
recommendations to improve the well-being and
empowerment of young people. The Summit adopted
the Declaration of Paramaribo on the Future of Youth
in the Caribbean Community, which identifies youth as

4

a resource and a partner in development and strongly
links youth development with national and regional
development.
The CARICOM youth agenda aims to empower
young people between the ages of 15 and 29 to take
advantage of and contribute to regional integration and
the CARICOM Single Market and Economy. It is
anchored in the Regional Strategy for Youth
Development, with the following thematic priorities:
social and economic empowerment, opportunities for
development, protection, leadership, governance and
participation, health and reproductive rights.
Since 2003, an important component of our youth
agenda has been the CARICOM Youth Ambassadors
programme. The programme is a Community
mechanism for deepening levels of youth participation,
partnership in regional integration and region-wide
social and economic development processes.
CARICOM Youth Ambassadors form a network of
young Caribbean leaders mandated by CARICOM
Heads of Government to advocate for, and to educate
young people about, regional priorities such as the
CARICOM Single Market and Economy and HIV and
AIDS.
Young people are increasingly affected by or at
risk of developing non-communicable diseases. To
ensure that all our citizens, including our youth, enjoy
the highest attainable standards of health, addressing
the incidence and prevalence of such diseases remains
a regional priority.
Another issue of concern to the region is the high
rates of youth unemployment, with female
unemployment rates being significantly higher.
CARICOM will support efforts to develop a global
strategy on this issue.
Crime and violence also remain a major concern
among adolescents and youth in almost all countries in
the Caribbean region. They are associated with
poverty, unemployment and social inequities. This led
CARICOM Heads of Government to direct that the
Social and Development Crime Prevention Action
Plan, developed with the assistance of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, be treated with the
utmost urgency.
We support initiatives within the United Nations
system that prioritize and increase support for youth
development. In that regard, it is CARICOM’s view

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

that there should be follow-up to the framework
approach developed by the United Nations
Inter-Agency Network on Youth Development to guide
its work during the International Year. That framework
also addresses the persisting challenges outlined in
priority areas of the World Programme of Action for
Youth. The overarching objectives of the framework —
to increase commitment to and investment in youth,
increase youth participation and partnerships, and
increase intercultural understanding among youth —
could guide the work of United Nations agencies
beyond the International Year.
The global community would make an excellent
investment by increasing financial and capacitybuilding support for youth development, particularly in
disadvantaged regions and communities. In that regard,
the UN-Habitat Youth Fund should be strengthened. It
could stand as a model for financing youth
development in other thematic areas.
Finally, CARICOM recognizes that young people
are already actively involved in society and make
valuable contributions to it through achievements in
leadership, democratic processes, business, technology,
research, sports, music, art and many other fields.
Their affinity with information and communication
technology allows them to share knowledge and
experiences beyond the borders of their own
communities and to build bridges between their
societies and cultures and those of others.
CARICOM understands the potential of young
people to be creative and to act as agents of change.
We are convinced that our future depends on our youth.
Therefore, there could be no better title for our youth
commission report than “Eye on the future: Investing
in youth now for tomorrow’s community”.
We stand ready to cooperate with other Member
States, donors and the international community to
advance youth development. We reiterate our
commitment to continue to provide young people
accelerated opportunities, within the possibilities of
our limited means, as a prerequisite for the well-being
of the world and future generations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Kazenambo Kazenambo,
Minister of Youth, National Service, Sport and Culture
of Namibia, who will speak on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community.

11-43012

Mr. Kazenambo (Namibia): First, on behalf of
the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), I would like to extend our condolences to the
people of Norway.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community, which is
composed of the following countries: Angola,
Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Seychelles,
South Africa, Swaziland, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and my own country,
Namibia. SADC aligns itself with the statements made
by the representative of Argentina on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China and the representative of
Rwanda on behalf of the African Group, respectively.
The SADC will lend its full support and cooperation
towards a successful conclusion of this crucial
gathering.
Youth development issues are a big priority in the
Southern African Development Community. National
policies, legislation and programmes exist at different
levels in our region to promote the development of
youth in general. As part of the African Union, SADC
member States continue to commit ourselves to 20092019 as the decade for youth empowerment and
sustainable development. At the regional level, a
programme has been established to collectively address
the growing challenges of vulnerable youth in our
region.
At the recent African Union Summit of Heads of
State and Government held in Equatorial Guinea from
30 June to 1 July, the leaders of Africa dealt with the
theme “Accelerating youth empowerment for
sustainable development”. They took a decision to
prioritize the youth agenda and they adopted policies
aimed at the creation of safe and competitive
employment
opportunities.
Despite
those
achievements, we are aware that many daunting
challenges remain, the biggest among them being
unemployment. A substantial number of young people
lack productive and self-employment opportunities,
and some in the region are either unemployed or
underemployed.
Studies conducted by the SADC secretariat also
suggest that there are challenges in the way existing
policies, strategies and service-delivery efforts are
being implemented to address the challenges facing
young people in some cases across our region. Existing

5

A/65/PV.111

structures to empower young people to effectively
contribute to national and regional development in
some areas are weak and grossly underfunded at the
national and regional levels. In addition, the
understanding of the concept of youth participation and
empowerment often varies among member States and
organizations working across the region, creating a
lack of comparability in the region. That situation
makes coordinating youth development another major
challenge.
SADC member States recommend the creation of
a specialized United Nations agency for youth in order
to support and fund youth initiatives in Member States.
This proposal has been made in light of the fact that
the existing United Nations agencies do not adequately
address youth development issues. The specialized
youth agency should report and be accountable to a
United Nations youth committee. The World
Programme of Action for Youth must be reviewed and
mechanisms for its implementation, monitoring and
evaluation established.
It is our hope that the outcome document adopted
at the beginning of this meeting (resolution 65/312)
will help advance the agenda of the well-being of
youth at the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Moncef Belkhayat,
Minister of Youth and Sports of Morocco, who will
speak on behalf of the Council of Arab Ministers of
Youth and Sports.
Mr. Belkhayat (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express the condolences of
the King and people of Morocco to the Kingdom of
Norway in the wake of the tragedy in Oslo.
Young people have changed, and so has their
environment, including their cultural, social, political,
economic and information framework — and their way
of life — as their ambitions have crystallized. They
have a different view of politicians and those who steer
public affairs and their confidence in the future has
been shaken. Today’s youth range in age from 18 to
30 years. Some drop out of school, forced by their
family circumstances into an early entry into the labour
marked, while some pursue their studies until a late
age. They constitute a new demographic with its own
peculiar needs.

6

Young people are an essential force for change in
developing countries, and the internet is their favourite
and most widely used medium and tool. They have
embraced it and made it a means of discourse that
transcends borders. Modern technology has become
their primary means of communication, and they derive
from it values and lifestyles unknown to their elders.
That virtual world has a marked effect on their thinking
and behaviour. Although attached to their values, they
are inclined to establish other, new rules of conduct,
including a new language.
What programmes do we have in place for this
new generation? Do we have enough to satisfy the
wide-ranging needs of youth between the ages of
15 and 30?
Under the wise leadership of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, over the past decade Morocco
has experienced profound changes, sectoral reforms
and structural transformations that have included all
fields, including the economic, social and political. It
has also made major strides towards achieving
development goals, especially the Millennium
Development Goals, with particular emphasis on
combating poverty, marginalization, fragility and
exclusion. Morocco has also made remarkable progress
in gender equity and equality, enhancing the political
representation of women and their active presence in
public life in the areas of health, family, education and
the labour market.
All through these years, our country has made
young people a strong strategic priority of our country.
We have focused on their education, their training and
their preparation for the labour market. We strive to
ensure their participation in political life and their
contribution to the economic, social and cultural
development of Morocco.
This interest has been reflected since 2009 in a
national youth strategy. We have sought to lay down a
general framework in which all players can be
included, and through which we expect to consolidate
and coordinate a plan of action for all the governmental
sectors concerned, and to prepare a comprehensive
offering to youth that would fulfil the aspirations of
every young woman and young man.
The
speech
given
by
His
Majesty
King Mohammed VI, on 9 March 2009 marked a major
turning point in Morocco. Through that speech, His
Majesty identified young people as the main engine of

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

development. Consequently, his will in that regard was
embodied in the drafting of a new Constitution
responsive to the aspirations of the Moroccan people,
especially the young among them.

potential for bringing a multiplier effect to bear on
their countries’ economies, and the importance of
providing them with opportunities to participate in
policymaking and leadership.

In determining how to proceed in tackling this
issue and formulating policies for youth, Morocco has
decided to take the path of soliciting the contributions
and involvement of all stakeholders, especially young
people. To that end, we organized our first national
youth debate, in which more than 1,000 young men and
women, representing every region of Morocco, held a
dialogue with the Government. The debate was a
genuine opportunity for young people to contribute to
formulating an integrated national youth strategy.

Regardless of the extent of individual countries’
national efforts and the effectiveness of their youth
policies, their success will remain contingent on
concerted endeavours at the regional and national
levels to overcome the challenges facing young people.
That is the goal of the Arab Youth Observatory recently
established in Rabat, which will serve as a mechanism
for predicting trends among young people. It is our
hope that the Observatory will contribute to
eliminating
barriers
and
creating
a
new
communications dynamic among the peoples of the
Arab region, aimed at fostering economic integration
and mobilizing young people’s capabilities in order to
ensure development.

Finally, 1 July marked a historic date in
Morocco’s democratic process, when more than
10 million Moroccans came out to express their
decision regarding the new Constitution, which
honoured our young people by genuinely involving
them in the development of our economic, social and
political institutions by encouraging their active
contribution to the electoral process. Moreover, a
consultative council for youth and collective action
was set up as an essential guarantor of the integrated
national youth strategy.
Fulfilling the aspirations of young people in our
Arab countries has always been a concern of
paramount importance in our national policies and in
the decisions taken at the Arab summits, the most
recent of which declared 2010-2011 the International
Year of Youth and called for the drafting of an Arab
youth policies document, which was adopted by the
Council of Arab Youth and Sports Ministers in
Marrakech, Morocco, on 4 May. The document
included the recognition by all Arab States of the need
to enhance young Arabs’ sense of belonging and
attachment to their identity and culture.
In their assessment of the situation of young
people in the Arab world, the States acknowledged that
they share with the rest of the world’s youth many
common concerns and attitudes on matters of universal
interest, such as the desire for security, liberty,
equality, dignity, health and acceptance of others. They
also recognized such issues as the lack of job
opportunities, emigration and migration, political
participation, conservation of the environment and
controlling pollution. The States also affirmed their
resolve to invest in young people, who have the most

11-43012

The year 2011 is the International Year of Youth;
we suggest that 2012 should be the year that all these
promises are implemented and that we invest in our
young people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Khalid Mohammad
Al-Attiyah, Minister of State for International
Cooperation of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Attiyah (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, on behalf of the State of Qatar, to
express our deep sorrow and condolences for the crime
that has cost the lives of dozens of innocent people in
Norway — a result of the same kinds of violence and
intransigence that have led us to hold our meeting
today. I offer our condolences to the people and
Government of Norway.
The declaration of 2010-2011 as the International
Year of Youth and the selection of “Dialogue and
mutual understanding” as the theme of our discussions
were decisions based on the ideals of human rights and
a spirit of solidarity. These are subjects that we must
consider if we are to come together to reject
stereotypes and reinforce a culture of understanding
and mutual respect among peoples.
The State of Qatar believes that young people are
an essential component of every society that must be
taken into account in order to build a promising future
that affords every member of a community the
opportunity to live in dignity and enjoy fundamental

7

A/65/PV.111

rights, including human rights and the right to
education, health and freedom of expression. In this
regard, the State of Qatar, through its various youth,
sport, cultural and social institutions, attaches great
importance to the International Year of Youth and has
integrated its theme of dialogue and mutual
understanding into its policy priorities.
The State of Qatar is eager to engage young
people in all its development policies and to involve
them in every area of society. We have therefore
supported initiatives for cooperation in the Middle East
and North Africa, aimed at developing and
implementing strategies for providing decent,
productive work for young people through the Silatech
Foundation. This is designed to address the problem of
unemployment in the Middle East and North Africa by
creating jobs for young people, bringing them into the
labour market and setting up programmes for their
training and rehabilitation, and supporting owners of
small and medium-size enterprises. Our goal is to reach
100 million jobs by 2020.
Moreover, the State of Qatar is doing its utmost
to provide a high level of education for young Qataris
and equal opportunities for both sexes, while ensuring
that the educational system meets the labour market’s
needs. The State also strives to provide health care for
young people, while focusing on awareness and
preventive campaigns against deadly diseases such as
AIDS, in addition to raising awareness of the risks of
drug abuse and psychotropic substances.
I would like to emphasize an important aspect of
the State’s youth policies, which is gender equality. We
recognize the importance of encouraging the education
of girls, since efforts in support of young people cannot
be complete if they do not take into account girls and
boys alike. The State of Qatar has made great strides in
this area and is one of the leading countries of our
region in terms of the education and involvement of
women in society and decision-making.
Young people between the ages of 15 and
29 represent more than 30 per cent of Qatar’s
population. In this context, and based on our
consciousness of the human wealth represented by this
sector of society and their skills and potential, which
must contribute effectively to the country’s
development, they are a significant component of the
Qatar Vision 2030 programme. Through Qatar Vision
2030, the State seeks to enhance the achievements of

8

sustainable development by allowing young people to
participate fully in the development process.
In recent years, several studies have addressed
the social and economic problems facing young people
in the Arab world, including unemployment and higher
poverty rates. There is no question that the economic
and financial crisis that began in 2008 has exacerbated
social and economic problems. Young people represent
the most numerous group in the world and are the most
affected by the world’s economic, social and
environmental challenges and face great difficulties in
the areas of access to education, health, decent work
and minimum living standards.
We also call for action to enable young people to
enjoy fundamental rights and real opportunities for
effective participation in building their countries’
future through participation in decision-making,
helping them become a pillar of sustainable
development, and building an economic system that
provides opportunities for success for every member of
society. There is no doubt that international
cooperation has a major role to play in securing the
necessary material resources and the exchange of
technical expertise and capacity-building needed to
achieve the majority of the goals we all seek in this
area. The genuine commitment of all parties to
implementing the pledges made in this meeting’s
outcome document (resolution 65/312) at the national,
regional and international levels is essential to
achieving those goals.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Robert
Mugabe, President of the Republic of Zimbabwe.
President Mugabe: I would like to begin by
recognizing all the young people who are present here
on this occasion of commemorating the International
Year of Youth, but in doing so, also repeat and reiterate
our expressions of sympathy to Norway over the
tragedy that has visited that country.
My delegation commends the decision made by
the General Assembly to convene this very important
meeting, whose theme is vital to reinforcing the
fundamental principle of international relations,
namely, that of peaceful coexistence. It is my sincere
hope that the deliberations and outcomes of this
meeting will provide young people with opportunities
to foster the spirit of dialogue and mutual
understanding across cultures and faiths, while

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

promoting the ideals of peace, respect for human
rights, freedom and solidarity.

progress made by the country on the Millennium
Development Goals.

The youth agenda has been a priority of my
Government’s programmes since the attainment of our
independence in 1980. In recognition of the sacrifices
made by our youth in fighting for our independence,
my Government not only created a Ministry of Youth,
Sport and Recreation, but also adopted a policy of
education for all children that would give them varied
educational skills and capabilities in order to enable
them to participate both in the economy and in the
social and political life of their country.

In 2001, my Government introduced a national
youth service programme whose principal goal is to
promote a culture of peace, dialogue, mutual
understanding, tolerance, equality, justice and
democracy. The objective is to instil a sense of
patriotism and national identity, while empowering
young people for community and nation-building by
moulding character and leadership skills. The
programme has been a tremendous success, with over
80,000 youths having participated and now proceeding
to establish programmes for self-reliant livelihoods.
More pointedly, the programme has proved our
Western detractors wrong in their unfounded
allegations against Zimbabwe.

With those first steps of our formative years as a
newly independent country, the Government ensured
that the youth in Zimbabwe would consistently enjoy
being a part of various representative institutions and
political pluralism. At the same time, Government
established and expanded vocational skills training
centres. The benefits of those measures, coupled with a
broad educational curriculum, have seen my country
attain top-notch positions in education and human
resources development on the continent.
However, in spite of these achievements, we still
face the challenges of unemployed and underemployed
youth. The demands of changing demographics and the
current global economic condition now challenge us to
employ greater innovation in addressing the needs of
young people who are unemployed and idle. Indeed,
the entire continent of Africa faces urgent challenges as
a result of the numbers of unemployed youth.
In 1995, my Government adopted the Zimbabwe
Youth Council Act, which gave further impetus to
efforts to include children and young people in national
dialogue, empowerment and governance issues. The
Council provides a platform for a harmonious working
relationship between Government, youth, the private
sector and civil society. The Zimbabwe Youth Council
is responsible for coordinating programmes for the
Junior Parliament, junior local Government structures
and youth business forums. The activities of the
Zimbabwe Youth Council have thus given our youth
vital experience in governance issues and decisionmaking processes. The deliberations and decisions
which evolve from those noble initiatives directly feed
into our national youth development programmes.
Just one month ago, on 29 June, our high school
students successfully held a model United Nations
General Assembly debate, at which they reviewed the

11-43012

My Government has, over the years, initiated
youth
empowerment
programmes
that
have
transformed our young people into power engines for
achieving long-term development. A notable example
of the empowerment programmes is the land reform
exercise, which has provided land to young people and
youth cooperatives, enabling them to become active
players in our national economic development
endeavours.
My Government is further encouraging the youth
to create wealth through an indigenization and
empowerment policy that aims to promote ownership
and control of the means of production by indigenous
Zimbabweans. Further, my Government has established
two important credit facilities — the Youth
Development Fund and the Empowerment Fund —
both of which provide State-guaranteed financial
assistance to support micro-, small and medium-size
enterprises. The Fund’s schemes are implemented in
partnership with local commercial banks. The
challenge faced by this programme is that of limited
resources. It is in this context that we encourage our
development partners to assist us by providing
additional funding to enable us to meet our goal of
preparing our youth and achieving the internationally
agreed development goals.
Zimbabwe envisions an education system that
incorporates its young people meaningfully in national
development and equips them with appropriate
industrial, trade and entrepreneurial skills. The youth
of many developing countries, including Zimbabwe,
are as talented, entrepreneurial, innovative and creative

9

A/65/PV.111

as their counterparts in the developed countries. What
they lack are resources and, often, skills training and
entrepreneurial opportunities.
As a result, developing countries have lost some
of their young creative and innovative talents to the
developed world in such critical areas as engineering,
health, industry, commerce, law and entrepreneurial
management. We call upon United Nations entities and
other development partners to assist developing
countries in providing more up-to-date scientific and
technological training, which has become necessary
because of the current levels of technological
advancement.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic continues to be a clear
and present danger to youth development, especially in
developing countries. My Government, with assistance
from partners such as the Global Fund, has invested
heavily in HIV and AIDS prevention and treatment
programmes. My country also introduced an AIDS levy
in order to broaden the financial base from which to
fight the pandemic. We once again call upon the
international community to increase its assistance to
the developing countries to combat the debilitating
HIV/AIDS challenge.
Zimbabwe fully supports the resolutions of the
African Union Heads of State and Government summit
that was held in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea in June and
July this year, the Youth Decade Plan of Action (20092018), and the Ouagadougou 2004 Plan of Action on
Employment Promotion and Poverty Alleviation to
promote the active participation and involvement of
young people in all spheres of national development.
These resolutions recognize that our youth, who
constitute the largest percentage of the population in
Africa, should not be on the periphery of our national
programmes and mainstream economic activities. We
need to view them as an asset rather than as a liability
to the socio-economic development of our nations.
Indeed, it is time that the international
community came up with a well-conceived and
properly structured international framework that has
comprehensive action plans for youth development.
The framework should fully address the real
contemporary challenges facing the youth.
Zimbabwe condemns any country or group of
countries that uses the plight of young people in
weaker States to achieve their own sinister political
ends, such as regime change. Zimbabwe has been and

10

continues to be a victim of the sinister neo-colonial
machinations through illegal sanctions and constant
interferences in our domestic affairs. Such actions
should stand condemned — and condemned forever —
as they adversely affect development and thus retard
youth development in particular.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Ximena Ponce, Minister
for Economic and Social Inclusion of Ecuador.
Ms. Ponce (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the President of the General Assembly. For the
Government of Ecuador of our comrade Rafael Correa,
it is truly a source of pride to be here. We consider
ourselves
democratic
Governments
—
some
Governments in Latin America that are finding
alternative tracks to development in which we have
changed the axis of the concept of what constitutes a
government.
We are changing the axis from that of a
government that is dedicated to offering market
solutions to a government in which the human being is
at the centre of our development. That is timely,
because here in this summit we are speaking
specifically of youth — a group of people with specific
needs — as well as other groups of people who have
been excluded from earlier development models —
women, indigenous people, people in rural sectors.
In this summit we are focused on youth. We think
the alternate tracks to development that we are working
on can in some way offer many responses to issues
raised here. But there are also questions, to which we
as a national Government must respond.
We have heard here, with much emphasis, of the
need for citizen participation. Much of this has to do
with what we think of as an essentially democratic
system in Ecuador. In our experience, we have seen
two different tracks for consolidating the democratic
system: the track of representative democracy and the
track of participative democracy. These theories are
found in all political developments in all concepts of
the State. However, along the way we have seen
practical applications.
The track of representative democracy is
something that we are institutionalizing. The idea is
that all State structures should provide solutions so that
a true representative democracy can be installed. In
that representation, which concerns us in this summit,

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

we should see the possibility that youth and other
disenfranchised groups have the possibility to be
represented, so that the policies for these populations
develop in a fluid manner throughout the State
structure. That allows us to achieve what we have
always sought through social organizations or citizens’
groups. That is, people can have a role in public policy.
We are working arduously on this, on the
normative
structure
that
enables
democratic
governments to have instruments, whether a
constitution or legal frameworks, and that they allow
for all sorts of projects and programmes and
management within the State of Ecuador. The idea is
that these guiding principles and policies should make
possible ongoing activities, fundamentally with regard
to youth.
In the non-institutional area there is a need to
ensure that civil society — organized in some manner,
including sometimes people acting on an individual
basis — also has means to express itself so that in their
own realities people have opportunities to express
themselves and bring their weight to bear on public
policy.
We have made progress in both tracks. There are
several examples of progress. In the Constitution, on
one hand, we have recognized, in a specific article,
youth as the actors in their own destiny. The idea is to
have a general framework for youth to contribute in the
whole of public policy. We have also, in the
Constitution, set out conscientious objection — the
highest expression of freedom for the youth to
determine their need, their concern, their decision or
choice when it comes to military service. In our
country military service is not obligatory. The idea is to
make this a concept around the world.
We have made progress in decent and dignified
work for youth in the work experiences they need with
a public sector programme called “My First Job”, to
which $3.3 million have been allocated in one year to
motivate youth to enter the job market. We are making
progress in sexual and reproductive rights through a
strategy to eliminate or reduce unwanted teen
pregnancy. In one year the Ecuadorian State will invest
$8 million in that undertaking. Free education from the
primary level to university can allow for the youth to
gradually make their own decisions to the degree that
they have the opportunities and knowledge to do so.

11-43012

Those are the two tracks for democratic
participation of youth that we think have been possible
in our country. Thus, as with the dreams and ongoing
struggle of the youth, we hope that together we can all
make possible a world that will necessarily be for
them.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Marco Antonio Midence
Milla, Minister of Youth of Honduras.
Mr. Milla (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to convey our heartfelt condolences
and solidarity to the brotherly nation of Norway.
I represent a country that is at the heart of Central
America. Though rich in diversity and endowed with
nature’s gifts, my country’s greatest treasure is its
people. Of the nearly 8 million Hondurans, our
demographic profile shows that 68 per cent of the
population is of less than 30 years of age, making
Honduras a young country. Despite that, our country’s
youth face a serious situation of exclusion. In the area
of education, only 35 per cent of young people
successfully complete secondary education, 15 per cent
advance to higher studies, and 4 per cent graduate
successfully.
Of our working population, 46 per cent are young
people, yet four out of five unemployed workers are
youths. In the area of emigration, 60 per cent of those
who leave the country to seek a better life in the north
are also young. Even more serious is the issue of
security, where two out of every three youth deaths
result from violence. While it may be accepted that
these scourges primarily target young people, it is not
enough for us to give up our efforts in this fight. We
view the current state of our nation more as a challenge
than as a grim prison for our hopes.
Today, we are seeking our own path ahead. I
express these words as a young man and a civil
servant. I represent a Government whose President has
entrusted me with the Ministry of Youth, although I am
only 26 years of age. I am the youngest Minister in the
democratic history of my country.
The Government has provided authentic venues
for youth participation. A framework law on
comprehensive youth development was adopted in
2005,
enabling
youth
decision-making
and
participation. The law also set up the Office of Youth
in the State Department, enabling us young people,

11

A/65/PV.111

who comprise the great majority of Hondurans, to have
voices and votes at the highest level of executive
decision-making. The most important result of the
framework law on youth has been the Government
policy on youth, which is aligned with the national
plan that will run to 2038. That policy enables young
people to act not merely as consumers of State policy,
but as authentic agents of strategic change.

timely High-level Meeting. I also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his opening
remarks. I join other speakers in extending our
heartfelt condolences to the Norwegian families who
lost loved ones in last week’s twin attacks. We stand
with the Norwegian people in support and solidarity.
We are also very sad that a majority of the victims of
that national tragedy were youth.

In the area of citizen participation, we have
launched an initiative to draft a law on volunteerism in
order to promote civic solidarity. An electoral reform
law is aimed at 30 per cent representation by youth. In
the area of education, we are considering laws that
would allow the community to participate actively in
youth training. In economic rights, there are initiatives
aimed at young people in business and as
entrepreneurs, as well as training opportunities to
acquire the skills necessary for entry into the labour
market.

Sri Lanka and its people understand the pain and
trauma that follow attacks of such magnitude, having
suffered similar relentless violence for close to 30 long
years. Such events, whether in Sri Lanka or Norway,
give the theme of the High-level Meeting on Youth
added meaning. Dialogue and mutual understanding
within and without are both critical to the evolution of
national harmony and international coexistence.

Given that progress, I take this opportunity to
express Honduras appreciation for the adoption by the
General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session of the
outcome document of the High-level Meeting on Youth
(resolution 65/312). We very much hope that this
mechanism will enable States, civil society
organizations, families and youth to become decisionmakers. We hope that the international community can
breathe life into those processes so that Honduras can
move from words to deeds in including the youth.
In conclusion, I wish to join with all to banish the
age-old cliché that the future belongs to the young. It is
not the future, but the present that belongs to the
young. The International Year of Youth may be
scheduled to end on 11 August, but the present is only
the start for a new generation to make a difference in
favour of a better world.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than three minutes when speaking in a national
capacity, and to five minutes when speaking on behalf
of a group. I urge speakers to respect those time limits.
As I have indicated, we have more than 100 left on our
list and I wish to give the floor to every one.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dullas Alahapperuma,
Minister of Youth Affairs of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Alahapperuma (Sri Lanka): Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important and

12

I address this forum as the Minister of Youth
Affairs and Skills Development of a country with a
youth population of almost 26 per cent of its 20 million
people. Following the end of the scourge of terrorism,
the hopes of the country’s youth for a secure, better
and more progressive Sri Lanka have been renewed.
It was in recognition of this new dawn of
opportunity and progress that the Youth Parliament of
Sri Lanka was conceived and implemented to mark the
International Year of Youth. The Youth Parliament
comprises 335 members between the ages of 15 and
26 years, representing all ethnic communities in the
country. Twenty-five per cent of the young
parliamentarians are from the predominantly Tamil
areas in the north. The Youth Parliament is also
inclusive, with members from the different ethnic and
indigenous groups.
The impetus for setting up the Youth Parliament
was to create leaders or representatives nurtured in the
finest democratic ideals and practices. It also provides
an important opportunity in post-conflict Sri Lanka to
foster ideals of peace, solidarity and harmony among
the country’s younger generation. The aspiring leaders
in the Youth Parliament could one day meaningfully
contribute to strengthening and revitalizing the
country’s democratic institutions and democratic
governance, and further promote the ideals of peace,
tolerance and justice.
Youth issues receive special policy attention in
my country. The problem of unemployment remains a
sensitive political issue for the country’s leaders and
policymakers, as unemployment is concentrated among

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

the educated youth. Sri Lanka experienced two violent
youth insurgencies in 1971 and 1988, and is therefore
especially mindful of the issues concerning young
adults. It is precisely in recognition of this reality that
the policy document of His Excellency President
Mahinda Rajapaksa, known as “Mahinda Vision”,
gives utmost priority to programmes for the country’s
youth.
In order to broaden the employment opportunities
for our youth and to enable them to compete better in
job markets, the Ministry of Youth Affairs is
integrating skills development. We encourage our
youth to be innovative and creative. The General
Assembly’s 2010 outcome document on the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (resolution
65/1) has also endorsed a similar call for effecting such
improvements.
The Government of Sri Lanka provides training
and capacity-building to complement the needs and
demands of the local, regional and global labour
markets. In addition to regular educational
opportunities, more than 1,300 young people —
including former Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
combatants — are being given vocational training in
the former conflict-affected north and east of the
country. In addition, the National Youth Services
Council of Sri Lanka, which coordinates the youth
clubs in the country, has initiated a foreign-language
training programme.
Since ending terrorism in our country, we have
restored political stability and taken many measures to
improve the social, civil, economic and political
conditions of all Sri Lankans. We have also made
remarkable progress in rehabilitating, reintegrating and
empowering former child combatants for a better
future.
It is our dedicated commitment to youth that has
enabled Sri Lanka to host the International
Coordination Meeting of Youth Organisations this year
in New York. We would like to have the opportunity
and honour to host the United Nations World Youth
Conference of 2014 in Sri Lanka as the international
community prepares to formulate a new, post-MDGs
agenda.
Finally, as we heard during the opening plenary
meeting, today’s youth need opportunities to
participate and contribute. They seek positive
engagement in community life. They look forward to

11-43012

being active partners in the development processes in
their countries, to being stakeholders in their
communities and societies rather being dependents or
mere beneficiaries. Their fears are real, given the
current multiple global crises, particularly the financial
and food crises and climate change.
Youth no doubt ask themselves whether the
quality of their lives will be better than that of their
parents. For those in the developing world, there is a
real need to bridge the digital divide, including through
transfer of technology and international cooperation to
impart needed knowledge and skills for gainful
employment. Through international cooperation, it is
also important to address issues surrounding
international migration. Therefore, recognizing the real
concerns and needs of youth is an imperative of the
present. We have already heard them say that now is
their future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Guy Nzouba Ndama,
President of the National Assembly of Gabon.
Mr. Nzouba Ndama (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I wish to convey to you the thanks of the
President of the Gabonese Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, for your invitation to this
High-level Meeting on Youth. Because his schedule
prevented him from coming, he asked me to represent
him at these meetings in order to deliver the following
message.
“I am delighted to participate in this
important High-level Meeting, which is the high
point of the International Year of Youth
proclaimed, in resolution 64/134, to commence
on 12 August 2010.
“Dialogue and mutual understanding are
instruments in service of sustainable peace. They
enable the coming together of peoples and lead
them to get to know each other better in the
deepest, truest and most sacred parts of
themselves.
“The constant use of these tools by young
people enables them to open up to the world and
provides the most effective way to prepare them
intellectually and spiritually to be instruments for
peace and development.
“It is among today’s youth that the leaders
of tomorrow will be selected, through ways that

13

A/65/PV.111

are not yet known to us. The popular movements
that have shaken the Middle East and North
Africa have shown how important it is to be alert
to the concerns of young people. We have been
wrong to have often failed to involve them in
processes of elaborating and implementing major
decisions that affect the fate of the world.
“In Gabon, we have understood for many
years the need to invest in young people in order
to increase the likelihood of a better future for
our country. My predecessor, the late President
Omar Bongo Ondimba, was accustomed to saying
that youth is sacred. My political commitment is
part of an extension of this vision, which puts
young people at the heart of Gabon’s
development. Indeed, I have committed myself to
making Gabon into an emerging country by 2025.
To achieve such an objective, we must value and
draw upon our human resources, that is, train
young people in key sectors of our economy.
“It is with a view to meeting this
requirement that I have decided to make
substantial increases in the budgetary allocations
to the education, training and the socio-economic
and professional integration of young people in
my country. I have also decided to hold a regular,
direct dialogue with young people in different
forums on their aspirations and vision for Gabon.
“We must fight isolation and distrust of
others by looking at the world, not through us,
but beyond us. It is the ideals of peace, tolerance
and mutual understanding that we must transmit
to today’s young people.
“I hope that the document that we have just
adopted (resolution 65/312) will reaffirm our
commitment to improve the conditions for young
people the world over and to give them a new
hope — that of involving them in building the
world of tomorrow to which they belong.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Adoum Garoua, Minister
for Youth of Cameroon.
Mr. Garoua (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to convey, on behalf of the
Cameroonian delegation, our condolences to
Government and the people of Norway following the

14

calamity that happened in Oslo on Friday, 22 July
2011.
It is a immense privilege and great honour for me
to take the floor at this podium, in this High-level
Meeting organized by the United Nations, to convey to
the General Assembly Cameroon’s position with
respect to youth matters.
I wish, through this statement, to paint a picture
of the situation of young people in Cameroon and to
present the various strategies implemented by the
Government to help young people flourish, particularly
through better taking into account the concerns of the
youth of my country, who represent more than 60 per
cent of a population of more than 20 million people.
Our country has demonstrated its intention
through the establishment by the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Paul Biya, of a whole
ministerial department dedicated to youth. Since its
establishment in 2004, the Ministry of Youth has set
about drafting a set of strategic documents to guide its
activities. These guidelines are set out in the
Employment and Growth Strategy Document, a
reference framework for Government activities over
the period from 2010 to 2020. It underscores the
central role of young people and shows the resolute
will to make Cameroon an emerging country by 2035.
The document of the National Youth Policy,
implemented through a youth plan comprising
13 projects and programmes, stems from that vision.
Those various projects and programmes seek the full,
effective and able participation of young people in the
State-building and durable development of Cameroon.
They also propose fitting responses to the concerns and
scourges affecting young people. Moreover, they are
anchored in the 10 priority areas identified for young
people and contained in international instruments, such
as Millennium Development Goals, the World
Programme of Action for Youth and the Plan of Action
of the African Youth Decade 2009-2018.
Given their cross-cutting and priority nature, in
view of the time allotted to us, I will focus on the
following four areas: education and vocational training,
health care, employment, and youth participation in
decision-taking.
With regard to education and vocational training,
the Government has strongly stressed building human
capital. One fifth of the gross domestic product is

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

dedicated to that. Public primary education is free.
Quality basic education, which covers the primary
cycle and the first cycle of secondary education open to
children aged 6 to 15, makes it possible to provide an
average level of education that is in keeping with the
vision of a Cameroon emerging by 2035. Secondary
education, built on a dynamic balance between general
and technical education, prepares for higher education
in courses that have priority for the development of an
economy expecting further industrialization and for a
professional university education.
In the area of health care, improving the state of
health, in particular of the young population, remains
an ongoing goal of the Government. There is also
intervention with regard to maternal, neonatal and
child mortality. With regard to the fight against
HIV/AIDS, to which young people in particular are
vulnerable, an entire programme, based on the
multisectoral approach implemented since 2000,
focuses primarily on reducing the prevalence rate of
that disease. Prevention activities for young people
have been developed along the lines of “Holidays
without AIDS” campaigns, advice on voluntary
screening and the treatment of orphans and vulnerable
children.
In the area of work, the national employment
policy primarily seeks to promote full, decent and
freely chosen jobs. The focus is on developing salaried
work through support for the establishment and
competitiveness
of
small
and
medium-sized
enterprises. Promoting self-employment will assist that
primary feature. There are specific programmes to
promote employment among young people. Here I
would like to cite the Rural and Urban Youth Support
Programme, the Integrated Support Project for
Informal Sectors, the National Employment Fund and,
lastly, the National Civic Service for Participation in
Development, whose goal is to help harness the
energies of young people.
In the area of youth participation in decisiontaking, I would mention the establishment of the
National Employment Council, which is a framework
for the cooperation, representation and action of young
people.
Allow me to conclude my statement by
mentioning challenges and prospects. For the
Cameroonian Government, young people are a major
asset in a country where there are stable institutions

11-43012

and where the body of reforms already undertaken
clearly demonstrates the emergence of responsible
youth, aware of the notion of peace, dialogue and
mutual understanding.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Shaw Kgathi, Minister of
Youth, Sport and Culture of Botswana.
Mr. Kgathi (Botswana): Botswana joins other
delegations in conveying our deepest condolences to
the Government and people of Norway on the recent
attacks, in which many innocent lives were lost.
We also join other speakers in commending you,
Mr. President, for the very effective manner in which
you have steered this High-level Meeting. I therefore
pledge the full support of my delegation to you in your
stewardship of our deliberations towards a meaningful
and fruitful outcome.
Botswana associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Argentina on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
My delegation noted with pleasure and
satisfaction the Secretary-General’s introductory
statement at the commencement of this High-level
Meeting (see A/65/PV.110). Consistent with the
Secretary-General’s statement, Botswana supports the
deepening of inter-agency coordination and the
mainstreaming of the youth development agenda in the
United Nations. To that end, Botswana also fully
supports the African Union’s call for the creation of a
United Nations special youth agency to support and
fund youth initiatives in Member States. Botswana also
fully supports the development of indicators linked to
the World Programme of Action for Youth in order to
assist Member States in assessing the situation of youth
in their countries.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of the
outcome document of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on Youth on the theme of dialogue
and mutual understanding (resolution 65/312).
The Government of Botswana recognizes youth
as a major human resource and an important
constituent in the development of the country. As such,
youth issues occupy a central place in the national
development agenda. We view youth development as a
strategic socio-economic, cultural and political
investment in Botswana’s future. The Botswana
Government is committed to nurturing and developing

15

A/65/PV.111

its youth and empowering them for a better future. That
arises from the fact that the existence, future and
prosperity of every nation are dependent, to a large
extent, on an empowered youth.
There is therefore a national consensus on the
need for the development and empowerment of young
people in Botswana in order to realize the full extent of
their potential. Consequently, youth and leadership
development has been included among the strategic
thematic areas within Botswana’s National Youth
Policy.
Since independence in 1966, the Government of
Botswana has been consistent in the development and
promotion of pro-poor policies and programmes that
have also targeted both urban and rural youth. The first
National Youth Policy, which was adopted by
Parliament in 1996, has been reviewed to address
emerging issues that affect young people. The
implementation of that Policy is guided by the Revised
National Youth Policy action plan.
One strategic thematic area to be addressed
through the 2010 Revised Policy is the issue of poverty
eradication. In an effort to address the challenges of
poverty and unemployment, as well as the emerging
challenge of HIV/AIDS among young people, the
Government of Botswana has a comprehensive crosssectoral policy, which embraces the Millennium
Development Goals, the National Vision 2016 and the
National Development Plan.
The commitment of the Botswana Government to
youth development and empowerment is further
demonstrated by the continuous inclusion of their
issues in the annual state of the nation address. That
address by the State President provides an opportunity
for announcements on youth policy, programmes and
projects, whose implementation is given high priority
in Government business.
However, there are other emerging challenges
confronting young people, arising from the effects of
the global economic recession and resulting in
increasing unemployment and poverty levels. It is
therefore imperative that Governments heavily invest
in youth empowerment and development programmes.
There is also a need for investment in expertise to
guide
proper
youth
policy
development,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation.

16

In conclusion, allow me to lend support to the
request to the Secretary-General to lead the
development of indicators for youth development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Glen Phillip, Minister of
Youth, Empowerment, Sports, Information Technology,
Telecommunication and Posts of Saint Kitts and Nevis.
Mr. Phillip (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Saint Kitts
and Nevis aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China and of the
Caribbean Community.
Saint Kitts and Nevis is proud to participate in
this important international gathering, and we today
affirm our commitment to the objectives and actions
that reflect the themes of the International Year of
Youth. These, as we know, are participation,
development and peace, and they draw us here today to
discuss “Youth: dialogue and mutual understanding”.
As one of the world’s smallest nations, we
believe, as a Government and as a people, that every
citizen and every resident is a key component in the
engine of our social and economic aspirations. It is this
belief that compels us to leave no son or daughter
behind. My country has a population of 50,000, of
which our youth comprise a significant majority. We
believe that it is in the preparation and inclusion of our
youth population that we in Saint Kitts and Nevis will
continue to accomplish our social objectives. Indeed, it
is through preparation and inclusion that those
important objectives will be transformed into
sustainable economic advancement for all.
The qualities of youth are innovation, inspiration
and adventure, and as the world around us changes,
Saint Kitts and Nevis understands that we, too, must be
ever vigilant, resilient and purposeful as we seek to
build a most progressive society.
Our country has made significant strides in
education, from the implementation of universal access
to education by our first national hero, Robert L.
Bradshaw, to the implementation of early childhood
education. Under the leadership of the current Prime
Minister, the Honourable Mr. Denzil Douglas, Saint
Kitts and Nevis has pursued an even greater vision.
Through a culture of student Government, we prepare
our students, and therefore our people, for active
participation in the time-honoured democratic ideals on
which stable Governments everywhere depend. We are

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

seeking to develop and manage an e-learning and
communications network to digitally connect all our
high schools and institutions of higher learning. Our
aim is to prepare our youth to effectively participate in
the knowledge society of the present, as well as in the
knowledge society that is yet to emerge.
We continue to work assiduously in defence of
our youth in the 10 priority areas identified by the
international community, and we actively pursue equal
education and equal employment opportunities for of
all our youth as we implement programmes to
eliminate hunger, poverty, drug abuse and juvenile
delinquency, while delivering improved health care and
a cleaner, safer environment.
Through information, communications and
technology advancements, and through the support of
local youth organizations, such as the Saint Kitts
National Youth Parliament Association and Island
Expressions, the Government of Saint Kitts and Nevis,
through the Ministry of Youth Empowerment, advances
the ongoing preparation of our young people to meet
the challenges of today and the uncertainties of
tomorrow.
Our great love and stewardship of our youth —
and indeed our very nation and several other Caribbean
nations — are beset by a very harsh challenge that is
foreign to our pristine, idyllic and nurturing Caribbean
lifestyle. I make direct reference to the spectre of guns,
drugs, gangs and crime, which loom ominously over
our nations, our economies and our youth. All of those
scourges are foreign to us. Ironically, we do not
manufacture guns or dangerous drugs. However, we
seem to be the victims of our own geographical
locations, where these two elements, combined with
crime, constitute a new era of exploitation in which our
young people, because of their innocence and fervour,
are the prime targets of exploitation by universal
and — sad to say — unscrupulous regional
“businessmen”, for want of a better word.
At this juncture, therefore, I want to make a most
sincere appeal on behalf of the youth of my nation and
the entire Caribbean to leaders of conscience to
intervene with us on behalf of our youth, our future.
The technical and financial resources for combating the
three-pronged scourge are far beyond the reach of our
developing nations. International assistance therefore
in curtailing this foreign agent is crucial to the

11-43012

development of our nations and, by extension, all
nations.
Saint Kitts and Nevis is ever thankful for the role
that the United Nations plays through UNESCO and
UNICEF. Those bodies help us to achieve our youth
empowerment and development goals. Today, the
UNESCO Small Islands Voice and Path projects, for
example, play pivotal roles in raising issues in Saint
Kitts and Nevis that otherwise might have been left
unspoken.
Leigh Hunt reminds us that there are two
worlds — the world that we measure with line and rule
and the world that we feel with our hearts and
imaginations. Saint Kitts and Nevis understands that it
is via the fusion of both that our nation will best fulfil
the aspirations of our youth.
We meet today in this Hall because we all desire
greater opportunities for our youth. With vision,
dedication and perseverance, this, I pray, we shall
achieve.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Paul Otuoma Nyongesa,
Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports of Kenya.
Mr. Nyongesa (Kenya): I join my colleagues and
all previous speakers in offering my country’s and my
own condolences to the people of Norway for the
tragic event there. Its effect on the young people of
Norway is all the more bitter in light of our gathering
here to celebrate the International Year of Youth, whose
main theme is “Dialogue and mutual understanding”.
May the Lord our God grant rest in His eternal peace to
those who lost their lives, and may He give strength to
the young people of Norway to continue pursuing
dialogue and mutual understanding.
It is a great honour to be part of this gathering,
which seeks to put youth at the centre of development.
This event gives us an opportunity for direct
interaction with youth and to share our achievements
challenges, hopes and fears.
The International Year of Youth is now coming to
an end, and it is time for us to review the ground we
have covered towards the theme of dialogue and
mutual understanding. The young people of the world
are an asset and an important source of creativity,
energy and potential. As the bearers of our future, it is
only through them that this theme can be realized.

17

A/65/PV.111

To add to the importance that the United Nations
and African Union give to addressing youth issues, the
Kenyan Government created a fully fledged Ministry
of Youth Affairs and Sports in the year 2005. At
present, Kenya is endeavouring to implement its Vision
2030, the Millennium Development Goals, the African
Union Plan of Action for Youth Development, the
Commonwealth Youth Programme and the African
Youth Charter goals.
Young people in Kenya, and indeed many from
elsewhere in our region, face many challenges. Some
of these have already been mentioned. They include
education and skills training, unemployment, poverty,
access to credit, high vulnerability to diseases such as
HIV/AIDS, drugs and substance abuse, and
environmental degradation, to mention but a few. There
is also a lack of opportunities and mechanisms to
participate in decision-making that affect their lives.
Both before and during the celebration of the
International Year of Youth, the Republic of Kenya has
established measures to address the numerous
challenges facing young people. These measures
include enacting the Kenya National Youth Council Act
of 2009, paving the way for youth to participate in
national decision-making, and the construction of
youth empowerment centres, which are one-stop-shops
for youth to access information, in every constituency.
We are also in the process of creating jobs for young
people through the Kazi Kwa Vijana programme, from
which more than 300,000 youths benefited in 2010.
There is also the Kenya Youth Empowerment
Programme, a project owned and implemented by the
Government of Kenya in collaboration with the private
sector. The programme is also being funded by the
World Bank to expand this job creation programme
through Kazi Kwa Vijana by providing market-driven
training and internships in the private sector for young
people to gain experience required by employers. The
project is now entering its second phase and plans to
build on and enhance existing efforts. It will cost
$43 million and will engage over 11,000 youths.
The National Youth Volunteerism Scheme is an
effort of the Government of Kenya to involve youth in
community development through volunteerism and
community service.
Entrepreneurial programmes are also being
implemented by the Government of Kenya in
partnership with development partners. In this context,

18

the Government of Kenya has carried out intensive
training in entrepreneurship aimed at inculcating an
entrepreneurship culture in youth. The Kenya Youth
Development Fund is a State corporation that
supplements entrepreneurship by facilitating access to
affordable credit for young people.
I conclude by echoing that young people are the
future of our nations and the world. Kenya is
committed to promoting and empowering youth in all
aspects, for a strong building is determined by its
foundations, and in this case young people are our
foundation.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to His Excellency Mr. Zacharie Kimpouni, Minister of
Physical Education and Youth of Congo.
Mr. Kimpouni (Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express, on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of the Congo and its
leader, President Denis Sassou Nguesso, our
compassion to the people of Norway following the
tragedy their country has just suffered.
The participation of the Republic of the Congo in
this High-level Meeting underscores the level of
interest and commitment my Government attaches to
all issues relating to youth. Indeed, the Congo has a
youthful population — some 60 per cent of an
estimated population of 3,687,490. In light of that
statistic, Government policy is strongly focused on
education, training and employment to give young
people all the means necessary to become a driving
force and fully play their role in decision-making. The
establishment of the Congo National Youth Council
following the second general conference on youth in
October 2010 is evidence of that firm commitment.
I note that, in the context of the fight against
deviant behaviour, which is an obstacle to
development, our actions includes the development of
civic education programmes and teaching guides for
the formal and informal sectors, and the organization
of civic meetings in all local districts throughout the
country as opportunities for education, exchange and
mutual dialogue among people of all ages. This was
achieved with the support of our United Nations
partners, in particular the United Nations Population
Fund.
I can affirm today that my Government is sparing
no effort to ensure that young people take advantage of

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

all the activities being carried out for their benefit, so
that they may take control of their own futures and
become the future generation of leaders and economic,
cultural and commercial actors, thereby promoting the
emergence of a creative, attractive, dynamic and
sustained private sector.
Despite these efforts, there remains a great deal
to be done at the national level to address certain gaps.
That is why we are still working in decision-making
areas affecting youth. This meeting is therefore an
excellent occasion to broach together the problems
affecting young people with a view to identifying
appropriate approaches and solutions.
The decisions taken at the seventeenth African
Union Summit, recently held in Malabo, whose
overarching
theme
was
“Accelerating
youth
empowerment for sustainable development”, and at the
world youth ministers meeting held recently in South
Korea, bear witness to the broad interest in Africa and
elsewhere in the world to develop collaboration at all
levels. Thanks to information and communication
technology, we have opportunities today to establish
synergies and develop solidarity among all the young
people of the world.
We are therefore called upon to unite in action,
dialogue and mutual understanding. Let us mobilize to
implement resolution 65/312 adopted at this meeting
under the agenda item “Social development, including
questions relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family”. I hope
that this Meeting will be stimulating and that it will
yield results that are commensurate with our
expectations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Ajay Maken, Minister for Youth Affairs of
India.
Mr. Maken (India): Mr. President, let me begin
by complimenting you on your organization of this
High-level Meeting on Youth. This meeting is a fitting
tribute to the culmination of the International Year of
Youth at the United Nations.
Last time the United Nations commemorated the
International Year of Youth, in 1985, we had the good
fortune of having the late Mr. Rajiv Gandhi as our
youngest Prime Minister. He was instrumental in
capitalizing on the international momentum for the
development of youth and in setting up the Ministry of

11-43012

Human Resource Development for the holistic
development of youth in India. Under his able
leadership, the Parliament also took the historic
decision to lower the voting age to 18 years so as to
enable young people to participate in the democratic
processes of our country. He went on to announce the
first national youth policy in 1988.
In order to further enhance the involvement of
youth in the democratic process of governance, the
minimum age for elected representatives in around
300,000 local bodies was lowered to 21 years.
I am glad that today my delegation has three of
India’s young elected representatives, representing
both Parliament and state legislatures, including the
youngest Member of Parliament.
Young people constitute a vibrant and dynamic
segment of society. They are also the most valuable
human resource in any country. Our Prime Minister,
Mr. Manmohan Singh, has rightly referred to youth as
the building blocks of the nation.
A total of 840 million people, close to 70 per cent
of India’s population of around 1.2 billion, are under
31 years of age. India is therefore the country with the
youngest population in the world. We are making
special efforts to ensure a high degree of skills
development. The Prime Minister heads a national
skills development mission which aims to reach out to
nearly 500 million people in the country by 2022. We
have also launched a youth employability skills
development programme. In its first phase, we will
carry out a district-level mapping of skills gap
assessment, and then marry the aspirations of youth
with the needs of the community.
The two field arms of my Ministry are the
National Service Scheme (NSS) and the Nehru Yuva
Kendra Sangathan (NYKS). They have been entrusted
with the job of carrying out youth-related development
activities. NYKS operates through 125,000 voluntary
youth clubs spread out all over the country, and NSS
has a membership of more than 3.2 million students at
over 251 universities and covering 15,000 colleges and
8,000 higher secondary schools.
We are also in the process of revising our national
youth policy, a draft of which has already been put up
in the public domain for comments and feedback.
The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development is our professional resource agency and

19

A/65/PV.111

acts as a think-tank of the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports. On the occasion of this International Year
of Youth, we are upgrading its status to that of an
institution of national importance. Legislation to this
effect will be moved in Parliament in the coming
weeks.
We are eagerly awaiting the deliberations and
outcome of this High-level Meeting on Youth. This will
help us to enhance our national initiatives in the
empowerment of youth.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm India’s
strong commitment to developing mutual understanding
and dialogue and to extend our support for the
declaration to be adopted shortly.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Alisbek Alymkulov,
Minister of Youth of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Alymkulov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for giving me the
opportunity to address the General Assembly on this
timely and important issue.
Kyrgyzstan is a peaceful and democratic country
that is seeking to build a State based on the rule of law.
Our country is entitled to call itself a young republic,
because young people from 14 to 28 years of age
account for 35 per cent of the total population, and
young people up to 35 years of age account for more
than half of the population.
Since our independence, Kyrgyzstan’s youth
policy has been directed at creating the legal, social,
economic and organizational conditions necessary for
the development of youth and democracy. Today the
implementation of our youth policy is moving to a new
level. Since April 2010, the task has devolved to a
special Ministry for Youth Affairs. This demonstrates
that Kyrgyzstan sees the development of young people
as one of the main priorities of our State policy.
As English politician Benjamin Disraeli said,
“Almost everything that is great has been done by
youth”. The political events of 2005 and 2010 in
Kyrgyzstan showed that young people are one of the
main driving forces in society. Young people in
Kyrgyzstan have shown themselves to be a progressive
segment of society who are striving for democratic
reform and the social and economic development of the
country.

20

Kyrgyzstan actively participated in events related
to the International Year of Youth. This is an excellent
opportunity for young people to contribute to the
development of our country and society. The Ministry
of Youth organized various events in connection with
the International Year of Youth, including a meeting
between the President of our Republic and young
people. We also organized an event entitled “Our year,
our voice: dialogue and mutual understanding”. Our
comprehensive programme calling for increased
cooperation between young people and the State is a
useful example of participation.
Notwithstanding its political, social and
economic challenges, Kyrgyzstan is looking to increase
the number of opportunities for active participation by
young people in shaping the future of our country, and
we continue to strive to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. In that connection, the Ministry
for Youth Affairs has begun to put together a
conceptual framework for a youth policy for the period
through 2015 that seeks to involve society as a whole
in the sustainable development of our country.
Kyrgyzstan supports the outcome document
(resolution 65/312) adopted by the General Assembly.
We deem it important to strengthen international
cooperation with a view to increasing youth
employment and enabling access to quality education,
preventing drug use and crime, eradicating poverty and
promoting social integration. As the Minister of Youth,
I wish to call, on behalf of the President of Kyrgyzstan,
on all States Members of the United Nations to
increase our attention to youth affairs, because
tomorrow’s history is being made today and tomorrow
depends on how we address the problems facing young
people today.
In conclusion, I wish to recall the words of our
President, who said that in the economy, as in all
aspects of society, we rely on young people. Today,
young people are bringing Kyrgyzstan forward. We are
moving ahead thanks to the intelligence and the
positive spirit of our young people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Zeferino Martins, Minister
of Education of Mozambique.
Mr. Martins (Mozambique): First and foremost,
allow me to start my statement by presenting to the
General Assembly the compliments of His Excellency
Mr. Armando Emílio Guebuza, President of the

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

Republic of Mozambique, who was not able to
participate in this great event due to agenda
constraints.
The choice of the theme of dialogue and mutual
understanding is appropriate, since the current
international moment can be characterized by
enormous challenges of a political, economic and
social nature that require great attention to be paid to
the age group in question, since demographic statistics
show that 1.8 billion of the world’s population are
young people between the ages of 15 and 24, which
means that their contribution to the development of the
United Nations cannot be questioned.
The Government of the Republic of Mozambique
attaches primordial importance to the issues of youth.
That is why, in its agenda, the Government gives
priority to policies, programmes and institutions
dealing with youth; to their social and economic
empowerment; to their rights, inclusion and
participation; to their development and well-being, the
funding of self-employment projects and activities for
the generation of income.
The creation of opportunities for youth
participation is the result of our investment and
recognition of the potential of this sector of the
population. This investment is based on our desire to
transmit such values as national unity, the culture of
peace, dialogue, self-esteem, solidarity, mutual respect,
freedom of expression, democracy and inclusive
participation.
Taking into account the multidisciplinary and
multisectoral issues of youth and considering dialogue
as an element of capital importance, the Government of
Mozambique has created the Multisectoral Committee
for Adolescent and Youth Development, which is a
consultative body of the Council of Ministers devoted
to monitoring and evaluating youth programmes and
policies. As a result of the dialogue between the
Government and youth, we are in the process of
revising youth policies and related strategies pursuant
to the recommendations of article 12 of the African
Youth Charter. These revisions take into consideration
the multidisciplinary and multisectoral issues relating
to youth.
It is in context of our constant quest to
consolidate and maintain openness in the relationship
between the Government and youth that we are
structuring our efforts to make that age group more

11-43012

participative in the development of the country. It is
our hope to witness the adoption of the ministerial
declaration at the end of this High-level Meeting
because it will help advance the United Nations agenda
on the well-being of youth.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Franklin Rodríguez,
Minister of Youth of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Rodríguez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to begin my statement by thanking
Almighty God. It is clear that, in this world, we are
called upon more to get along with another than to
clash, compelled more to agree than to have
differences. God protects all of us under the same
mantle of His eternal wisdom and His infinite grace,
and sanctifies us, making us worthy of His estate.
On behalf of the Dominican Republic and our
President, Mr. Leonel Fernández Reyna, I would like to
express my solidarity with the sister nation of Norway
in the wake of the brutal events that took place recently
in that country.
Since 2002, Dominican young people, working in
association with the United Nations, have taken a
remarkable part in the participatory forums of the
Organization. As a fruit of this involvement, in 2009
we set up a youth delegate programme at the General
Assembly. Moreover, we are the only Latin American
country that has a country profile for its youth delegate
programme on the United Nations Youth Programme
website. Similarly, we have participated actively in the
UNESCO Youth Forum in Paris and, since 2002, we
have had a Dominican Model United Nations — the
only one in Spanish — which has made it possible for
more than 800 Latin American young people to
participate in the programme.
In our country, young people constantly seek to
draw attention to the need for decision-makers around
the world to act responsibly in their roles. In 2010,
Marcos Díaz, a young long-distance swimmer from the
Dominican Republic, under the aegis of the United
Nations and working with the Dominican Republic’s
Ministry of Youth, decided to launch a project in which
he would swim in open waters from each of the five
continents in order to draw attention to the need to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to
demonstrate that, despite the distance between peoples,
we are living on the same planet and must all work for
this common cause. This young man was received by

21

A/65/PV.111

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at a ceremony that
took place near this building.
With a similar objective, three Dominican youths
climbed Mount Everest, the point on the Earth closest
to the heavens. Only A few days ago, five Dominicans
youths read aloud for 365 uninterrupted hours to set a
new Guinness world record. Similarly, the young
people who protested around the world yesterday hope
for a positive response from this Meeting. Let us show
that we are aware of our titanic responsibility for
protecting the well-being of the youth of the world.
We welcomed the recent creation of UN Women,
led by the honourable former President of Chile,
Michelle Bachelet. Given the difficulties experienced
by young people around the world and the essential
need to find solutions to those problems, we call on the
authorities to create an organization that is dedicated
solely to working with youth and which could be called
UN Youth.
Similarly, aware that, as has been said in this Hall
by the President of the Republic of the Dominican
Republic, Mr. Leonel Fernández Reyna, who is known
as a bringer of peace to Latin America, education is the
cornerstone of the development of peoples. Starting
from that premise and in view of the broadening
educational opportunities available to the youth of the
world, we call on the United Nations to create a world
scholarship fund in which each country would be
obligated to set up a certain number of educational
opportunities that would be offered to worthy youth
from the most remote regions of the world.
We invite the youth of the world to participate,
play a role in and be part of the social organizations
that contribute to the progress of peoples; to join
literary circles, dance troupes, various university
organizations, sports clubs, music academies, and
volunteer services; and to be part of all that would
ensure progress for the homelands in which they were
born. Just as their fingerprints are distinctive and
important, their contribution to the development and
advancement of all peoples of the world is unique.
Finally, the Dominican Republic’s Ministry of
Youth is committed to shaping young citizens who
participate deeply, who go from being spectators to
being agents of change, who go from the stands to the
playing field, who dare to take chances and remain
dedicated, and who make sure that things happen,
because, in the end, we understand that, in this twenty-

22

first century, being silent and detached is no longer an
option for young people. Such attitudes must be cut out
of the body of society — using a scalpel for
precision — so that never again may we fail to uphold
the unshakeable objective that brings us here today —
a to be potential sponsors of change.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to Ms. Ajulu Joy Ifeoma, Director of Youth of Nigeria.
Ms. Ifeoma (Nigeria): Mr. President, permit me
to join other delegations in conveying the condolences
of the Nigerian delegation to the Government and the
people of Norway on the unfortunate incident that took
place a few days ago and led to the deaths of many
Norwegians, many of them young people who were
gathered to contemplate their role in the future of their
country.
As we all know, the youth of any society are its
assets and its hope for the future; early investment in
them is imperative for meaningful national
development. Their energy, if properly harnessed, will
contribute in no small measure to today’s success and
tomorrow’s hope.
It is in recognition of the important role of youth
in society that a special Ministry dedicated to the issue
of young people was established in 2007 by the Federal
Government of Nigeria. Since its establishment, the
Federal Ministry of Youth Development has created
various structures and programmes for youth
empowerment and entrepreneurship, including youth
development and skills-acquisition centres, a youth
parliament, and a national youth council of Nigeria
which serves as an interface between the Government
and the various youth organizations in the country. At
the moment, the Federal Government is exploring the
possibility of establishing youth desks in all ministries,
departments and agencies so as to facilitate the
mainstreaming of youth issues into the national
development agenda.
In addition, the Government is in the process of
establishing a youth fund from which young people can
draw to realize their self-development and
entrepreneurship aspirations. This has become
necessary in view of the usual difficulties associated
with securing loans from regular financial institutions.
Furthermore, the Government organizes regular
workshops for youth aimed at value reorientation,
mentoring and leadership development skills. The

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

outcomes of such workshops are communicated to the
Government and used in the formulation of youthrelated policies, taking into account the views of young
people themselves. There are also ongoing advocacy
programmes to encourage the participation of youth at
the grass-roots level in youth-oriented policy
formulation and implementation.
Nigeria is proud to be a major contributor to the
African Union Youth Volunteer Corps, which is
mandated
to
popularize
and
promote
the
implementation of the African Youth Charter. In
demonstration of this support, Nigeria hosted the
launching and training of the first group of Corps
members at the Obudu cattle ranch in Nigeria. Our
strength lies in the fact that Nigeria has considerable
experience in youth development programmes, as is
evident in our National Youth Service Corps scheme
and the Technical Aid Corps programme, through
which Nigeria provides technical assistance to many
African, Caribbean and Pacific States. We are willing
to put our experience to use at the continental and
global levels.
Let me conclude by urging all present to heed the
advice of one of our young people: take care of them
today so they can take care of us tomorrow.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Olivia Grange, Minister of
Youth, Sports and Culture of Jamaica.
Ms. Grange (Jamaica): The Government and the
people of Jamaica join in conveying our deepest
sympathies and solidarity with the people of Norway in
the wake of the recent tragic events.
Jamaica aligns itself with the statement to be
made by Argentina on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, and by Suriname on behalf of the States
members of the Caribbean Community.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate the
United Nations on the work it has done in the Latin
American hemisphere in advancing the welfare of
young people, and I urge the United Nations to
redouble its collaboration with the Caribbean
subregion. We look forward to strengthening levels of
cooperation with the United Nations Programme on
Youth.
Jamaica supports the decision by the United
Nations to establish a network on youth development,
and we are committed to collaborating in that respect,

11-43012

since we believe that this is an excellent framework for
sharing best practices on a global scale.
Approximately half of Jamaica’s population is
aged 30 years and under, and we therefore understand
the benefits of investing in our youth to ensure their
engagement in the development process. We are proud
of our history, culture and traditions, which have led
Jamaican
youths
to
excel
in
academics,
entrepreneurship, leadership, volunteerism, community
service, sports and the visual and performing arts. Our
young people are indeed one of Jamaica’s greatest
assets. Today, we boast the fastest man on Earth, Usain
Bolt, and we gave the world the musical icon Bob
Marley and reggae music.
My Government is deeply concerned about the
impact of drugs, crime and violence on our young
people, and we are committed to addressing the
situation. However, this is a global challenge, and we
urge Member States to work collaboratively to find
long-term solutions to these problems.
I take pleasure in reporting that in response to
domestic intervention policies, Jamaica has made
significant progress in developing social and economic
programmes for youth using a multi-sectoral and
multifaceted approach.
Research indicates that Jamaican sports and the
cultural industries contribute approximately 10 per cent
to gross domestic product and 5 per cent of jobs. We
are linking our national youth and sports policies and
programmes, using our cultural assets as the primary
tools to propel our young people to social and
economic prosperity and healthy adulthood. This
approach also presents significant opportunities for
youth engagement in new career paths and the
development of dynamic cultural and sports industries.
In celebrating the International Year of Youth,
Jamaica involved our young people in many different
ways, including facilitating youth leaders to engage
street children in dialogue so as to determine the types
of interventions they need and to work towards
effecting positive changes in their lives; conducting a
national youth census to tap into the vast potential of
our young people; undertaking a national youth
situational analysis to better understand their needs and
concerns, and to develop appropriate policy
frameworks; and organizing national consultations
designed and directed by youth leaders themselves
which will further enhance the national youth policy.

23

A/65/PV.111

We have created youth information centres and
made significant progress with our HIV/AIDS
programme. We have developed a national youth
entrepreneurship strategy and implemented a Prime
Minister’s Youth Award Programme for Excellence. We
have also appointed youth ambassadors, including a
youth ambassador to the United Nations. My
Government has also made a significant financial
investment in youth business development through the
Jamaica Youth Business Trust.
Jamaica supports the World Programme of Action
for Youth, adopted in 1995. However, there is a need to
further develop the international framework by
reviewing and updating the World Programme to take
into account current global realities. I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity, and I hope you will
share in some of the initiatives we have presented as
Jamaica strives to realize its national goals.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Djiguiba Keita, Minister
for Youth and Sport of Mali.
Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me
the pleasant duty of conveying the brotherly and
friendly greetings of the people of Mali and His
Excellency Mr. Amadou Toumani Touré, President and
Head of State of the Republic of Mali. As with every
invitation the General Assembly has extended to him,
the President would have very much liked to be here to
share these moments of reflection on youth, that source
of wealth and asset for the development of every
nation. Unfortunately, due to other engagements, he
has asked me to represent him at this important
meeting. I would therefore like to heartily thank the
Assembly on his behalf for convening this High-level
Meeting on Youth, whose theme of dialogue and
mutual understanding has been the organizing principle
for the activities celebrating 2010 as the International
Year of Youth. I assure the Assembly that my
delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the African Union.
Like others who have spoken before me, I would
like to offer my heartfelt condolences — as my
President has also done — to the people of Norway on
the occasion of the tragedy they have experienced.
I would be remiss in speaking of youth from this
rostrum if today, 26 July, I did not recall the same date
in 1953 when the young people of Cuba, led by a man
named Fidel Castro, attacked the Moncada Barracks in

24

order to liberate their people. The young people of
Tunisia and Egypt did essentially the same thing at the
beginning of this year. Young people are often the
engines of history. It was thus that men such as Modibo
Keïta, Nelson Mandela, Ahmed Sékou Touré,
Agostinho Neto, Amilcar Cabral, Patrice Lumumba,
Kwame Nkrumah and others — all young men —
committed to freeing their peoples from the colonial
yoke.
The theme “Youth: dialogue and mutual
understanding” is in perfect harmony with the founding
principles of our society. Mali is a land of ancient
traditions and civilizations whose mingling and
harmony have greatly contributed to our socio-cultural
influence. Indeed, Malian society’s cohesion and glue
are the results of language, listening and mutual
understanding. Our masters of speech; our flaniya, or
age groups; our sinankuya, or kinship through joking;
our nimogoya, or familial joking among in-laws; and
our parable tree are all elements and vectors that
contribute to a culture of dialogue and peace between
ethno-cultural groups. Such exchanges between our
ethnic groups, especially our young people, have
helped them mix together, forging our country’s unity
and cohesion.
Within this dynamic, our policies and strategic
directions have been focused principally on the welfare
of our communities while taking our cultural wealth
into account. Thus, the traditional meeting areas,
gatherings of young people such as youth weeks,
artistic, cultural and sport biennials, festivals, sessions
on Malian understanding, youth camps, friendship
caravans and other events have helped us cultivate
certain virtues and values such as courage, dignity,
respect for the differences of others, listening,
tolerance, loyalty, and solidarity — all essential to
producing social order and building peace.
In conclusion, I would like to note that all these
social norms do not nullify individual identity. On the
contrary, since time immemorial these social rules have
helped to make Mali a country of peace and stability
and continue to make it a model of democracy and a
country of cultural diversity, dialogue and mutual
understanding.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Clement Kofi Humado,
Minister of Youth and Sports of Ghana.

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

Mr. Humado (Ghana): It is indeed an honour to
be given the opportunity to make a statement on behalf
of Ghana at this High-level Meeting on youth
development, on the theme of dialogue and mutual
understanding.
Permit me to express, on behalf of the
Government and people of Ghana, our heartfelt
sympathy and condolences to the Government and
people of Norway on the occasion of the tragic
shooting and bombing incidents that led to the loss of
many lives and left many injured.
This meeting is particularly important to us in
Ghana because we have a very large youth population
that is very vulnerable to the worsening social and
economic conditions around the world. Ghana
therefore associates itself with the meeting’s theme of
dialogue and mutual understanding, in the belief that it
provides us, as stakeholders, the opportunity to share
information about best practices for mechanisms that
can enhance the active participation of young people in
policy- and decision-making processes at the local,
national and international levels, in order to achieve
social integration, full employment and poverty
eradication.
In order to give full effect to the global and
continental youth charters, Ghana launched a national
youth policy and action plan in August 2010. The
Parliament of Ghana also ratified the African Youth
Charter in December 2010. The National Youth
Authority, the agency mandated by law to facilitate
youth development in Ghana, works in the following
areas: first, young people’s sense of direction and
nationalism, grounded in the national development
agenda; secondly, young people’s health and sexuality;
thirdly, young people’s education for employment and
entrepreneurship development; and fourthly, young
people and the management of national resources and a
sustainable environment.
The National Youth Authority currently
implements 19 priority areas derived from the national
youth policy, and also manages 11 schools and training
institutes in the 10 regions of Ghana. This year, in
order to promote dialogue and understanding, the
Authority is organizing 30 volunteer youth work
camps, in addition to those of other stakeholders
throughout the country, to enable young people to
appreciate national cultural diversity, as well as to
provide volunteer services in the rehabilitation and

11-43012

construction of rural infrastructure, including
classrooms, clinics, toilets, rural water projects, green
projects such as tree-planting, and so forth. These
camps will also help promote youth awareness through
programmes and activities in the youth action plan,
derived from the National Youth Policy.
Other regional, continental and international
youth exchanges are being implemented by the
Authority to expose Ghanaian youth to other cultures
and societies in order to promote dialogue and
understanding. A Youth Parliament has also been
organized by the National Youth Authority and linked
to the Parliament of Ghana to enable dialogue and
involvement of young people in policy- and decisionmaking processes.
Ghana has also embarked on a national youth
employment programme to engage and empower young
people in productive and skills-training activities as a
prerequisite for preparing unemployed youth for
industry and public service. The programme is
currently running 12 work modules comprising
internships, trades and vocations modules for 400,000
beneficiaries in a two-year cycle. Exit strategies and
programmes have been developed and modules aligned
to funding sources. To date, 111,000 youth
beneficiaries have been exited in all modules over the
past four years. Ghana also runs special modules to
take care of persons with disabilities and women to
ensure social inclusion and integration.
The Ministry of Youth and Sports also
collaborates with ministries in other sectors, such as
education and health, in dealing with issues such as
HIV and AIDS, drug abuse and other health-related
lifestyle issues.
However, we still face some challenges. With
regard to future prospects, the Government is linking
with donor partners to increase funding for the national
youth employment programme.
With regard to the social and economic impact,
the relatively peaceful youth front in Ghana is partly
due to the openness and transparency of Government
and society that enable young people to have dialogue
leading to mutual understanding. Youth development
programmes being implemented in Ghana have started
to impact positively on society in promoting dialogue
and understanding among young people and between
youth and stakeholders. It is also creating job
opportunities, thereby reducing unemployment and

25

A/65/PV.111

poverty and resulting in the relative stability in the
youth front.

in providing care and help to their Libyan neighbours
when they enter Tunisia fleeing their war-torn country.

At this forum, Ghana is prepared to listen others
and to share experiences with them in order to enrich
our methods and approaches.

Today, Tunisia is at a turning point in its history.
The country stands at the beginning of a fundamental
process of democratization. We are counting on our
own strengths to fulfil the promises of the revolution,
and we do have strengths: a highly educated
population, a well-established middle class and highly
emancipated women. But our strongest asset is perhaps
the dynamism and high degree of engagement of our
youth. Tunisian young people are the country’s primary
asset and will be a key factor in any successful
transition.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Radhouan Nouicer, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia.
Mr. Nouicer (Tunisia): I would like to start my
brief statement by conveying the sincere condolences
of the Tunisian people to Norway, its people and its
leadership, and to express our solidarity with the
families of the victims of the horrible acts of last
Friday in Oslo. This tragedy reminds us that we cannot
let our world and our youth be held hostage by those
who occupy the extremes of the political spectrum.
The Tunisian people have, in a brief space of time
and armed only with their democratic convictions,
achieved a peaceful and spontaneous revolution that
had no political leadership, no ideological orientation
and no external interference. The slogans chanted
during the revolution by the people — especially
young people and, in particular, what is referred to as
the dot.com generation — were deeply rooted in the
universal values of freedom, dignity and democracy.
The young people who invaded the streets of
Tunis and other cities in the country in late December
2010 and early January 2011 belong to all strata of
society: poor and rich; men and women; boys and girls;
entrepreneurs and unemployed; educated and illiterate
people. They all agreed that enough was enough and
that Tunisians deserved better governance — a
Government that listens to people and works for their
welfare and prosperity in full transparency and
accountability.
Today, the Tunisian people owe to their young
people the freedom of expression they enjoy and the
democratic prospects they aspire to. Tunisian youth
were also instrumental in protecting their families,
neighbourhoods and villages in the difficult days
following the revolution.
The
non-governmental
organizations
and
associations created by young Tunisians are today very
active in promoting the principles of tolerance, equality
and gender balance, and in creating awareness of the
importance of the participation of youth in national
political dialogue. Young Tunisians are also very active

26

Tunisia has drawn many lessons from its
revolution. We have learned that Government must
listen to young people; perhaps it can not offer them
more, but it must treat them with respect and dignity,
develop their self-esteem and give them hope.
Government must consider young people feel like fully
fledged citizens and involve them in decisions
concerning their future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Urgamal Byambasuren,
State Secretary of the Ministry of Social Welfare and
Labour of Mongolia.
Mr. Byambasuren (Mongolia): I would like to
thank the United Nations for having organized this
very important and timely High-level Meeting.
Mongolia is a country of youth, and therefore
conventionally young people have always been at the
heart of Government policies. The Government of
Mongolia is implementing policies and programmes
aimed at promoting youth employment, providing them
opportunities to attain education consistent with labour
market needs, introducing modern technology to help
young people to keep up with world development, and
supporting young families and providing housing
through soft loans. We are making significant progress
through these efforts.
Young people should be at the centre of
sustainable development. Still, there are several
challenges facing young people. Let me stress the main
such challenges facing youth in my country.
First, young people are not benefiting sufficiently
from our economic growth. Economic growth in
Mongolia has not dropped below 6 per cent in the past
few years. However, youth unemployment has not

11-43012

A/65/PV.111

decreased in that same period, and has remained at
twice the national average. Addressing youth
unemployment is the key to overcoming poverty,
promoting families and stability and to discouraging
involvement in crime. It is therefore essential to make
the distribution of resources and wealth more just and
favourable to youth.

that regard, it is essential that investment contracts —
especially in the mining sector, which has an extensive
impact on the environment — be tied to the use of
ecologically friendly techniques and technologies, the
training of the national youth work force in their
application, and continued improvement of youth
qualifications and skills.

Secondly, another issue that greatly affects young
people is internal and international migration — from
rural to urban areas and from urban areas abroad. As a
consequence, overpopulation is becoming a reality in
urban communities, while in rural areas a shortage of
labour in traditional animal husbandry is evident.
Thirdly, youth health issues, particularly alcohol abuse,
drug addiction and HIV/AIDS, are another concern.
Fourthly, problems such as environmental degradation
and climate change are becoming global issues, and are
no longer problems of single nations. Particular focus
is needed on educating young people to foster in them
the moral attitude of caring for the environment and
taking social responsibility. Fifthly, disparities in
standards of living and education levels are widening
among youth, leading to unequal treatment.

Expanded activities aimed at the exchange of
information among youth and at cooperation and
sharing experience at the regional level are of crucial
importance in broadening their knowledge and
expertise, raising their self-confidence, educating them
in the notion of caring for the environment and the
Earth, and shaping in them a sense of collective social
responsibilities. We therefore appeal to the United
Nations and its agencies to increase their efforts for
various groups of young people at the regional and
subregional levels. All our work and efforts for youth
are a great investment in a great future. I believe that
together we can do something extraordinary.

To address those challenges, it is essential for us
to engage in greater international cooperation, in
addition to national efforts. The creation of decent and
productive work opportunities for young people and
improving their qualifications, education and skills to
allow them to contribute to and benefit from economic
growth should be at the centre of development policies.
We call on the United Nations to issue
comprehensive recommendations and provide us with
methodologies. There is a need to introduce
comprehensive policies to manage international
migration in a way that favours migrants,
acknowledging the contributions of international
migration to the economy. It is especially crucial to
support young people in migrating with their families
in order to help them avoid the problems of family
dissolution, alcohol abuse and HIV/AIDS.
We call on international banking, finance,
business and investment institutions to focus more on
the sustainable development of countries and to work
to have a more positive impact on the well-being of the
environment, society and youth by departing from their
conventional position of concentrating on economic
gain. Direct foreign investment plays an important role
in the economic life of every developing country. In

11-43012

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Zhou Changkui, ViceMinister of China.
Mr. Zhou Changkui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I am honoured to participate in this High-level Meeting
on Youth on behalf of the Chinese Government. The
Chinese Government and youth organizations highly
appreciate the organization of this important General
Assembly meeting in the International Year of Youth.
The Chinese delegation would like to associate itself
with the statement to be made by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The Chinese Government has always attached
great importance to youth development and youth
work. The Government has been formulating and
implementing youth policies from a long-term and
strategic perspective by improving youth-related laws
and relevant coordination mechanisms, fostering youth
talents and supporting the development of youth
organizations. In the 11 years since the adoption of the
World Programme of Action for Youth, the Chinese
Government has increased financial support in areas of
education, employment, culture, health and others.
The All-China Youth Federation is responsible for
coordinating and co-managing youth affairs. Over the
years, guided by the four basic functions of organizing
youth, guiding youth, serving youth and protecting
their legal rights, the Federation has promoted the

27

A/65/PV.111

formulation and implementation of youth policy and
developed a series of programmes that befit the
characteristics of youth. Those programmes focus on
the fields of youth participation, employment and
entrepreneurship, voluntary service, protecting youth
rights, environmental protection, culture and sports.
The year that began in August 2010 was
proclaimed by the United Nations the second
International Year of Youth. Focusing on the theme of
dialogue and mutual understanding, the All-China
Youth Federation organized the International Peace
Day Celebration on the theme of “Chinese Youth and
Peaceful Development”, the Shanghai World Expo
Youth Summit 2010, the 2011 European Union-China
Year of Youth, and the Beijing Model United Nations
2011, among others. Those dialogues and exchanges
provided a platform for young people to enhance
mutual understanding and promote youth participation
and development.
The International Year of Youth is another
milestone in United Nations youth affairs. I would like
to take this opportunity to propose three ways to move
forward.
First, let us support the United Nations in
continuing to play an important role in promoting
youth development. As an important leader and
advocate for youth development, the United Nations
has greatly promoted the well-being of world youth
and the improvement of youth policy. Today, youth
issues share many common features across borders,
and young people are facing increasingly global

challenges. Youth development has become
integrated part of the global development agenda.

an

Secondly, let us promote youth participation and
common development. As youth is an important
political force, facilitating young people’s political
participation reflects a society’s equality and progress.
Participation is a way for young people to improve
their status, exercise their rights and promote common
development. Besides traditional political elections and
consultations, we should respond to new features of
political awareness and ways of expression among
young people, providing them with more channels and
options, such as virtual organizations and internetbased new media. Only through wider and better
participation can young people really be both
participants and beneficiaries in the process of
globalization and modernization.
Thirdly, let us encourage young people to create a
harmonious world through cultural dialogue. Diversity
of cultures and civilizations is a fundamental
characteristic of human society. Cultural pluralism is
the common heritage of humankind. Diversity among
civilizations and cultures should not be a cause for
conflict in the world but an important driving force for
the advancement of human civilization. As the heirs of
civilization, young people should not only absorb the
spiritual essence of their nationalities and regions, but
also contribute to dialogue among civilizations. As the
pioneers of cultures, youth should contribute to the
creation of a compatible, open and new youth culture,
leading to a new era of cultural coexistence.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

28

11-43012
