United Nations

S/PV.6705

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6705th meeting
Thursday, 19 January 2012, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sangqu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2011/634*)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-20961 (E)

*1220961*

S/PV.6705

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

There is no silencing this cry for justice.
Repression only raises the volume. Our task is to usher
in an era of respect for the law in every field, from
peace and security to trade and development; from the
high seas to local communities. Never has the United
Nations rule of law sector faced such great challenges
or such historic opportunities. This Security Council
meeting is part of a broader international push to rise
to this moment.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace
and security
Report of the Secretary-General on the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and postconflict societies (S/2011/634*)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Mauritius, Mexico, Nepal, Norway, Peru,
Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka and Switzerland to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/634*, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General: I should like to thank
Ambassador Baso Sangqu, President of the Security
Council, for having organized this important meeting.
Today’s open debate comes at a time of
breathtaking political change driven by people’s calls
for accountability, transparency and the rule of law.
Women and men everywhere want their rights to be
respected. They are risking their lives in peaceful
protest to demand the opportunities, dignity and secure
future that every individual deserves.

2

Earlier this week, the United Nations gathered
officials, ambassadors and distinguished thinkers on
the rule of law for a two-day meeting dealing with
justice, human rights, peacekeeping and related issues.
In September, we will convene a high-level meeting on
the rule of law — the first event of its kind and the first
time since 2005 that these issues will be discussed by
top leaders.
The United Nations work to promote the rule of
law extends to more than 150 countries. Our efforts to
combat transnational crime, build confidence and
capacity in State institutions, and battle discrimination
against women are all part of this effort. United
Nations programmes have already helped tens of
thousands of vulnerable individuals to obtain justice.
We are supporting legal aid. We are training public
defenders. We are raising awareness, since it is often
those who most need the rule of law who also know
least about their rights. We are working on strategies to
counter the growing threats posed by piracy, drug
trafficking and organized crime.
For societies traumatized by years of fighting and
gross violations of human rights, nothing is more
critical than establishing the rule of law. When the
guns fall silent, the United Nations is often the first
organization on the ground, helping fractured countries
to start building peace and strengthening key
institutions. Our goal is to quickly demonstrate the
value of the rule of law. That builds public confidence
in political settlements.
Our approach has three basic components: first,
promote accountability and reinforce norms through
transitional justice; secondly, build justice and security
institutions to promote trust; and thirdly, focus on
justice for women and girls to foster gender equality.
The Security Council has helped bring these priorities
to the top of the international agenda, but the Council
can do more.

12-20961

S/PV.6705

I encourage the Council to include the promotion
of transitional justice measures more broadly in the
mandates of peacekeeping and political missions. I also
encourage the Council to reject any endorsement of
amnesty for genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity or gross violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. I urge members to
bring justice closer to the victims. That means giving
them the opportunity to speak out to truth commissions
and to participate in judicial proceedings. It also calls
for supporting remedies and reparations, and it requires
strengthening national prosecutions for serious
international crimes.
The primary obligation for accountability rests
with domestic justice systems. It will require the
development of security institutions that are
accountable to laws and to the people. It will take more
funding for women’s access to justice, and it will
demand greater attention to the economic and social
roots of gender inequality.
We have made progress in helping vulnerable
groups, but we need to do more to include their
perspectives when we design rule of law activities and
when we carry them out. We must also support
innovative initiatives such as the deployment of
civilian justice and corrections experts on missions.
And we should use the United Nations Rule of Law
Indicators, designed to monitor criminal justice
institutions, during and after conflicts. But when
national justice systems fall short, the international
community must be able to respond with international
prosecutions, particularly before the International
Criminal Court.
The United Nations was established in the name
of the world’s peoples. As their demands for justice
rise, we must respond. We have to create a world where
the rule of law, social justice, accountability and a
culture of prevention are the foundations of sustainable
development and durable peace. It will take
commitment from the international community and the
Security Council to see that justice is done where
justice is due.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

12-20961

Mr. Berger (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank the Secretary-General for his presentation and
for his comprehensive report of October 2011 on the
rule of law and transitional justice (S/2011/634*). We
are also pleased that today’s open debate is taking
place under the presidency of South Africa, a country
that has set an historic example in the field of
transitional justice through its own process of truth and
reconciliation.
Germany, which aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union,
reaffirms its firm commitment to an international order
based on international law and the rule of law with the
United Nations at its core. Our own history has shown
us the disastrous consequences of disregarding even
the most basic rules without which societies are
relegated to a state of lawlessness and moral
destitution. Today, strengthening the rule of law is a
priority area within our international cooperation
activities, and we are currently providing targeted rule
of law assistance to partner countries worldwide.
Both the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognize the
relevance of the rule of law to lasting international
peace and security. The issue cuts deeply through the
entire spectrum of activities undertaken by the United
Nations in general, and by the Council in particular.
The presence or non-presence of the rule of law
ultimately determines success or failure. This applies
just as equally to the protection of civilians as it does
to children in armed conflict, or to women, peace and
security, to name but a few key areas.
In this context, we welcome the establishment of
and activities undertaken by the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of
Law Unit. However, we call upon all participating
agencies in the Group to redouble their efforts to define
and implement a unified and comprehensive approach
to strengthening the rule of law worldwide, and to
address relevant gaps in their programme activities.
We note with satisfaction that the Security
Council, in exercising its mandate, has been playing an
increasingly crucial role in the promotion of the rule of
law. This is most notable in the more than 160
references to rule of law and transitional justice made
since 2004 in its thematic and country-specific
resolutions. In the same period, the Council has

3

S/PV.6705

included support for the rule of law in the mandates of
at least 14 peacekeeping and special political missions
worldwide. In this context, we appreciate the
achievements of, inter alia, the United Nations Mission
in Liberia and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, as well as the
fact that the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan has made the strengthening of the rule of
law in South Sudan a key priority. The United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) also has a critical
role to play in this regard. The promotion of justice and
the rule of law has become an integral part of
peacebuilding strategies for countries on the PBC’s
agenda, such as Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Furthermore, the Security Council has recently
been further integrating the rule of law as a basis for its
own work, as is evident from the establishment of the
post of Ombudsperson under the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime, through resolution 1989 (2011), and the
ongoing discussions by the Council of its working
methods. In that regard, we fully recognize the scope
for expanding that basis as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. For example, more frequent use could
indeed be made of Article 36 of the Charter, which
allows the Council to recommend to States to refer
legal aspects of international disputes to the
International Court of Justice. Also, the acceptance by
more States of the Court’s jurisdiction as compulsory
would greatly contribute to further anchoring the rule
of law, both within the Security Council and in
international relations. From among the current
members of the Council, only five States have
deposited such a declaration. We therefore call upon
those Council members, as well as non-Council
members, that have not yet done so to consider taking
that important step.
Given the importance of accountability to the rule
of law, combating impunity becomes, by definition, an
obligation. The Nuremberg Declaration on Peace and
Justice of 2007 therefore correctly states that
“The most serious crimes of concern to the
international community, notably genocide, war
crimes, and crimes against humanity, must not go
unpunished and their effective prosecution must
be ensured.
“As a minimal application of this principle,
amnesties must not be granted to those bearing
the greatest responsibility for such crimes and

4

violations of international humanitarian law.”
(A/62/885, annex, III (2))
Those objectives were recently further served by the
Council when it established the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, through resolution
1966 (2010), and when it referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
through resolution 1970 (2011). In that context, let me
reiterate my country’s continuing support for the ICC
and its invaluable contribution to the strengthening of
the rule of law.
Germany
recognizes
the
importance
of
transitional justice as an essential component of efforts
to strengthen the rule of law and as a viable
contribution to peace and security. We therefore fully
support the call for a comprehensive transitional justice
policy in countries emerging from conflict that
involves criminal persecution, institutional reform,
redress for victims and the establishment of truth and
reconciliation commissions. In that context, the focus
of the international community in the area of the rule
of law should be on broadening and deepening civilian
capacity within countries emerging from conflict.
In the wake of the historic changes symbolized by
the fall of the Berlin Wall, in 1989, many countries
have undergone the transition to democracy, and in
other cases new nations have emerged. Since last year,
we have observed momentous change in the Middle
East and North Africa, where the Arab Spring
continues to unfold. While the hopes and specific
challenges connected to those developments might
differ in each and every case, the establishment of the
rule of law remains a common benchmark for success
at all levels — be it the realization of a people’s
political aspirations, the enhancement of prosperity or
the creation of sustainable economic development. To
strengthen the rule of law, whether at the national or
international level and whether through conflict
prevention or peacebuilding, is an investment that
pays.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank the South African delegation for organizing
today’s open debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/634*) on justice and the rule of law in conflict
and post-conflict countries, as well as for his valuable
statement.

12-20961

S/PV.6705

As the world’s largest democracy and, arguably,
one of its most diverse countries, India firmly believes
that the rule of law is a necessary precondition for
sustainable peace and development in any society.
Indeed, justice and the rule of law are preconditions for
the maintenance of peace and security at the
international level as well.
In the World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1), which was adopted on 16
September 2005, our leaders acknowledged that good
governance and the rule of law at the national and
international levels were essential for sustained
economic growth, sustainable development and the
eradication of poverty and hunger. To achieve that
objective at the national level, world leaders also
recommitted themselves to actively protect and
promote all human rights, the rule of law and
democracy. They also recognized that those were not
only interlinked and mutually reinforcing, but also
belonged to the universal and indivisible core values
and principles of the United Nations. To achieve that
objective at the international level, the Outcome called
upon all parts of the United Nations to promote human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
their respective mandates.
Strengthening the rule of law at the national level
necessitates that States fulfil their obligations to
observe and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all in accordance with their domestic
legislation, international law, the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and other related instruments. It is also necessary to
eliminate policies and practices that discriminate
against women and to adopt laws and promote
practices that protect the rights of women and other
vulnerable sectors of society and promote gender
equality.
Compliance with rule of law standards not only
facilitates the resolution of conflicts and the
achievement of peace, stability and development in
post-conflict situations, it also helps underprivileged
people and other vulnerable sectors of society to secure
justice, dignity and empowerment. Accordingly, we
also support activities of United Nations agencies in
assisting countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations to build their capacity to ensure justice and
the rule of law for all sectors of their societies. We are
happy to note that the Secretariat’s Rule of Law
Assistance Unit is actively engaged in strengthening

12-20961

United Nations activities in promoting the rule of law,
including through technical assistance and capacitybuilding for countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Such assistance should be based on the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter,
namely, respect for national sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference. The objective should be
to build national institutions that are capable of
meeting the legitimate aspirations of the population
and addressing their grievances. There is no one model
to fit all conflict and post-conflict situations. United
Nations assistance must therefore have flexibility to
adapt assistance to specific situations. The value
systems and sensibilities of the societies concerned
should invariably be taken into account while planning
for United Nations involvement and assistance.
The rule of law is a principle and does not
necessarily mean precepts of one particular kind. It is
important to ensure national ownership while assisting
countries in capacity- and institution-building,
including in the area of the rule of law. Adequate
resources should be made available to United Nations
missions, and there need be no hurry to withdraw them
so long as national authorities request their continued
presence.
To ensure transparency, fairness and adherence to
the rule of law in the United Nations system, it is
necessary that the mandate of one organ of the United
Nations should not be infringed upon or be duplicated
by its other organs. It is also necessary to support and
further encourage those institutional policies and
processes that ensure a just and effective international
order based on the rule of law. There are some basic
principles accepted universally, but beyond that it is
clear that there is no one single approach to the rule of
law. In that context, it is important to note that, to
address the diversity prevailing in rule of law
approaches in different countries around the world, the
Statute of the International Court of Justice emphasizes
the representation of major civilizations and principal
legal systems of the world when it comes to the
composition of the Court.
In conflict and post-conflict situations, it is
important that United Nations officials on the ground
realize that their role is to assist the country concerned;
it is not a matter of leadership. United Nations officials
must also adhere to their mandates and not take unto

5

S/PV.6705

themselves the task of propagating one or another line
of thinking on what and how laws should be framed
and implemented at the national level. That is a matter
that is outside the United Nations domain and lies
squarely with national authorities.
It is necessary that the mandates for United
Nations missions generated by the Council be focused
and duly prioritized. There have been instances where
Council mandates are interpreted in a broad manner
and, at times, without consultations with the host
Government. For the effective functioning of the
United Nations missions, particularly given the limited
resources they have, it is essential that those aspects be
given due consideration at the time that mandates are
generated, as well as during their implementation.
The synergies across the board in the United
Nations system are important and need to be reflected
in the implementation of mandates. In that connection,
the onus is essentially on the Council to ensure that it
respects the mandates of other United Nations bodies,
rather than encroaching on them. The Council should
also resist the temptation to have recourse to its
Chapter VII powers and, instead, promote justice and
the rule of law in countries on its agenda through
peaceful means under Chapter VI of the Charter.
In conclusion, let me state that my delegation
sees an urgent need to move towards approaches that
are nationally driven and sustainable and that can
garner the requisite political and popular support in
conflict and post-conflict countries for United Nations
assistance in justice and the rule-of-law fields to be
fruitful and enduring. There is also a need for a more
comprehensive and joint approach among United
Nations entities to support the rule of law in line with
national priorities and plans. At the same time, a
reformed Security Council that conforms to the
contemporary geopolitical realities is essential if
efforts at global norm-making — in the case of justice
and
rule-of-law
challenges
in
post-conflict
situations — are to succeed.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me thank
South Africa for bringing forward this important matter
under its presidency and for holding this debate open to
the participation of the wider membership. The focus
of this debate is on the rule of law in the context of
conflict and post-conflict situations, which is clearly a
crucial matter for the Council to consider and develop.

6

The rule of law is today an indispensable
component of any successful strategy on United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The Council
therefore has to deepen its reflection on the issue, in
particular when drafting mission mandates, so as to
respond more effectively to the needs on the ground.
Naturally, Portugal fully supports the statement
that later will be delivered by Ambassador MayrHarting on behalf of the European Union.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation here today as well as for his
comprehensive report (S/2011/634*), which illustrates
many important aspects that will help guide the
Council’s work on this topic in a more oriented way.
The report covers a lot of ground but, due to time
constraints, I will touch upon the following five issues
that we would like to highlight in that context.
My first point is on international tribunals. One
can never overemphasize the role that such tribunals
play in ensuring and promoting the rule of law. First
and foremost is the International Court of Justice,
whose role is undisputable, be it in conflict resolution
or prevention. That essential tool could be used more
often to the advantage of the international community.
It would therefore be important for more States to
accept its compulsory jurisdiction. We therefore
encourage States that have not yet done so to ponder
accepting it.
But in the recent history of the United Nations,
other international tribunals have come into existence.
Those have already established an impressive record in
the fight against impunity for the most serious crimes.
International tribunals, including ad hoc international
tribunals, mixed tribunals and specialized chambers in
national tribunals, have all played an important role in
administering international justice. They have
developed a set of international standards of justice
that have strengthened their authority and consolidated
an important area of international jurisprudence.
Likewise, their influence is felt also in domestic
jurisdictions. Indeed, the role of those tribunals in
building and promoting the rule of law at the national
level, including through the application of the
principles
of
complementarity
with
national
jurisdictions, merits being noted. Very soon, the
Residual Mechanism, established by the Council over
one year ago, will start its work absorbing an important
functional legacy of the International Criminal

12-20961

S/PV.6705

Tribunal for Rwanda and International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, which represents an important part
of building international rule of law.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) builds on
those steps and now has a unique role to play, not only
on behalf of the 150 States that are parties to the Rome
Statute, but also of the international community as a
whole. The situations in Darfur and in Libya, which the
Council decided to refer to the ICC, are proof of that.
Cooperation with the Court is therefore crucial to
achieving the goals of justice and fighting impunity,
which are part and parcel of sustainable peace.
My second point relates to the rule of law as a
crucial component in the mandates established by the
Council. The rule of law is fundamental to sustainable
peace and development. The Council should address
those needs when drafting mandates and planning
missions, as well as at an early stage of the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. We should also
make sure that the necessary means are made available
in due time, which requires careful United Nations
planning.
Furthermore, there should be an evaluation of the
results of the work undertaken by the United Nations
on the rule of law in the field. Bearing in mind the
importance of the rule of law in the prevention of
conflicts and in ensuring sustainable peace and
development, the Council should follow that work
closely and support initiatives to further strengthen and
coordinate relevant United Nations activities, such as
the development of indicators.
My third point relates to transnational organized
crime. This is a matter with undeniable relevance to the
topic we are addressing today. Conflict and postconflict situations provide fertile ground for organized
crime, which today, with international networks and
the interlinkage of different criminal activities,
represents a real threat to peace and security. Piracy off
the coast of Somalia, with its impact, not only
domestically on Somali society but also at the
international level, provides some hard evidence of that
link.
Only through strong legal systems, appropriate
legislation,
effective
judicial
machinery
and
international cooperation can those threats be fought.
For countries debilitated by conflict, easily permeated
by such criminal activities, the only viable option is the
assistance of the international community. We welcome

12-20961

the Council’s awareness of that by calling for longterm capacity-building efforts by the United Nations in
affected countries, including through regional
initiatives, and for a strengthened United Nations
coordination.
My fourth point concerns the situation of those
most vulnerable to the impact of conflict and postconflict situations. An effective response has to address
the particular needs of those people, such as women
and children, who are not only more vulnerable, but
also so often targeted and used as soldiers or as
instruments of war, as is the case with sexual and
gender-based violence. Rule-of-law tools are also
fundamental in that regard. The means to fight
impunity for those crimes have to be strengthened,
including in United Nations mandates through their
components on protection of civilians. Moreover, legal
systems have to be capable of addressing the special
situation and needs of women and children,
particularly in societies traumatized by conflict,
including through special legislation and appropriate
programmes of assistance and by abolishing laws and
practices that discriminate against women and pose
obstacles to their full and equal participation.
My fifth point concerns a final word on
amnesties. Our steadfast support to the ICC is firmly
anchored in the belief that there can be no impunity for
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes that concern
us all. We therefore fully support the United Nations
policy, reiterated in the Secretary-General’s report, of
rejecting any endorsement of amnesty for genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity or gross
violations of human rights.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank South Africa for having organized this
open debate on the role of justice and the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This debate is an important stage in the preparation of
the high-level event on the rule of law that will be held
on the margins of the General Assembly’s sixtyseventh session — an event in which the presidency of
the Security Council has been invited to participate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
I would also like to associate myself with the
statement that is to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

7

S/PV.6705

In 2006 and 2010, the Security Council adopted
ambitious and innovative presidential statements
concerning justice and the rule of law. We welcome
that the text of draft statement that the President will
read at the close of our debate is set out in the same
vein.

prison administration. We have had a debate in the
Council on this subject, which should also be examined
in the General Assembly. It is important to encourage
any and all initiatives to expedite work to facilitate
access by countries concerned to the expertise they
need.

More significantly still, the Security Council has
implemented its commitments in the context of
geographic situations. This synergy between the
Council’s thematic work, on the one hand, and its
action in specific situations, on the other, is a key
component of its efficacy.

The Council should also mobilize to support the
efforts of States in the fight against organized crime,
drug trafficking and corruption. The increase in crosscutting threats compels us to support the rule of law in
the most fragile countries, particularly in West Africa
and in the Sahel.

The successive Council resolutions of 2011 bear
witness to that, with the Council implementing in that
regard the full array of measures anticipated in the
thematic declarations on justice and the rule of law.
Resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
reflects the intention of the Council “to continue
forcefully to fight impunity … with appropriate
means”, as stated in the presidential statement of 2010
(S/PRST/2010/11). Resolution 2009 (2011) established
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and called on it to support Libya’s efforts
to restore the rule of law. It also reflects the Council’s
resolve to promote the rule of law in the efforts to
restore peace, which was also reaffirmed in 2010.

The second area concerns criminal justice. The
fight against impunity for those who commit genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes is an essential
component of our peace and security mission. The
international community and this Council can already
count on the International Criminal Court — a
permanent, fully integrated tribunal with the
competence to prosecute the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes when national judicial institutions lack
either the will or the capacity to bring the authors of
such acts to justice. The International Criminal Court is
involved in numerous situations that are on the
Council’s agenda, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or in Côte d’Ivoire, and the Council itself has
referred two situations to the Court.

There are many other examples, and therefore our
action can be further strengthened in several areas. I
shall cite two.

We must remain firm and consistent in our
message to the perpetrators of atrocities, in particular
those who plan and order crimes to be committed as a
means to attain or remain in power. Their individual
criminal responsibility is at stake.

The first has to do with strengthening our support
for the rule of law in countries affected by conflict. The
Security Council’s investment in the rule of law —
whether in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan or Côte d’Ivoire — is immense and
lasting. The increased efforts for coherence and
coordination implemented by the Secretary-General
and described in his report (S/2011/634*) are directed
at greater effectiveness. The dialogue between the
Council and the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission is also a key element of
that coherence. Real needs are better identified. We do
feel, however, that it would be useful to make progress
in the identification and rapid deployment of capacities
that are adapted to those needs.
The report of the Secretary-General on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict (S/2011/527) is
particularly relevant with regard to police, justice and

8

In that regard, we welcome the unambiguous
position of the Secretary-General, who has asked his
representatives on the ground to, on the one hand,
always respect judicial process but, on the other, to
limit their contacts with wanted criminals to what is
essential for their mission and finally never to accept
provisions concerning amnesties or immunities in
agreements that are sponsored by the United Nations.
International criminal justice can be an effective
instrument for preventing crime and thus for promoting
lasting peace, provided that it has the unwavering
support of the international community and of this
Council.
2012

One possible route for improving our efforts in
could be to better ensure follow-up in

12-20961

S/PV.6705

cooperation between States and the International
Criminal Court when that cooperation has already been
decided by the Council in a resolution adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter, as with resolution 1593
(2005) on Darfur. That is also one of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report.
The draft presidential statement prepared by
South Africa contains a new provision recalling the
importance of cooperation with the ICC and the other
international tribunals. We welcome that.
Before concluding, I wish to recall the
importance that we attach to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, which is one of the pillars of the Charter, and
to the role of the International Court of Justice as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations. The
number of inter-State disputes that have been brought
before the Court and the requests for opinions from
organs of the United Nations attest to its vitality.
Issuing judgments is an essential responsibility
that gives structure to the international order. But in
this domain, and for criminal justice, implementing the
decisions of judges is just as fundamental. We must
focus our attention on that in the coming years.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comments today and for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/634*). We welcome this opportunity to join
the discussion on justice and the rule of law. As the
Secretary-General’s report, of October 2011, makes
clear, the rule of law and transitional justice are critical
in preventing conflict and atrocities and in rebuilding
societies that have been torn apart by systemic
violence.
Today I would like to address three aspects of
justice and the rule of law as they relate to conflict and
post-conflict situations. The first concerns the
importance of support for justice at the international
level. The second is the need to build the capacity of
domestic justice systems, and the third concerns recent
efforts by the United States to institutionalize and
deepen our own commitments in that area.
Strengthening the rule of law requires more than
technical expertise. It also requires political will and
coordinated action by a wide range of international
actors. One key way through which the international
community has signalled that impunity for the most

12-20961

serious crimes will not be tolerated is the creation of
international and mixed tribunals, as well as
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding mechanisms.
Active support by all States for international and
mixed tribunals is crucial. We have supported those
international accountability mechanisms across the
globe, from the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts
of Cambodia to commissions of inquiry in places like
Kyrgyzstan, Côte d’Ivoire and Libya. In this regard,
the International Criminal Court (ICC) can play an
important role in contributing to the fight against
impunity. The United States supported the Security
Council’s ICC referral regarding Libya, and we are
helping to ensure that those charged in that country by
the Court face justice consistent with international
standards.
Although the United States is not a party to the
Rome Statute, over the past several years we have sent
observer delegations to sessions of the Assembly of
States Parties and to the Review Conference in
Kampala. In December, we co-sponsored a high-level
panel at the Assembly of States Parties to highlight the
importance of ensuring protection for witnesses and
judicial officers. We have engaged with the Office of
the Prosecutor and with the Registrar to consider ways
to support specific prosecutions already underway. We
have also responded positively to a number of informal
requests for assistance.
As we approach justice and the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations, we must place
special emphasis on the protection of women and
children, as well as of other vulnerable groups. That
includes persons targeted for violence based on sexual
orientation or gender identity.
We must ensure accountability for those
responsible for the most serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
we must deter further violations. Hindering such
persons from travelling, accessing funds and arming
themselves by the application of targeted sanctions can
play an important role in deterring future violations.
We have strongly supported targeted sanctions to help
combat the threats to international peace and security
posed by the most egregious of such violations. The
rule of law also means that States must fulfil their
international legal obligations, including Chapter VII
obligations, related to sanctions imposed by the
Security Council.

9

S/PV.6705

While all of those international accountability
mechanisms play an important role, on their own they
are insufficient. We must also catalyse a broader
process of long-term prevention. The lessons of
international justice must be embraced at the national
level and developed locally to ensure that States can
protect their citizens’ rights.
The many rule of law capacity-building
initiatives to advance transitional justice deserve the
continued support of the international community. The
United
States,
together
with
its
partners,
enthusiastically supports initiatives in such States as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire
and elsewhere to bolster domestic capacities to
investigate and prosecute atrocity crimes and to build
justice systems that can deliver fair and impartial
justice. We can help to deter and prevent future
violence through such actions as embedding judicial
advisers in local prosecution cells, supporting
specialized mixed courts, funding witness protection
programmes, training police to investigate sexual and
gender-based violence, and training border security
officers.
Finally, let me end by noting two recent
initiatives that the United States has undertaken to
make good on its commitment to address many of the
issues being discussed here today.
First, in December 2011, President Obama signed
an executive order launching the first-ever United
States National Action Plan on Women, Peace and
Security, which provides a comprehensive road map
for accelerating and institutionalizing efforts across the
United States Government to advance women’s
participation in making and keeping peace. The
National Action Plan recognizes that women are not
just victims of war; they are agents of peace and
essential to building the rule of law in any society.
Secondly, the United States Government, under a
presidential
study
directive,
undertook
a
comprehensive review to strengthen the United States’
ability to prevent and respond to mass atrocities. The
directive mandated the establishment of an atrocities
prevention board that will coordinate prevention and
response efforts and help the United States to engage
early and effectively. The review also focused on how
we can work with our international partners to more
effectively prevent and respond to atrocities. We look

10

forward to working with them to strengthen the
international community’s capacities in that area.
Those two initiatives exemplify the importance
that the United States places on ensuring that we
prioritize the rule of law and transitional justice as
essential elements in efforts to prevent and respond to
conflict and to assist in building peace.
As has been pointed out in today’s discussion,
strengthening the rule of law around the world
reinforces peace, progress and security. We look
forward to further discussions of rule of law matters
throughout the United Nations system, including future
discussions here in the Council, as well as the highlevel event on the rule of law to be held in the General
Assembly this fall.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes this debate and is grateful
to the South African mission for taking the initiative to
hold it. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his important report (S/2011/634*), for his
statement today, and for the strong personal lead that
he has taken on this issue.
The rule of law is a term that was coined by the
great British constitutionalist A.V. Dicey in the
nineteenth century. It is a concept that lies at the heart
of the unwritten Constitution of the United Kingdom.
Our reforming ancestors recognized that the fairness
inherent in the rule of law was preferable to the rule of
man.
Since 1945, that principle has been systematically
extended into almost all areas of the international
sphere. In some matters that were once fertile sources
of potential conflict, the rules-based approach has been
comprehensively and universally adopted. Issues
related to diplomatic protection, maritime navigation
and trade tariffs are now almost exclusively settled in
negotiations guided by international law or, when that
fails, by international processes and tribunals.
That success should spur us to work harder in
other fields, such as climate change, where agreement
is possible on extending the reach of the rule of law in
the international sphere. For the United Kingdom, a
rules-based approach is at the heart of our foreign
policy. We are the only permanent member of the
Security Council to have accepted the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. We
are also strong supporters of the International Criminal

12-20961

S/PV.6705

Court (ICC) and one of only two permanent members
of the Council, alongside France, to subject ourselves
to its jurisdiction wherever we act in the world.
Together with the other international tribunals,
the ICC has ushered in a new era of accountability,
which should make some — including those acting in
Syria right now — think twice before ordering or
committing atrocities. We call on all members of the
Security Council that have not yet done so to become
States parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC, as 120
United Nations Members have already done.
It is particularly disappointing that some Council
members that express a commitment to the rule of law
are even now unwilling to recognize the achievements
of the ICC in the fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes of international concern.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the focus
of the Secretary-General’s report on the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict countries. A defining feature
of the Arab Spring is the revolutionaries’ clear demand
for the rule of law and justice, instead of the arbitrary
rule of autocrats. Across the world, ordinary people
cite insecurity and lack of access to justice as one of
the main impediments to a better life.
Collective efforts to strengthen rule of law
systems in countries affected by conflict are critical. It
is the bedrock of sustainable development. The United
Kingdom considers security and justice as a basic
service, on a par with health and education, and a
fundamental right, as recognized in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
The United Kingdom is committed to spending
30 per cent of its growing development assistance in
countries affected by conflict, which among other
things will help 12 million women to access justice
through the courts, the police and legal assistance.
The United Nations is uniquely placed to play a
central role in strengthening the rule of law in
countries affected by conflict. The World Bank’s 2011
World Development Report provided evidence that
there are crucial gaps in the international system in
support of the rule of law, specifically in police, justice
and corrections support. Those continued gaps mean
that countries emerging from conflict are often unable
to access the support they need in those critical sectors.
The United Kingdom recognizes the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to address those challenges. We

12-20961

welcome the Secretary-General’s report on civilian
capacity in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2011/527). That initiative has the potential to
improve the United Nations rule of law assistance to
countries emerging from conflict by broadening and
deepening its pool of deployable civilian experts. The
United Kingdom urges the Secretary-General to use
that process to delineate more clearly roles and
responsibilities within the United Nations system for
rule of law activities, and to develop better ways of
objectively measuring their impact on the ground.
National ownership is critical to the success of
any international assistance to strengthen rule of law
systems. The United Kingdom recognizes that building
national
capacities
and
independent
national
institutions is essential, and that local ownership and
leadership in that process should be encouraged.
There is no one correct way of implementing the
rule of law. There is much to be learned from the
experience of other traditions. That is why the United
Kingdom strongly supports the recent launch of the
“new deal” proposed by countries affected themselves
by conflict to guide the way in which the international
community works in fragile and conflict-affected
countries. We encourage the whole United Nations
system to adhere to its principles.
Those issues demonstrate the need to make
greater strides towards a common understanding of the
need to build and entrench respect for the rule of law in
post-conflict countries. As the Secretary-General has
reminded us today, this autumn’s high-level meeting on
the rule of law will provide an opportunity to take
action to address those challenges.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate on a subject of such paramount
importance to all Member States as justice and the rule
of law. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the subject of how this issue should be applied in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2011/634*).
Colombia attaches great importance to the
maintenance and strengthening of judicial institutions
and to efficiency and effectiveness in the
administration of justice. In Colombia, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
are a part of our constitutional foundation, bringing a
moral force to constitutional principles and taking
precedence in the domestic legal system. In applying

11

S/PV.6705

that moral foundation we act on our strong belief in its
underlying principles.
The Secretary-General’s report notes a number of
initiatives by the Government of Colombia, especially
in the areas of reparation, judicial reform and
coordination with the United Nations team. Those
initiatives testify to our commitment in this matter. We
appreciate the interest in the Colombian Government’s
formulating and implementing measures to guarantee
the rights of victims to truth, justice and reparation.
Examples include Act 975 of 2005, the Justice and
Peace Act, which sets out provisions for the
reintegration of extra-legal armed groups, and the more
recent 2011 Act 1448, the Victims and LandRestitution Act, which sets out means for care,
assistance and full reparation for victims of internal
armed conflict. Those measures can serve as a
reference point in discussing strengthening the rule of
law in situations such as Colombia’s.
We welcome the support that the United Nations
can provide in strengthening the rule of law, especially
the Security Council’s contribution in situations on its
agenda and under its jurisdiction. We well know the
slow, arduous path to the full realization of the rule of
law. We are striving to pursue that path and to achieve
well-being and prosperity for all our citizens.
In our determination to build confidence in
institutions, we have developed programmes such as
the Crystal Urn, an online resource provided by the
national Government to give citizens an active hand in
the conduct of government. In a similar vein are the
“pact for prosperity” meetings held weekly around the
country and attended by the President and many of his
ministers, as well as the establishment of the High
Presidential Commission for Good Governance and
Administrative Efficiency. Both are impeccable
opportunities for direct interaction between the
Government and the people and bespeak our clear
awareness of the immediate needs of our people. We
are also aware of the responsibility to properly
administer justice. Act 1935 of 2010, which sets out
measures to clear up court congestion, aims to make
the judiciary a more effective tool for the speedy and
full administration of justice for all citizens.
Colombia wants to underline the importance,
when analysing such situations, of taking into account
the particular characteristics of each situation,
including the diversity of judicial traditions and

12

foundations, as well as differences in background, to
avoid generalized concepts that may not apply to the
reality on the ground. We strongly emphasize the
importance of the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, adopting a spirit of cooperation with
Member States in addressing areas needing
improvement in the sphere of strengthening the rule of
law. To that end, we should bolster communication
among the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council.
The credibility of measures adopted by the
Security Council lies in their effectiveness in restoring
international peace and security. Faced with complex,
multidimensional issues such as restoring the rule of
law, strengthening justice systems, fostering gender
equality and protecting children requires interventions
that promote those goals effectively and in a long-term,
sustainable way.
In conclusion, United Nations actions in such
matters work best when they complement the efforts of
States. It is hard to imagine that decisions adopted by
the Security Council in an abstract framework of
generally applied themes will work in particular
situations, if contrary to the course set by legitimately
constituted authorities for strengthening the rule of law.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like, first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on a very important topic. This
debate enables us to maintain momentum on this issue
as we approach the high-level meeting to be held on
24 September. I also want to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his personal commitment, for his
participation in this debate and for his report on the
subject (S/2011/634*).
Justice and the rule of law clearly constitute a
sine qua non precondition for people living together in
community, whether on the international or national
plane. That is particularly true in countries in conflict
or emerging from it. In that context, the Security
Council’s exercise of its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security is
essential to solidifying the primacy of law in
international relations, to minimizing the risks of
conflicts erupting and to preserving peace and security
around the world.
In this debate, my delegation would like to focus
on the following fundamental aspects. First is the
importance of adopting a comprehensive approach to

12-20961

S/PV.6705

the restoration and consolidation of the rule of law in
conflict or post-conflict situations. Far from being a
purely legal question, strengthening the rule of law is
inextricably linked with different political, economic
and social factors. Building the rule of law should be
an integral part of the political process. Most previous
speakers have focused on the political will to establish
the rule of law. It must be integrated into the process,
not separated from it, so that they are mutually
reinforcing.
While it is true that strengthening the rule of law
in such situations is a precondition for moving from
conflict to peace, a fundamental element in
guaranteeing sustainable peace, the long experience of
the United Nations in conflict prevention and
resolution teaches us as well that the absence of
development is at the heart of a large number of
conflicts on the agenda of the Council.
In this enormous undertaking it is crucial that
United Nations efforts be effectively coordinated, in
order to combine efforts in a coherent way. That aim
will require the adoption of a strategic approach within
the whole of the United Nations system, in order to
harmonize actions undertaken. The role of the Security
Council is to interact with other competent bodies in
the United Nations, so as to pursue and strengthen
complementary and interactive relations that it already
has with them, in particular with the International
Criminal Court, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Economic and Social Council.
The second point that my delegation would like
to stress is the importance of placing national
ownership at the centre of all international efforts
aimed at consolidating the rule of law. That involves,
of course — as other speakers have underlined —
respect for the principles of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. In that context, the efforts
of the international community are not aimed at
substituting for those of States but, rather, at
contributing to the elaboration and implementation of
national strategies that are focused on the principal
elements of the rule of law. In that regard, it is crucial
to ensure the support of local populations for
programmes aimed at establishing or consolidating the
rule of law, and the United Nations must contribute to
the efforts of Governments to establish mechanisms
and instruments that will enable them to respond to the
real needs of their peoples.

12-20961

In societies ravaged by conflict, the fragile state
of national institutions represent a major obstacle to
the strengthening of the rule of law. It is therefore
essential that the international community have at its
disposal the resources necessary to enable it to support
national efforts to re-establish national institutions.
Complex peacekeeping operations, whose civilian
mandates have expanded considerably, provide support
to basic institutions, including judiciary bodies, civil
administration and public services, so as to enable
post-conflict countries to re-establish normal living
conditions. In that regard, the rule of law is today an
essential component of missions, and we take note of
the important progress made in activities related to the
police, judiciary and penal fields in post-conflict
countries. When it is so mandated, the rule of law
element of peacekeeping operations plays a supporting
role and does not substitute for national efforts.
Cooperation with host countries is therefore crucial to
the success of such a complex mandate and is closely
linked to security. It goes without saying that security
and the rule of law are two fundamental pillars without
which post-conflict States will be unable to move
ahead in the context of a dynamic of lasting peace.
The third and final element on which I should
like to focus is the emergence of new threats to
international peace and security, in particular
transnational organized crime, all types of trafficking
and terrorism, which represent genuine threats to the
rule of law. The case of the Sahel region is a perfect —
and worrisome — example in that respect.
We agree with the approach suggested by the
Secretary-General in his report regarding the
importance of finding regional solutions to the problem
of transnational organized crime and to capacitybuilding at the national and regional levels. The
Council, which periodically considers those threats,
should also undertake specific assessments of the
impact of those threats on the rule of law. In that
regard, we encourage the increasing use by the United
Nations of organized crime assessments in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
My country, which has established an Equity and
Reconciliation Commission and which intends to bring
to justice those whose human rights violations have
been documented and proved, is deeply aware of the
importance, value and benefits of transitional justice.
Morocco’s new Constitution has enabled it to further

13

S/PV.6705

strengthen its commitment to the rule of law and
respect for human rights.
As a member of the Council, Morocco remains
prepared to participate in all efforts made by the United
Nations to ensure the effective and universal
strengthening of the rule of law.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his briefing. On the
question of justice and the rule of law, I should like to
emphasize the following points.
First, the Charter of the United Nations and the
fundamental principles of international law enshrined
therein should be upheld. The rule of law in
international relations should be strengthened. The
Charter and the principles of international law
enshrined therein constitute the core of the rule of law
in international relations and the bedrock for its
development. In the conduct of international relations
and international affairs, adherence to the Charter and
to other fundamental principles of international law,
such as respect for national sovereignty, noninterference in internal affairs and the fulfilment of
international obligations in earnest, represents the
essence of the promotion of the international rule of
law.
Under the Charter, Security Council resolutions
constitute an integral part of the international rule of
law,
whose
promotion
requires
the
strict
implementation of Council resolutions by Member
States. It does not allow for arbitrary distortions or
extensive interpretations of the contents of resolutions,
even less the option of action beyond the mandate
provided in such resolutions.
Secondly, diversity has become the predominant
fundamental reality in today’s world. Conflicts are
inevitable when countries with different historical and
cultural backgrounds, different political, economic and
social regimes and varied levels of development
endeavour to achieve their aspirations. The rule of law
has therefore become a requirement in the achievement
of peaceful settlements. Chapter VI of the Charter
provides a number of modalities for the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, and we support the legitimate
right of countries to seek such a peaceful settlement.
Thirdly, the development of the rule of law in
countries in conflict or post-conflict situations should

14

be addressed in a comprehensive and holistic manner.
The development of the rule of law is pivotal to
the achievement of peace and to peacebuilding in
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.
However, that is not the only important aspect. In such
countries, the effectiveness, sustainability and
continuity of the rule of law must be ensured and
efforts made to ensure coordination between the rule of
law and political processes, economic development and
national reconciliation. The sovereignty of those
countries must be respected. Efforts must be devoted to
their capacity-building, and the specific and unique
situation of each country should be respected. Only in
this way can efforts to develop the rule of law meet the
requirements of such countries.
Fourthly,
the
relationship
between
the
maintenance of peace and the pursuit of justice must be
addressed in an appropriate manner, as there has been
increased activity in the field of international criminal
justice, and issues relating to peace and justice are
receiving increased attention. We condemn all
violations of human rights and humanitarian law. We
support penalizing those who commit serious
international crimes such as genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We believe also that peace
and justice should facilitate and complement each
other. Since peace is a universal value, it represents the
fundamental aspiration of all nations. The pursuit of
justice should promote rather than interfere with peace
processes and facilitate rather than hinder national
reconciliation. The problem of impunity can be
resolved only in a situation of decreased tensions and
political stability.
Fifthly, caution is called for in the meting out of
sanctions. We support an improvement of the United
Nations sanctions regime on the basis of extensive
consultations so as to improve its credibility and
procedures and to establish effective monitoring
mechanisms, strict criteria and defined timelines.
Sanctions should be carried out only on the basis of
facts and evidence. Double standards must be avoided.
Impacts on civilian lives and on socio-economic
development must be minimized.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his substantive report to the Council on the rule of law
and justice (S/2011/634*). In today’s world, the rule of
law sparks great interest, and that is not fortuitous. As
the Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his report,

12-20961

S/PV.6705

the political and structural changes in the Middle East
and North Africa and in other regions of the world are
taking place extremely swiftly. We see a destabilization
of the situation in these regions, and the legal standards
are becoming almost the only way to prevent the
situation from plunging totally into the chaos of armed
conflict and use of force, which violates international
law.
In these circumstances, it is particularly
important that the Security Council take a balanced
approach in the area of the rule of law, focusing on
fundamental principles of international law such as
sovereign equality of States, non-interference of
internal matters of States, the use of force only with
Security Council authorization, in line with the United
Nations Charter, and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. We agree with the overall understanding that
the Security Council, as the primary organ for
maintaining international peace and security, is a key
component in the rule of law, conflict resolution and
post-conflict settlement. That is pursuant to the norms
of law and above all the provisions of the Charter.
Here the Council has a vast array of instruments
available, from measures to restore order during
peacekeeping operations, governing territories in crisis
conditions and providing assistance to protect civilians
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, right up to assisting States in
providing investigations of violations of international
law of all parties, whether or not they were involved in
the conflict. It is important to note that this can be
achieved only if there is strict compliance with the
appropriate Security Council resolutions, excluding
vague interpretations that transform their meaning.
In Libya, the arbitrary interpretation of resolution
1973 (2011) by the coalition forces led to numerous
violations of international law. The rule of law in that
situation can be restored only by holding an impartial
investigation of the actions of all parties to the conflict.
Here, we should talk about not only prosecution of
those responsible for crimes but also possible liability
or responsibility of the relevant international
organizations and individual States.
We consider that the primary role in ensuring the
rule of law belongs to States. Activities in this area
carried out at the international level should
complement national efforts, not replace them. We
support the broad use of the capacity of the

12-20961

International Court in the area of resolving
international disputes and the Court’s carrying out a
consultative function to resolve complex legal
questions. It provides justice standards for all other
international legal organs.
The Russian Federation is concerned with the
situation of piracy off the coast of Somalia, which is
getting worse. It is not possible to fully eradicate this
problem without getting rid of impunity for pirates and
those who sponsor them. We fully endorse the idea of a
specialized regional anti-piracy court with an
international component. It is important to practically
implement that initiative as soon as possible.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2011/634*) and for presenting it to us.
We believe there has been considerable
conceptual and practical progress in strengthening the
rule of law, particularly since the Secretary-General’s
watershed report in S/2004/616, in the clarification of
concepts such as justice, the rule of law and
transitional justice, as well as the manner in which they
interact with each other at the national and
international levels.
From our national perspective, the strengthening
of the rule of law and of our democratic institutions is
a priority derived from the Peace Accords signed at the
end of 1996, which are State commitments. In fact,
only five days ago a new Administration took office in
my country. In his inaugural speech, the new President,
Otto Pérez Molina, said:
“Our commitment to the rule of law in all its
aspects will lead us to accede to the Rome Statute
in order to join the International Criminal Court
as a sign of our desire to transition to a future that
is governed by law and by respect for human
rights of all peoples and all nations.”
In this regard, our position is not only based on ideals;
it responds to specific considerations that condition our
future as an inclusive and democratic society.
As is known, Guatemala emerged from a
protracted internal conflict after we signed our Peace
Accords. We were left with fragile institutions,
particularly in the security and justice sectors. The
Accords incorporated concrete proposals to tackle
those deficits.

15

S/PV.6705

In addition to the conflict, we also inherited a
culture of impunity that to this day has not been
entirely overcome. On the contrary, one might argue
that the situation has deteriorated following the
appearance in the country of cartels linked to
transnational crime, which have infiltrated those weak
institutions with officials who are willing to break the
law.

and security. In fact, the Council should further
develop its institutional capacity further to prevent the
emergence of situations that threaten peace and, in
particular, it should strive to help concerned parties
settle their differences in accordance with the means
set forth in the Charter. Further efforts should be made
to ensure that legal disputes are referred to the
International Court of Justice.

A novel response, first conceived in the Peace
Accords, is the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala. It is an important partnership
between the United Nations and the Government of
Guatemala, launched in 2007 and generously supported
by various donor sources. In the four years of its
existence, the Commission — which is referred to in
paragraph 30 of the Secretary-General’s report — has
attained tangible successes in its areas of competence.
Those areas include the criminal prosecution of
emblematic cases, technical assistance and promotion
of laws to strengthen the State’s ability to fight
impunity.

Thirdly, situations must be considered on a case
by case basis. While we certainly expect progress and
effectiveness through rule of law indicators, we wonder
how these would contribute to reflecting the rule of law
in conflict and post-conflict societies. What are the
objective criteria to develop and assess them? How can
such indicators be reconciled with the overall
objectives and parameters of the performance of a
peacekeeping operation that has other mandated tasks?

The Guatemalan experience is consistent with the
assertion of the Secretary-General in the 2004 report
indicating that the main role of the Organization is not
to create international mechanisms to substitute for
national structures but to help build domestic
capacities for justice. This brings me to the
considerations proposed by the Secretary-General in
his latest report as the next steps to promote the rule of
law. I refer particularly to the contents of part A in
section IX of the report. I have five observations.
First, we believe that the matter of national
ownership, which is key to any successful transition, is
not sufficiently taken into account. Concerning the
provision of assistance, we support looking into ways
to enhance rule of law capacities whenever so
requested by the State in question, in close
coordination with local authorities and with the aim of
fostering national capacities. In relation to transitional
justice, this does not pertain exclusively to any
particular type of community, and therefore any
measure must reflect the unique needs of the affected
communities. Avoiding the importation of external
models is not a mere policy, but should reflect one of
the lessons that have been learned by the international
community.
Secondly, we believe that the peaceful settlement
of disputes is the main guarantor of international peace

16

Fourthly, we must continue to promote the strict
observance of international law and accountability for
those responsible for the gravest violations of human
rights. The question of amnesty continues to pose a
great challenge and creates obvious sensitivities. On
the one hand, it is not possible to start with a clean
slate or to simply ask for forgiveness. The right
balance must be found between the excess of memory
and responsibility — factors that could prevent the
reconciliation necessary to sustain peace and
strengthen democracy. In all cases, we acknowledge
that this matter presents legal, moral, ethical and
practical dilemmas that are difficult to resolve.
Finally, and as was recalled by the SecretaryGeneral, this year the United Nations will hold a highlevel meeting on the rule of law. We believe that this
will be a unique opportunity for Member States to
strengthen the rule of law as a fundamental
contribution to consolidating peace and justice and
ending impunity. When reviewing the status of this
issue, we find that much remains to be done, and we
recognize the timeliness of elaborating a declaration of
guiding principles on the rule of law. Undoubtedly, if
the Charter had been drafted today, the rule of law
would lie at the heart of the principles and purposes of
the Organization.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes this
debate and is grateful to the South African presidency
for its initiative. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict

12-20961

S/PV.6705

societies (S/2011/634*), and for his statement this
morning.
The international community’s efforts to define
and implement the rule of law reflect the march of
civilization. Today, the rule of law is considered a
critical component in our endeavours to build a durable
system for peace and prosperity for all. It is also
central to the concept of global peace and security and
the promotion of fair practices in the struggle for social
and economic justice.
The Charter of the United Nations, its principles
and international law are at the heart of a rule-based
international system. Upholding the principles of
justice and the rule of law, sovereign equality, the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means, the conduct
of international relations without the threat or use of
force, and non-interference in the domestic jurisdiction
of any State is essential to the maintenance of
international order.
The Security Council should lead by example in
upholding and promoting the rule of law. Resort to
Article 39 of the Charter to determine the existence of
any threat to the peace or breach of peace must be
made by the Security Council in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter, as indicated in
paragraph 2 of Article 24. In particular, the use of force
should be consistent with the Charter’s principles
relating to collective security. In its decisions and
practices, the Security Council must adhere to its legal
foundation, which is the Charter and international law.
The institutions that are responsible for the
implementation of the rule of law must strengthen it
first by their own decisions and actions. If the
Council’s decisions are informed by the same norms of
fair play and justice that it seeks to promote, that
would redound to the benefit of the implementation of
its decisions and the many-fold increase in the
Council’s effectiveness.
Concerted efforts should be made to ensure that
the resolutions and decisions of the Security Council
are implemented uniformly and without discrimination.
Selective implementation must be avoided, as it creates
an unjust environment that deepens conflicts and
compounds the suffering of peoples. It also erodes
confidence in the United Nations system and
undermines the credibility of the Organization.
International humanitarian law must remain the
guiding norm in all situations of armed conflict. The

12-20961

Security Council must persist in demanding full
compliance by all to prevent or mitigate the appalling
consequences of armed conflicts.
We agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the Council needs to strengthen
its support for the International Court of Justice. The
Security Council should request advisory opinions
from the International Court of Justice whenever it is
faced with issues of legal intricacy. The Council can
make better use of Article 36 of the Charter by
referring parties to a conflict to the International Court
of Justice. The pacific settlement of disputes should be
promoted by negotiation, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and other means, as enshrined in Article 33
of the United Nations Charter.
Pakistan appreciates the recent efforts to make
the Security Council sanctions regimes streamlined and
transparent. The role of the Ombudsperson was
enhanced by resolution 1989 (2011). We are of the
view that while much has been done, a lot of work is
still needed to improve the procedures and meet the
requirements of the rule of law for ensuring a fair and
transparent listing or de-listing of individuals and
entities under the Council’s sanctions regimes.
Each conflict situation is unique and has its own
dynamics. However, justice and the rule of law needs
should be integrated into any international or United
Nations involvement in post-conflict societies. While
we work towards a seamless transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-term political
stability, partnerships among various stakeholders need
to be expanded by placing national ownership and
perspectives at the centre of rule of law assistance.
Practices that encourage impunity in cases of war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity must be
rejected. We support the mandates and the work of the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and for
the Former Yugoslavia. The Tribunals play an
important role. They have shown that, within their
scope, no one is above or beyond the reach of
international law.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this very important open debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his report on
the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and

17

S/PV.6705

post-conflict societies (S/2011/634*), as well as for his
briefing.
Azerbaijan reaffirms its commitment to an
international order based on international law and the
rule of law and considers it essential to cooperation
among States. In recent years, international attention
on the importance of the rule of law at the national and
international levels has significantly increased. At the
same time, greater efforts are needed to ensure a
unified approach to the rule of law and to address the
major threats and challenges that continue to affect
basic elements of the international legal order, to
undermine the national unity, territorial integrity and
stability of States, and to generate disregard and
contempt for human rights.
In that regard, further efforts, in particular
through resolute measures aimed at ensuring the strict
compliance of parties to armed conflict with their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law, remain crucial and must be an
absolute priority. The lack of agreement on political
issues in situations of armed conflict and military
occupation cannot be used as a pretext for disrespect of
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
fact that illegal situations continue because of political
circumstances does not mean that they are therefore
rendered legal. Law and justice are more important
than force.
With respect to such situations, we proceed from
the importance of reaffirming the continuing
applicability of all relevant international legal norms,
putting an end to activities aimed at the consolidation
of foreign occupation, initiating urgent measures
towards removing the adverse effects of such activities,
and discouraging any further practices of the same or a
similar nature.
The situation of the most vulnerable in societies
affected by conflicts, in particular forcibly displaced
persons, women and children, brings an element of
urgency to the imperative of restoring the rule of law.
Ensuring the right to return represents a categorical
rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing and provides
a significant measure of justice to those displaced from
their homes and land. The impact of conflict on
housing, land and property, as well as discrimination
on ethnic grounds and forced demographic changes in
situations of foreign occupation, require a more
consistent and resolute international response. As the

18

Secretary-General pointed out in his report, reparations
mechanisms that compensate returnees for the illegal
occupation of their property show promising results
and should be replicated.
Integral to the existing challenges is the need to
ensure accountability for the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community. In recent
years, important steps have been taken for the
protection and vindication of rights and the prevention
and punishment of wrongs. Justice is a fundamental
building block of sustainable peace that needs to be
further strengthened, fully taking into account existing
United Nations activities and structures, including in
the fields of the rule of law and accountability.
It is therefore important that peace and mediation
efforts never accept or tolerate situations created by the
unlawful use of force or other egregious violations of
international law. They should never promise amnesties
or encourage any other form of immunity for the most
serious crimes of concern to the international
community.
We would like to emphasize once again the
responsibility of States to comply with their obligations
to end impunity and to thoroughly investigate and
prosecute persons responsible for such crimes in order
to prevent violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation. We
are of the view that the international community, in
general, and the Security Council, in particular, should
react in cases of consistent disregard by States of their
obligations to fight impunity.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in
order to achieve the goal of the rule of law, we should
uphold fundamental principles, adhere to the uniform
application of international law and promote the
democratization of international relations.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Today’s
Security Council open debate on the issue of justice
and the rule of law has great significance for our
delegation. Togo would like to congratulate your
presidency, Sir, for having organized it, and thanks the
Secretary-General for his report (S/20121/634*) and
his presentation. As part of this debate, my delegation
would like to make the following remarks.
Renouncing the use of force is a fundamental
principle of the United Nations, even if the
requirements of collective security and the right to

12-20961

S/PV.6705

self-defence limit its scope. From the outset, it is worth
recalling that essential principle at a time when we
note that force seems to be the choice for achieving
justice, to the detriment of the peaceful settlement of
conflicts. Peace and respect for the law are therefore
interlinked, while respect for the rule of law is a
prerequisite for peace and security, guaranteeing
human rights and combating impunity.
I would briefly like to underscore the fact that the
role of the International Court of Justice takes on
particular importance in that regard. The Court has
intervened in situations where a peaceful settlement
has not been achieved. In that way, the Court
contributes to the maintenance of peace and security
and to the promotion of justice and the rule of law.
It is also undeniable that international law is
beneficial and effective only if it is implemented at the
national level. That is why Togo thought that the
functioning of its institutions should be based, first and
foremost, on respect for justice and the rule of law. The
preamble to Togo’s basic law therefore clearly
recognizes the primacy of international law and affirms
that the State must be founded only on relevant
international legal principles and instruments.
Furthermore, my country believes that the best
way to promote justice and the rule of law is to ensure
that the conduct of all national political stakeholders,
as well as the international community, is anchored in
the principles of law, and that the violation of such
principles be punished in line with established norms.
That is why Togo believes that no crime committed
during armed conflict should ever go unpunished,
including genocide, rape, gender-based violence and
violence against children.
It is also undeniable that the perpetrators of such
crimes must be punished in accordance with the
national law of each country. However, to do that,
justice must operate with equality and independently
on the basis of the strength of the law and not the law
of force. There must be equal justice for all. It must be
accessible to all, without any impediment linked to
social rank, ethnic origin, culture or religion. Justice
for all must be encouraged, in particular in postconflict countries, because a lack of justice and the
prevalence of impunity undoubtedly fuel cycles of
vengeance and violence. My country therefore
welcomes the fact that the Secretary-General’s report
on the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict

12-20961

and post-conflict societies (S/2011/634*) is focused on
access to justice for all.
The Government of Togo has undertaken broad
reform of its justice system to ensure respect for the
rights of all citizens. It has established a fully active
truth, justice and reconciliation commission, which
seeks to shed light on acts of violence perpetrated in
the country’s past, identify victims and ensure
reparations in the context of national reconciliation.
My country also welcomes the gradual
establishment of international and ad hoc tribunals, the
International Court of Justice in particular, that have
promoted number of positive developments. The
perpetrators of serious violations of human rights and
international law who, for any reason, cannot be tried
in their own countries must be referred to those courts.
Ideally, however, alleged perpetrators would be held
accountable for their actions before national courts.
While it is the State that can most readily enforce
the law and ensure its primacy in times of peace,
challenges remain to civic well-being in conflict and
post-conflict societies. It is therefore important during
the reconstruction phase for a viable and credible
justice system to be established in order to promote
respect for human rights, national reconciliation, peace
and stability. We feel that such a system should be able
to integrate reparations and punitive justice, while
incorporating national sociological values and
traditional mechanisms prevent, manage and settle
conflicts.
In conclusion, Togo reaffirms its commitment to
the rule of law and transitional justice, and believes
that the Security Council should continue to play its
role in promoting and coordinating efforts in this area.
Togo welcomes the adoption of measures by the United
Nations on the protection of civilians and children in
armed conflict. The Security Council should also
encourage better international cooperation in the
promotion of the rule of law and justice, and assist
countries — developing countries in particular — in
ensuring that those principles are anchored in their
daily lives.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Permanent Representative of South
Africa.
I, too, wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on his report before us (S/2011/634*). It is a

19

S/PV.6705

truism that the promotion of justice and the rule of law
is an indispensable pillar of peaceful coexistence and
the prevention of conflict. An inextricable link between
the promotion of justice and the attainment of a
peaceful world is reflected in Articles 1, 2 and 33 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Our efforts in the
search for long-lasting peace must therefore of
necessity include the establishment of the rule of law
and the promotion of justice.
Peacebuilding and peacemaking require an
integrated and comprehensive approach that takes into
account development, economic prosperity, the
establishment of the rule of law and the promotion of
justice. All of these must be accounted for in all
conflict
prevention,
conflict
resolution
and
peacemaking activities. The role of the international
community in assisting with the building and
strengthening of justice institutions in conflict-affected
countries is crucial. Equally important, however, is the
promotion of national ownership in all activities
associated with the rule of law if these are to be
successful.
We cannot speak of the rule of law in the context
of peacebuilding without speaking of accountability,
particularly for the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the ad hoc Tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia are important cogs
in the international architecture to fight impunity. The
ICC and the ad hoc tribunals, through the promotion of
accountability and the fight against impunity, are
making an essential contribution to the preservation of
the peace, security and well-being of the world.
Ultimately, however, success will be achieved
only when there are no cases before international
courts and tribunals because national systems are
willing and able to carry out investigations and
prosecutions. It is for that reason that South Africa
continues to champion positive complementarity,
which is a key principle of the Rome Statute system
designed to strengthen domestic jurisdictions to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes.
In efforts to promote the rule of law at the
national
level, including the promotion of
accountability mechanisms, equal attention must be
paid to the rule of law at the international level. If it is
not, the United Nations runs the risk of being accused
of double standards and of losing its credibility. To

20

borrow from a statement made by the SecretaryGeneral in 2004, we need to ask the question of
whether the international community can be said to be
governed by a system in which all players are
accountable to laws that are equally enforced and
independently adjudicated.
Over the past year, we have seen inspiring
improvements and spectacular disappointments alike in
the promotion of the rule of law through the Council’s
work. The adoption of resolution 1989 (2011), bringing
the Al-Qaida regime closer to human rights and due
process standards, was a noteworthy illustration of the
Council’s willingness to improve its adherence to the
rule of law. However, as noted by President Zuma on
12 January from this very seat (see S/PV.6702), the
abuse and disregard of basic rule of law requirements
in the implementation of resolution 1973 (2011) remain
a serious cause of concern. South Africa therefore fully
supports the call on the Council to undertake deliberate
measures to satisfy itself about whether those who
implemented resolution 1973 (2011) correctly
interpreted its provisions. They should also be held
accountable for the actions they took in implementing
the Council’s decisions.
We continue to encourage the Council to make
better use of the International Court of Justice, the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations. By
making requests for advisory opinions when
confronted with complex legal questions, it would
show that the old debate about whether the Security
Council functions above international law is passé and
that, notwithstanding the primary role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Council operates within the framework of
international law in all its actions.
In conclusion, we thank the Rule of Law Unit and
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group for
their efforts to ensure greater coordination and
coherence in the United Nations rule of law activities.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Following
consultations
among
Council
members, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf.
“The Security Council recognizes the need
for universal adherence to and implementation of
the rule of law and emphasizes the vital

12-20961

S/PV.6705

importance it attaches to promoting justice and
the rule of law as an indispensable element for
peaceful coexistence and the prevention of armed
conflict.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, and to an international
order based on the rule of law and international
law, which are essential for cooperation among
States in addressing common challenges, thus
contributing to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
“The Security Council is committed to and
actively supports the peaceful settlement of
disputes and reiterates its call upon Member
States to settle their disputes by peaceful means
as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council emphasizes the key
role of the International Court of Justice, the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, in
adjudicating disputes among States and the value
of its work. To this end the Council calls upon
States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in
accordance with its Statute.
“The Security Council reiterates its concern
over the devastation and suffering caused by
armed conflict and emphasizes the need to
prevent conflict and, where conflict has already
broken out, to restore peace and security. The
Council acknowledges that political will and the
concerted efforts of both national Governments
and the international community are critical to
preventing conflict and achieving success in the
restoration of and respect for the rule of law.
“The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the situation of the most vulnerable in
societies affected by armed conflict, including
women and children as well as other vulnerable
groups and displaced persons. The Council
expresses particular concern about sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations and
recalls in this regard resolution 1325 (2000) and
other relevant resolutions.
“The Security Council reaffirms that
sustainable peace requires an integrated approach
based on coherence between political, security,
development, human rights, including gender

12-20961

equality, and rule of law and justice activities. In
this regard, the Council emphasizes the
importance of the rule of law as one of the key
elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of national ownership in rule of law
assistance activities, strengthening justice and
security institutions that are accessible and
responsive to citizens’ needs and which promote
social cohesion and economic prosperity. In this
regard, the Council takes note of the initiatives
being taken by some conflict-affected countries to
help ensure national ownership in rule of law
assistance activities and improve the quality of
support to those countries.
“The Security Council recognizes the need
for enhanced efforts aimed at capacity building in
justice and security institutions, especially in the
police, prosecutorial, judicial and corrections
sectors. In this regard, the Council notes the need
for increased efforts to ensure that conflictaffected countries are able to access a broad
range of relevant expertise, in particular from
developing countries, in order to effectively build
the capacity of justice and security institutions.
“The Security Council welcomes efforts by
the Rule of Law Unit and the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group within existing
mandates and encourages further efforts to ensure
greater coordination and coherence in rule of law
activities in conflict-affected societies. To this
end, the Council requests that the SecretaryGeneral continue his efforts to further clarify
roles and responsibilities within the United
Nations system for specific rule of law activities,
based on assessments of agencies’ respective
strengths and capacities, to ensure more effective
delivery of support to conflict-affected countries.
“The Security Council notes with concern
that transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking can pose serious threats to
international security in different regions of the
world, notes also that these transnational crimes
may threaten the security of countries on its
agenda, including post-conflict States, encourages
the coordination of United Nations actions as
well as Member States’ actions in fighting these

21

S/PV.6705

threats through implementation of national and
international
applicable
norms,
relevant
international long-term capacity-building efforts
and regional initiatives.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on
all parties to armed conflict to comply with the
obligations applicable to them under international
humanitarian law and to take all required steps to
protect civilians and recalls in this regard
resolution 1894 (2009).
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
opposition to impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. The Council further emphasizes the
responsibility of States to comply with their
relevant obligations to end impunity and to
thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes
against humanity or other serious violations of
international humanitarian law in order to prevent
violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable
peace,
justice,
truth
and
reconciliation.
“The Security Council recalls the statement
by
its
President
on
29
June
2010
(S/PRST/2010/11),
which
included
the
contribution of the International Criminal Court,
ad hoc and mixed tribunals, as well as chambers
in national tribunals to the fight against impunity
for the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community. In this regard, the
Council reiterates its previous call on the
importance of State cooperation with these Courts
and Tribunals in accordance with the States’
respective obligations.
“The Security Council reaffirms that the
failure to prosecute persons responsible for acts
of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia, including hostage-taking, negatively
affects the rule of law, and recalls its decision
contained in resolution 2015 (2011) to continue
consideration, as a matter of urgency, without
prejudice to any further steps to ensure that
pirates are held accountable, of the establishment
of specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia and
other States in the region with substantial
international participation and/or support.

22

“The Security Council considers sanctions
an important tool in the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security.
The Council reiterates the need to ensure that
sanctions are carefully targeted in support of
clear objectives and designed carefully so as to
minimize possible adverse consequences and
implemented by Member States. The Council
remains committed to ensure that fair and clear
procedures exist for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them,
as well as for granting humanitarian exemptions.
“The Security Council looks forward to the
high-level meeting on the rule of law at the
national and international levels to be held on
24 September 2012 and notes with appreciation
the intention to extend an invitation to the
President of the Council to participate in the
event.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to provide a follow-up report
within 12 months to consider the effectiveness of
the United Nations system’s support to the
promotion of the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/1.
I should like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank South
Africa for organizing this open debate.
As this is the first time that Brazil participates in
a Security Council meeting since the end of our
mandate, let me reiterate our pledge to continue to
cooperate with Member States in advancing the role of
the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Our warmest wishes for success go to Guatemala,
Azerbaijan, Togo, Morocco and Pakistan.

12-20961

S/PV.6705

As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/634)
underlines, the observance of basic rule of law
principles by the international community a
prerequisite for lasting peace, security and
development. That becomes even more important in
conflict and post-conflict contexts, in which societies
must rebuild the social fabric torn apart by armed
conflict. We welcome the inclusion by the Security
Council of the rule of law and transitional justice
dimension in its decisions.

commissions of inquiry, reparations and institutional
reform are valuable instruments to foster peacebuilding
and democratic governance. In developing those
initiatives, the United Nations and the Council should
be attentive, first and foremost, to the importance of
national ownership, as has already been highlighted
here. Social change will take root only if it is
nationally owned by all relevant national actors. That
implies close attention to the specificities of a given
country.

The protection of civilians, grave violations in
armed conflict of children’s rights, and women’s
justice and security needs have become an important
part of the Council’s concerns and mandates.

Secondly, women and children must be placed at
the centre of transitional justice mechanisms. We
commend the Council for its efforts in combating
impunity for sexual and gender-based violence, in
promoting gender-responsive justice reforms and in
securing women’s participation in all aspects of postconflict recovery.

Brazil has consistently emphasized the structural
importance of the ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda in the fight against impunity
and in the quest for judicial accountability.
We also acknowledge the fundamental role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). International
criminal accountability is a responsibility of the
international community as a whole. The increased
willingness of the Council to resort to the ICC should
be accompanied by increased responsibility of the
whole United Nations membership in providing the
necessary means to the Court. Brazil supports the
integrity of the Rome Statute and firmly opposes the
exemption from the jurisdiction of the ICC of certain
categories of individuals. We regret that exemptions
were introduced in Security Council resolutions. The
notion of selective international criminal accountability
is foreign to the values we uphold when advocating for
the cause of justice.

Thirdly, when addressing the root causes of
conflict, the United Nations must continue to
strengthen the linkages between the rule of law and
economic and social development. Brazil warmly
welcomed the General Assembly’s decision to
strengthen the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive
Office of the Secretary-General.
The multidimensional challenges of the current
peace and security agenda require that the Security
Council set the example. Accountability is crucial to
the rule of law at the national level. It should also be a
major concern with regard to the implementation of
Security Council decisions. Those elements form part
of a discussion that Brazil is promoting on
responsibility while protecting. By reinforcing
accountability with regard to the implementation of its
own decisions, the Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the rule of law as a prerequisite to
long-lasting peace and security. The ideal of an
international order based on the rule of law should
always be a source of inspiration for all of us.

We are also in favour of increased use of the
International Court of Justice to clarify legal elements
of international disputes as a means to strengthen the
Council’s actions. The President of the International
Court of Justice, in his briefing to the Council last
October, spoke about the parallel and complementary
roles of the Court and the Security Council. Indeed, the
work of the International Court of Justice helps to
uphold the primacy of law in international affairs. The
Council could further explore the advisory role of the
World Court.

Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico commends the delegation of South Africa for
convening this important and timely debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for presenting his report
(S/2011/634*), as well as for his personal interest in
the matter we are debating.

The Secretary-General aptly mentions the
mutually reinforcing character of transitional justice
processes
and
institutional
capacity-building.
Non-judicial mechanisms such as truth commissions,

Mexico recognizes the importance that the
concept of the rule of law has acquired through a
number of Security Council resolutions, in particular
when it comes to establishing mechanisms for the

12-20961

23

S/PV.6705

protection of civilians in armed conflict, the attention
that has been given to the justice and security needs of
women and children, and the promotion of gender
equality in access to justice.
In the same vein, we welcome the transitional
justice initiatives that have advanced accountability,
respect for human rights and the creation of
institutional capacity, because they have generated
trust among citizens in their institutions and have
encouraged reforms to the rule of law. For that reason,
we believe that it is critical for Security Council
decisions to adhere to the principles of the rule of law
in order to guarantee the legitimacy of its actions, as
the President himself stated few moments ago in his
national capacity. It is imperative for the Council to
comply with and ensure compliance with international
law. We acknowledge that the Council has made
progress in that area, but a great deal remains to be
done in order to guarantee that all actions that this
organ decides to take are in every case based on and
guided by international law.
As the Secretary-General’s report emphasizes,
Mexico believes that the Organization should play a
leading role in the efforts to combat impunity for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes with
international importance. In that respect, the
establishment of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals will ensure the effective
conclusion of the important mandates granted by the
Council to the Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. On its part, the growing role
that the Council has played in the referral of situations
to the International Criminal Court, as was the case
with the situations in Darfur and, more recently, in
Libya, is a positive contribution to efforts by the
international community to ensure that such crimes do
not go unpunished when a State lacks the will or the
ability to prosecute them.
While the Secretary-General’s report addresses
the status of the rule of law in societies faced with
conflict or the aftermath of conflict, it also makes clear
that the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law
are not simply a remedy for societies faced with such
situations. Rather, it also constitutes a guide for
behaviour to which all States are obligated, regardless
of their level of economic or social development or
their political or military power. Similarly, the
principles of the rule of law apply to all international
organizations, including their subsidiary organs.

24

In that context, my delegation believes that the
Secretary-General’s proposal to fast-track the
implementation of indicators for the rule of law is a
positive step. However, it should be kept in mind that
quantitative indicators alone are not sufficient for
evaluating results. It is therefore important to include
qualitative criteria, such as equal access to justice, the
effectiveness of judicial systems and the fight against
impunity. In addition, it should be recalled that the
indicators used to measure respect for and compliance
with the rule of law should be applied to all Member
States.
Mexico reiterates its conviction that the rule of
law is indispensable for peacekeeping and international
security, as well as a precondition for ensuring the
comprehensive development of the international
community on the political, economic and social
levels.
Mexico supports the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/1) that the President has just read out, in
order that the Council promote the strengthening of the
rule of law in its decisions and underscore the
importance of respect for international conventions and
treaties as a first step towards preventing conflicts.
Finally, my delegation would like to stress that
the upcoming high-level meeting on the rule of law at
the national and international levels, to be held as part
of the General Assembly on 24 September, represents
an opportunity to better address this issue from a more
cross-cutting, balanced, better-coordinated and longerterm perspective.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like, first of all, to
congratulate His Excellency Mr. Baso Sangqu on his
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
as well as to extend my appreciation for South Africa’s
strong initiative in convening today’s open debate on
justice and the rule of law. I would also like to take this
opportunity to wish a successful year to the newly
elected members of the Council, namely, Azerbaijan,
Morocco, Togo, Pakistan and Guatemala.
Progress has been made in recent years within the
United Nations system in the field of the rule of law,
including an enhanced focus on women and children,
which has created greater awareness of the subject. The
plan to hold a high-level meeting on the rule of law at
the national and international levels during the highlevel segment of the General Assembly’s sixty-seventh
session demonstrates that heightened awareness.

12-20961

S/PV.6705

In that regard, we welcome the submission of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/634*) on the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies. We hope that today’s debate will help to
advance our efforts to strengthen the rule of law, to
prevent conflicts and to build peace.
January marks the one-year anniversary of the
historic change that occurred in Tunisia and Egypt.
Since then, we have witnessed efforts to reform by
many countries. The events of 2011 reminded us that
the rule of law is one of the most critical norms in
realizing peaceful coexistence. In other words, this
year will be especially important in ensuring that the
rule of law, freedom and democracy take root in our
respective societies.
Different countries are at different phases of
change: some are progressing towards the
establishment of democratic Government through
constitutional and electoral processes and some are
seeking to create a blueprint for their countries, while
the actions of certain Governments give rise to serious
doubts as to their sincerity with regard to reform. It is
essential that the Security Council and the international
community continue to be seized of the developments
in each of those countries and provide the necessary
assistance.
Efforts to strengthen the rule of law have been
made in every part of the world, including Asia and
Africa. Japan has actively supported such endeavours.
In Afghanistan, for example, Japan has contributed a
total of $960 million to build capacity in the security
sector since 2001. In South-East Asia, we have
allocated $70 million to the Khmer Rouge trial in
Cambodia and have dispatched Mr. Motoo Noguchi to
serve as an international judge. I would like to take this
opportunity to reach out to the international community
for further assistance in order to support that very
important trial.
In the United Nations setting, Japan, as Chair of
the Working Group on Lessons Learned of the
Peacebuilding Commission, held a meeting on security
sector reform and the rule of law last October, leading
the discussion on linkages between security sector
reform and the rule of law and on the role of capacitybuilding in rule of law efforts. The need for better
coordination at the policy level and among various
actors is quite evident. Japan, working through the
Peacebuilding Commission, stands ready to continue to

12-20961

seek improvements in methods of assistance and to
explore a variety of means to mobilize funds.
The International Criminal Court is indispensable
in putting an end to impunity for perpetrators who
commit the most serious crimes. Japan will more
actively engage in the work of the Court and, together
with other States parties, strongly support the newly
elected President of the Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
Her Excellency Ambassador Intelmann of Estonia. It is
our hope that those activities will lead to progress in
our fight against impunity and to the realization of
justice and the strengthening of the rule of law.
On 11 March, we will commemorate the first
anniversary of the Great East Japan Earthquake. The
fact that the people in the affected areas acted in such
an orderly manner, despite indescribable chaos and
sorrow, illustrates that in addition to institutionbuilding, nurturing a law-abiding spirit is also vital in
making the rule of law take root in a society. Needless
to say, the heartwarming support received from all over
the world also played a large role in giving the affected
people courage in the face of such adversity. We would
like to reiterate our deepest gratitude for that support.
Japan stands ready to support those countries
working to rebuild in the aftermath of conflicts and
disasters. We remain committed to providing assistance
in this very important area of the rule of law. Japan
also supports the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2012/11).
Mr. Román-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first time that my delegation addresses the
Security Council this year, I would like to take this
opportunity
to
warmly
welcome
the
new
non-permanent members of the Council and to wish
them every success during their term. We reiterate to
them Peru’s commitment to make a solid contribution
to the vital task of maintaining international peace and
security, which is the primary goal of this United
Nations organ.
Today’s debate is focused on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies. In his report (S/2011/634*), the SecretaryGeneral judiciously outlines a number of fundamental
aspects to be addressed in that regard, such as security
sector reform and civilian protection, placing particular
emphasis on the most vulnerable groups, such as

25

S/PV.6705

children and women, as well as the need to bring to
justice the perpetrators of international crimes.

territorial disputes, by peaceful means in order to avoid
jeopardizing international peace and security.

As is well known, Peru was affected by domestic
terrorism and political violence during the 1980s and
1990s. That triggered a process of internal reflection
and reform, as well as the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission. Judicial proceedings have
also been carried out to try the perpetrators in
accordance with due process. Now that nearly two
decades have passed since the violence ended, we
continue to adopt measures that enable us to provide
care and make reparations to the victims.

In that regard, we must underscore the work of
the International Court of Justice, as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations system, to resolve
disputes between States. The General Assembly has
reiterated that point in several resolutions and in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States.

Strengthening the rule of law is undoubtedly a
fundamental prerequisite if we are to truly speak of
inclusive societies. If we fail to strengthen the rule of
law, the living conditions of our peoples and the
institutional structures of the State, as well as proper
administration, will be undermined. That, in turn, can
have an impact by jeopardizing international peace and
security.
Furthermore, we must reaffirm our commitment
to the fight against impunity, in terms of both national
and complementary international actions. In that
regard, we wish to underscore the work accomplished
by the international tribunals established by the
Security Council and the work of the International
Criminal Court. In that context, we must ensure that
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes that affect
the international community as a whole are duly tried
and punished. As part of that task, the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court establishes the
fundamental role to be played by the Security Council.
All States must unambiguously adopt respective
measures with regard to the provisions of the Rome
Statute and the Charter of the United Nations in order
to respond to requests for cooperation and assistance
and to execute the arrest warrants issued by the Court.
I would like to address two fundamental aspects
in the field of strengthening the rule of law at the
international level, namely, the obligation of States to
refrain from the threat or use of force and the central
role of peaceful dispute settlement mechanisms. In
order to preserve future generations from the scourge
and consequences of war, States are compelled to
refrain from having recourse to the threat or use of
force in any manner that is incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations. That obligation means
that States are to resolve their disputes, including

26

Moreover, given the ongoing situations of
conflict, in particular those arising from the arms race,
the General Assembly adopted resolution 37/10 by
consensus on the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, in which it stated
that the referral of a case to the International Court of
Justice should not be deemed an unfriendly act
between States. The General Assembly subsequently
adopted the Declaration on the Prevention and
Removal of Disputes and Situations Which May
Threaten International Peace and Security and on the
Role of the United Nations in this Field (General
Assembly resolution 43/51). That resolution calls for
States to act so as to prevent in their international
relations the emergence or aggravation of disputes or
situations, in particular by fulfilling in good faith their
obligations under international law.
With regard to the International Court of Justice,
there are two factors that that this Council must always
bear in mind. On the one hand is recognition of the
Court’s contentious jurisdiction, and on the other, the
recognition of and full compliance with its rulings.
There is no doubt that those two factors, especially the
second, are a clear way of gauging the contribution and
commitment of States to the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as to the other
purposes of this Organization.
We should highlight that States are obligated to
implement the decisions of the International Court of
Justice in all disputes to which they are parties. That
was one of the main objectives that the General
Assembly entrusted to States in the framework of the
United Nations Decade of International Law, from
1990 to 1999, one of the principal objectives of which
was the promotion of ways and means for the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States, including
recourse to the International Court of Justice and full

12-20961

S/PV.6705

and unequivocal respect for and compliance with its
rulings.
The Secretary-General’s report entitled “An
Agenda for Peace” (S/24111), presented to both the
General Assembly and the Security Council,
recommended that all Member States accept the
general jurisdiction of the Court without reservation
before the end of 2000. However, to date only 66
States, including Peru, have submitted statements that
they recognize the compulsory jurisdiction of the
Court — although in a number of cases they have done
so with reservations. We therefore call on all States that
have not done so to recognize the Court’s jurisdiction
as soon as possible.
It is worth stressing that the ideal framework for
the full implementation of the rule of law is
democracy. We tend to distinguish between measures
intended to strengthen the rule of law on the
international level and on the internal level. However,
it is clear that that is an artificial dichotomy and that
actions have effects on both levels.
We recognize that many States are facing a
serious economic crisis, but that situation cannot be
used as a pretext for not carrying out or applying
measures to strengthen the rule of law. Such measures
constitute a mechanism that makes it possible to reduce
economic costs, to legitimize the actions of the State
and, more importantly, to prevent the loss of innocent
lives. International cooperation, at its various levels
and in its various methods of operation, must guide
those activities. To that end, we must strive to better
coordinate and streamline initiatives in this field in
order to use resources as efficiently as possible.
We wish to conclude by recognizing the efforts
that have been made in this undertaking by the Rule of
Law Assistance Unit and the Rule of Law Coordination
and Research Group. We look forward with optimism
to the high-level meeting to take place next September
alongside the general debate.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The year 2012
may well become the year of the rule of law at the
United Nations, not least because of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly to be held in
September. It is gratifying to see that the Security
Council pays corresponding attention.

12-20961

We agree that the Security Council is playing an
increasing role in promoting the rule of law and hope
that it will consider and follow the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/634*). We fully endorse his view that the
Council should adhere to basic rule-of-law principles
to ensure the legitimacy its actions. Indeed, the best
way for the Council to promote international law and
the rule of law is to lead by example. Such leadership
by example is required not only from the Council itself
but also from missions and operations mandated by it,
often with explicit mandates to support the rule-of-law
architecture in the respective host countries.
The importance of ensuring that United Nations
peacekeepers and other personnel operating in such
environments abide by applicable laws and do not
commit crimes themselves cannot be overstated. It
appears, however, that much remains to be done to
effectively prevent such crimes and to ensure that the
perpetrators are brought to justice. Repatriation alone
is insufficient to bring about accountability. Greater
efforts must be made to address this problem, and we
were disappointed to note an absence of any reference
to it in the report of the Secretary-General.
In recent years and decades we have seen an
enormous expansion of international mechanisms
promoting the rule of law, and criminal accountability
in particular, as evidenced most prominently by the
growing role of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
At the same time, it is evident, as well as in keeping
with the principle of complementarity enshrined in the
Rome Statute, that the domestic level holds the key for
sustainable progress. It must therefore be at the centre
of our attention and also a focus of Security Council
action. The Council should remind States of their
obligations to investigate and prosecute the most
serious crimes under international law and should
support efforts to strengthen domestic judicial
capacities, in particular by devising appropriate
mandates and structures for missions on the ground.
We are pleased to note the Secretary-General’s
commitment to work together with the ICC and donors
to enhance support to national authorities. The General
Assembly has repeatedly stressed the importance of
placing national perspectives at the centre of rule-oflaw support and capacity-building. We hope that the
high-level meeting in September will be an opportunity
to improve the coordination of those efforts.

27

S/PV.6705

The report rightly highlights commissions of
inquiry as an important tool to promote accountability.
At the same time, it appears that the United Nations
system often struggles to provide those commissions
with the necessary support. Given the wealth of
experience gained in recent years with such
undertakings, the time seems ripe to systematize and
professionalize support for commissions of inquiry, in
a manner similar to the Secretariat’s improvement of
its support for mediation activities.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
remind the Council and Member States of an important
development in international criminal law. The 2010
ICC Review Conference adopted by consensus a
definition of the crime of aggression for the purpose of
the Rome Statute, as well as the conditions under
which the Court may — no earlier than 2017 —
exercise jurisdiction over that crime. Once formally
activated, the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression will give the Council a new policy option
for addressing the most serious forms of the illegal use
of force in contravention of the Charter. In addition,
the definition of the act and crime of aggression can
already assist the Council, even now, in its
deliberations on the legality of the use of force.
The prospect of judicial enforcement of this most
central prohibition of the United Nations Charter
represents a significant advance for the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
order to bring this new system to full effect, States
should ratify the amendments on the crime of
aggression soon. Furthermore, they should also
incorporate the definition of the crime of aggression
into their national criminal codes, at least with respect
to their own nationals.
It is our hope that the outcome of today’s debate,
particularly the presidential statement, will have a
concrete impact on the Security Council’s future work
in country-specific situations and will make a
contribution to the preparatory process for the
September high-level meeting. The Council’s full
support for the rule of law is indeed indispensable for
the overall success of the United Nations in this area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first and foremost to congratulate the elected

28

members of the Security Council, who have joined the
Council this month, and to wish them every success.
My delegation welcomes the convening of this
debate. We welcome also the growing interest shown
by the Security Council in the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security. That initiative is
reflected in the broadest-ranging efforts of the
Organization, including in the convening of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly that is to take
place
in
September,
which
my
delegation
enthusiastically supports. We wish also to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/634*) on the
implementation of transitional justice measures in
conflict and post-conflict societies.
Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
Human Security Network and wishes to emphasize the
following elements.
The rule of law and legal certainty in every
country and in the international system are essential
elements for the sustainability of peace and security,
and for the protection and promotion of human rights,
as well as the promotion of development.
As stated in the ministerial declaration of the
Human Security Network of 23 September 2009, peace
and justice are interrelated and complementary.
Furthermore, the rule of law should not be viewed from
a merely procedural perspective as a matter of legal
norms. Rather, it should include the assurance that
justice is done from the most substantive point of view,
which, in the global arena, implies firm opposition to
impunity for the commission of serious violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights
norms.
We welcome the progress that has been made in
providing for the protection of persons, in particular
civilians, including women and children, when
addressing security-related issues. In its actions to
prevent and resolve conflicts and to help build and
maintain peace in specific situations on the ground, the
Council must sustain its efforts to make the rule of law
in the broader sense the linchpin of its resolutions and
mandates in a systematic and non-selective manner.
Furthermore, we encourage the Council to make
greater use of the information that is available within
the United Nations system regarding the human rights

12-20961

S/PV.6705

situation in the various countries of the world and to
establish channels for more open communication with
the Office of the High Commissioner and with other
human rights mechanisms that are relevant to the issue
we are considering today.
As they play an important role in ensuring respect
for and promotion of the rule of law, both the Council
and the United Nations system as a whole must also
adopt a more comprehensive approach to transitional
justice mechanisms and to the establishment of specific
programmes aimed at building national capacities. That
must go hand in hand with the rejection of initiatives
that seek to grant amnesty to the perpetrators of crimes
against humanity. A further essential undertaking is the
adoption of an approach that addresses transnational
organized crime in the context of programmes dealing
with the rule of law, as is reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General.
The Council has reiterated its commitment to an
international order that is based on the rule of law and
on international law. For that reason, in its daily and
concrete actions it must support the work of the
international tribunals. The Council must not fail to
recognize and encourage the contributions made by the
International Criminal Court; its commitments must
include the referral of situations whenever necessary,
as well as the provision of clear and resolute support
for the Court’s actions. That cooperation, on the part of
both the Council and the membership of the United
Nations, is particularly important in terms of the arrest
of suspects, an aspect that Costa Rica has repeatedly
underscored.
Furthermore, the Security Council must also
maintain its support for the International Court of
Justice, as the Court is one of the most significant
means used for the pacific settlement of disputes, in
particular when there is non-compliance with the
obligations stemming from the decisions adopted by
the Court, pursuant to Article 94 of the Charter.
Moreover, as a fundamental prerequisite for its
legitimacy, the actions of the tribunals, be they
international, regional or national, must also be subject
to law and free of any attempt at political
manipulation.
Like all the other organs of the multilateral
system, the Security Council must be subject to the
rule of law. As one of the earliest proponents within the
Council of respect for due process in the imposition of

12-20961

sanctions, in accordance with the regime established
under resolution 1267 (1999), Costa Rica welcomes the
progress that has been achieved in that area, in
particular through the establishment of the Office of
the Ombudsperson towards the end of 2009. However,
further changes must still be made in order to meet still
higher standards.
Finally, we believe that, above and beyond
sanctions regimes, when seeking to address new
security threats such as terrorism or piracy, the
Security Council must be particularly cautious in
ensuring that its actions remain governed by the
specific nature of the situation at hand and are timebound and restricted by the provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter. That will enable it to maintain its
legitimacy and better serve the cause of peace and
security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): It is my honour to speak on
behalf of the Human Security Network, an informal,
cross-regional group of States comprising Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand and Austria, and South
Africa as an observer.
At the outset, we want to thank the presidency for
having organized today’s open debate as well as the
Secretary-General for his presentation, and we would
like to express our support for the recommendations
contained in his report (S/2011/634*).
We welcome the Security Council’s important
role in enhancing the rule of law, which is central to
the people-centred, holistic approach to security
advocated by the Human Security Network. Clear and
foreseeable rules, respect for and adherence to those
rules and an effective rules-based multilateral system
to prevent and sanction violations are preconditions for
lasting international peace and security. We encourage
the Council to use the tools at its disposal to ensure
respect for international law and to respond to grave
violations in a systematic and consistent manner.
While the primary responsibility for investigating
and prosecuting international crimes lies with States,
and domestic justice systems are the first resort in the
pursuit of accountability, the international community,
including the Council, undeniably has a key role in
addressing such crimes and in ensuring accountability.

29

S/PV.6705

Possible measures at the Council’s disposal are diverse
and include referrals of situations to the International
Criminal Court, as with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya; the
imposition of targeted measures; the establishment of
accountability mechanisms; the mandating of
commissions of inquiry; and, more generally,
mandating support for the rule of law and the
strengthening of justice and security institutions in
peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, let me also mention the great
importance that the Human Security Network attaches
to the role of the Council in the protection of women
and children. We are pleased with the work undertaken
by the Security Council in progressively strengthening
the protection framework for children affected by
armed conflict, as well as with its efforts to prevent
and combat sexual violence.
We would like to underline the importance of
capacity-building for State institutions and transitional
justice approaches that are victim-centred and gendersensitive in order to ensure that the rights of victims, in
particular of women and children, are fully respected
and their interests taken into account.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for further attention by the Council to
the rights of victims to reparations. Of the four pillars
of transitional justice, reparation is the one that most
lacks concrete implementation. Over the past two
decades, the Council has supported the development of
national and international judicial mechanisms, the
creation of truth commissions and the implementation
of institutional reforms needed to prevent further
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We encourage the Council also to
give more attention to the question of reparation.
Reparation programmes, as underlined in General
Assembly resolution 60/147, on reparations, are not
limited to monetary compensation but can also include
symbolic measures, such as social services and
psychological care, that can make an important
contribution to the reconciliation of divided societies,
as well as help to address the economic and social
justice dimensions of the root causes of conflict.
Last but not least, the Human Security Network
would like to express its full support for the new
Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence, whose

30

mandate was recently established by a consensual
resolution of the Human Rights Council. That reflects a
clear acknowledgement that accountability, along with
truth-seeking processes, reparations and institutional
reforms as a means of advancing human security, must
be an integral part of the United Nations transitional
justice efforts. We envision that the new Special
Rapporteur will be able to contribute to a more
comprehensive approach to justice and rule of law
related issues, and hope that the Secretary-General will
take into account, as appropriate, the work of relevant
special procedures within the United Nations system in
his next report presented to the Council on this issue.
Allow me now to address to Council in my
national capacity. It goes without saying that Austria
aligns itself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
The recent events in the Arab world show the
timeliness of discussing the rule of law and transitional
justice. Accountability for serious international crimes
is a crucial aspect of that. Austria therefore calls for
full cooperation by all States with international and
hybrid tribunals established by the United Nations or
with its support. Moreover, all States must abide by
and implement the resolutions adopted by the Council
under Chapter VII, in particular when urged to fully
cooperate with the International Criminal Court,
including with regard to the arrest and surrender of
suspected perpetrators.
Rule of law and transitional justice activities are
now increasingly integrated into Security Council
resolutions. For example, resolution 1894 (2009), on
the protection of civilians, highlighted the importance
of a comprehensive approach to transitional justice
initiatives and acknowledged the important role of
accountability mechanisms, as well as national
reparation programmes for victims, in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
As emphasized in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/634*) to the Council on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies, all rule of law programmes and transitional
justice mechanisms have to be planned and
implemented in a manner sensitive to the specific
needs and rights of women and children. Evaluations
of the specific impact of transitional justice measures
on marginalized groups of society should be conducted
on a more systematic basis. In view of the unique and

12-20961

S/PV.6705

disproportionate effects of conflict on women and
children, we must enhance our efforts to ensure
women’s access to justice. We also need to provide for
minimum standards for the participation of children in
transitional justice mechanisms. For children who have
been associated with armed groups, for example, the
focus should be on non-judicial, restorative
accountability mechanisms that take the child’s interest
into account, as well as on socio-economic
reintegration.

Allow me to conclude by pointing to the highlevel meeting on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, to be held in September. The
meeting could, and should, provide the ideal
opportunity for the launch of a new inclusive global
dialogue forum that brings together all relevant
stakeholders — national authorities, multilateral
bodies, regional organizations, civil society and the
private sector — and help to consolidate the currently
fragmented approach to rule of law assistance.

Furthermore, the report rightly highlights the
need for the Security Council itself to adhere to basic
rule of law principles to ensure the legitimacy of its
actions. In that regard, Austria welcomes the
substantial improvements of the procedures within the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime, including the recent
strengthening of the Office of the Ombudsperson, and
encourages the Council to further broaden and enhance
due process, including with regard to other sanctions
regimes.

Finally, I would once again like to thank South
Africa for convening today’s meeting. We call on the
Security Council to hold open debates on the rule of
law on a regular basis in the future.

12-20961

The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list. Given the lateness of
the hour, I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

31
