General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

6

7. Invites Member States, the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the nongovernmental organizations co!1cer~ed to m~ke availab~e
to the Committee, as appropriate, mformatton on their
plans and intentions for the International Co-operation
Year;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account United Nations participation in the International
Co-operation Year, to provide within existing budgetary limits all necessary facilities for promoting and
carrying forward the International Co-operation Year ;
9. Requests the Committee to submit an interim
report to the General Assembly at its nineteenth session.
1262nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1963 ..

•

•

•

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 5 of tlze above resolution, appointed the members
of the Committee for the International Co-operation Year.
The Committee will be composed of the following Member
States: ARGENTINA, CANADA, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC,
CEYLON, CYPRUS, CzECHOSLOVAKIA, FINLAND, INDIA, IRELAND,
LIBERIA, MEXICO

and UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC.

1949 (XVIll). Question of Aden
The General Assembly,
Having considered the part of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa~ion with regard ~o the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of Aden, 6
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 and 1810
(XVII) of 17 December 1962,
Bearing in mind the unanimous desire, expressed _to
the Sub-Committee on Aden, for an early end of colomal
domination,
Considering the strong desire of the population for
the unity of the Territory,
Deeply concerned at the deteriorating situation in the
Territory, the continuation of w?ich is !ikely to lead to
serious unrest and to threaten international peace and
security,
Convinced of the necessity of consulting the people
of the Territory at the earliest possible time,
1. Approves the report of the Special Co~mittee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, and endorses th. conclusions
and recommendations of the Sub-Committee on Aden;
2. Expresses deep regret at the refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to co-operate with the Sub-Committee
on Aden, particularly its refusal to allow the SubCommittee to go to the Territory in pursuance of the
tasks entrusted to it by the Special Committee ;
3. Endorses the resolutions adopted by the Special
Committee on 3 May7 and 19 July 1963 ;8
4. Reaffirms the right of the i:eople of the Territory
to self-determination and fr~edom from colonial rule
e Ibid., addendum to ager:i~. item 23, document A/5446/Rev.1,
chapter V.
1 Ibid., chapter V, ?,'iJendix, para. 6.
8 Jbid., chapter V, ,,ara. 478.

in accordance with the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples;
5. Considers that the maintenance of the military
base in Aden is prejudicial to the security of the region
and that its early removal is therefore desirable;
6. Recommends that the people of Aden and the
Aden Protectorate should be aJlowed to exercise their
right to self-determination with regard to their future,
the exercise of that right to take the form of a consultation of the whole population, to be held as soon
as possible on the basis of universal adult suffrage;
7. Calls 1tpon the administering Power:
(a) To repeal all the laws which restrict public
freedoms;
( b) To release all political prisoners and detainees
and those who have been sentenced following actions
of political significance;
( c) To aJlow the return of those people who have
been exiled or forbidden to reside in the Territory
because of political activities;
( d) To cease forthwith aJI repressive action against
the people of the Territory, in particular military expeditions and the bombing of villages;
8. Further calls upon the administering Power to
make the necessary constitutional changes with a view
to establishing a representative organ and setting up
a provisional government for the whole of the Territory
in accordance with the wishes of the population, such
legislative organ and government to be constituted
follow:ing general elections to be held on the basis of
nniversal adult suffrage and with full respect for
fundamental human rights and freedoms;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee and the administering
Power, to arrange for an effective United Nations
presence before and during the elections referred to in
parag-raph 8 above;
10. Recomm!'nds that these elections should be held
before the attainment of independence, which will be
granted in accordance with the freely expressed wishes
of the inhabitants ;
11. Recommends that conversations should be opened
without delay between the government resulting from
the elections mentioned above and the administering
Power, for the purpose of fixing the date for the
granting of independence and the arrangements for the
transfer of power ;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the administering Power and to
report to the Special Committee on its implementation ;
13. Requests the Special Committee to examine again
the situation in Aden and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1950 (XVIII). Question of Malta
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1%0,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Commiltee

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Malta, 9
Noting that constitutional progress has been achieved
in the Territory of Malta,
1. Notes with satisfaction that Malta will attain
independence not later than 31 May 1964;
2. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Malta's accession to independence and that the
Territory will become an independent State not later
than the date referred to in paragraph 1 above ;
3. Invites the administering Power to take the necessary measures for the transfer of powers, not later
than 31 May 1964, to the people of Malta, in accordance
with their will and desire ;
4. Congratulates the Governments of Malta and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
on the steps taken towards the achievement of the aims
set out in the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1951 (XVIII). Question of Fiji
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 and 1810
(XVII) of 17 December 1962, and in particular paragraph 5 of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, contained
in resolution 1514 (XV), which provides that:
"Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and NonSelf-Governing Territories or all other territories
which have not yet attained independence, to transfer
all powers to the peoples of those territories, without
any conditions or reservations, in accordance with
their freely expressed will and desire, without any
distinction as to race, creed or colour, in order to
enable them to enjoy complete independence and
freedom",
Having considered the part of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Fiji, 10
Having heard a statement by the representative of the
administering Power,
Noting with regret that the administering Power has
still taken no effective steps to transfer all powers to
the people of Fiji in conformity with paragraph 5 of
resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting further that the Constitution of Fiji, in particular those sections governing the electoral system
and the composition and functions of the Legislative
and Executive Councils of Fiji, is not based on generally
accepted democratic principles,
1. Affirms the inalienable right of the people of Fiji
to self-determination and national independence in conformity with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Invites the administering Power :
(a) To work out, together with the representatives
of the people of Fiji, a new constitution providing for
t Ibid., chapter VI.
10 Ibid.,

chapter VII.

7

free elections conducted on the principle of "one man,
one vote" and the creation of representative institutions;
( b) To take immediate steps for the transfer of all
power to the people of the Territory, in accordance with
their freely expressed will and desire and without any
conditions or reservations;
( c) To endeavour, with the co-operation of the
people of Fiji, to achieve the political, economic and
social integration of the various communities.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1952 (XVIll). Question of Northern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Northern Rhodesia, 11
Noting the statement on recent constitutional developments in Northern Rhodesia made by the administering
Power on 4 December 1963,12
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Northern Rhodesia to self-determination and independence;
·
2. Notes with satisfaction that elections for the new
Legislative Council will be held in January 1964;
3. Expresses the hope that Northern Rhodesia will
achieve its independence in the nearest possible future,
a~d requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the newly elected Government of Northern Rhodesia, to fix a date for the independence of the Territory;
4. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Northern Rhodesia's accession to independence
and that the Territory will become an independent
State not later than thP. date referred to in paragraph 3
above.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1953 (XVIll). Question of Nyasaland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Nyasaland, 13
Noting that constitutional progress has been achieved
in Nyasaland,
1. Notes with satisfaction that Nyasaland will attain
independence not later than 6 July 1964;
2. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Nyasaland's accession to independence and that
the Territory will become an independent State not
later than the date referred to in paragraph 1 above;
11 lbid.,

12 !bid.,

chapter VIII, section A.
Eighteenth Session, Plenary

Meetings, 1273rd
meetmg.
. 13 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23, document A/5446/Rev.1, chapter VIII, section B.
