reaffirm your role as guarantor of an objective and impartial
referendum and expect any difficulties with the compromise to be
resolved by early 1994.

"They understand the reasons that led you to postpone the
publication of the report pursuant to resolution 809 (1993) of 2
March 1993, and they welcome your decision to visit the region in
the first week of June. The members of the Council also welcome
the establishment of the Identification Commission and hope it will
complete its work as soon as possible. They express the hope that
you will submit a report including recommendations concerning the
organization of the referendum as well as the possible adjustments
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara at the earliest possible date after the completion of your visit
to the region, in order to respect the time-frame set out in resolution
809 (1993)."

"While regretting that the timetable suggested in resolution 809
(1993)of2 March 1993 cannot be maintained, the members of the
Council support your goals of presenting a report to the Council early
next year and holding the referendum no later than mid-1994. They
underline the crucial importance they attach to these goals.
"The members of the Council confirm the full confidence they
place in you and your Special Representative for a speedy settlement
of the situation concerning Western Sahara in conformity with the
settlement plan and with relevant resolutions of the Council. They
urge both parties to cooperate fully with you and your Special
Representative to that end."

In a letter dated 4 August 1993,8 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"The members of the Security Council welcome your report of 28
July 1993 on the situation concerning Western Sahara. 9
"The members of the Council fully support your efforts to make
early progress on the preparations for holding the referendum in
accordance with resolution 809 (1993) of2 March 1993. They note
that the Identification Commission has now begun preparatory work.
They welcome the reaffirmation by the two parties of their commitment to the implementation of the peace plan in its entirety and, in
particular, their encouraging responses to your compromise proposal
concerning the interpretation and application of the criteria and their
determination to work towards an early referendum.

THE SITUATION IN CAMBODIA 1
Decision

"The members of the Council agree that the holding of direct talks
between the two parties in Laayoune from 17 to 19 July 1993 is a
positive development and share your hope that talks will soon
resume.

At its 3181 st meeting, on 8 March 1993, the Council discussed the
item entitled "The situation in Cambodia: report of the SecretaryGeneral on the im~lementation of Security Council resolution 792
(1992) (S/25289)".

"The members of the Council reiterate their support for your
renewed efforts to resolve outstanding issues so that an early
referendum may be held, and hope they will soon receive your full
report in this regard."

Resolution 810 (1993)
eU M■rch 1993

The Security Council,

In a letter dated 6 December 1993,' 0 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

Reaffirming its resolutions 668 (1990) of20 September 1990 and
745 (1992) of28 February 1992 and other relevant resolutions,

"The members of the Security Council welcome your report of24
November 1993 11 and fully subscribe to the observations it contains.
They also welcome the progress already achieved in narrowing the
differences between the two parties.

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 13 February
1993,3
Paying tribute to His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
Chairman of the Supreme National Council, for his continuing efforts
to restore peace and national unity in Cambodia,

"The members of the Council further agree that your compromise
proposal referred to in paragraph 27 of your report is a sound
framework for determining potential participation in the referendum
for self-determination of the people of Western Sahara as foreseen
in the settlement plan. 3 They welcome your determination to move
ahead and proceed with voter registration and identification. They

Recalling that under the agreements on a comprehensive political
settlement to the Cambodia conflict signed in Paris on 23 October
1991 4 the Cambodian people have the right to determine their own

S/26239.
1
Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1990, 1991 and 1992.

9

Official Records of the Sec11rity Cou11cil, Forty-eighth
Year, Suppleme11tfor J11lv, A11gust and September 1993, document
S/26185.
10

2
See Official Records o[d,e Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplemelltfor January, February and Marci, 1993.

S/26848.
Ibid., document S/25289.

11

Official Records of the Security Co1111cil, Forty-eighth
Year, S11ppleme111 for October, November a11d December ]~93,
document S/26797.

4
lbid.,Forty-si:rth Year, S11pp/emet11forOctober, Novem•
ber and December 199 J, document S/23177, annex.

91

political future through the free and fair election of a constituent
assembly, which will draft and approve a new Cambodian constitution
and transform itself into a legislative assembly, which will create the
new Cambodian government,

1. Urges all Cambodian parties to help create in the minds of their
followers tolerance for peaceful political competition and to ensure
adherence to the code of conduct during the forthcoming political
campaign;

Welcomi,ig the achievements of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia in the implementation of the Paris agreements, in particular regarding voter registration
and refugee repatriation, and reaffirming its continuing support for the
activities of the Authority,

8. Urges in particular all Cambodian parties to take all necessary
measures to ensure freedom of speech, assembly and movement, as
well as fair access to the media, including the press, television and
radio, for all registered political parties during the electoral campaign
starting on 7 April 1993, and to take all necessary steps to reassure the
Cambodian people that the balloting for the election will be secret;

Welcoming the decision taken by the Supreme National Council at
its meeting on 10 February 1993 to adopt a moratorium on the export
of minerals and gems and to consider limits on the export of sawn
timber from Cambodia in order to protect Cambodia's natural resources,

9. Demands that all Cambodian parties take the necessary measures
to put an end to all acts of violence and to all threats and intimidation
committed on political or ethnic grounds, and urges all those parties to

cooperate with the Authority's Special Prosecutor's Office in investigations of such acts;

Deploring the violations of the cease-fire by the Party of Democratic
Kampuchea and the Party of the State of Cambodia,

10.
Expresses its.full confidence in the ability of the Authority to
conduct an election that is free and fair and its readiness to endorse the
results of the election provided that the United Nations certifies it free
and fair;

Concerned by the increasing number of acts of violence perpetrated
on political grounds, in particular in areas under the control of the Party
of the State of Cambodia, and on ethnic grounds, and by the negative
implications of such acts for the implementation of the Paris agreements,

11.
Calls on all Cambodian parties to abide by their commitment
under the agreements on a comprehensive political settlement to the
Cambodia conflict signed in Paris on 23 October 1991 4 to respect those
results;

Underlining the importance of measures by the Authority in order
to ensure a neutral political environment in Cambodia,
Condem11i11g attacks, threats and intimidation against the Authority,
in particular the recent detention of Authority personnel,

12.
Recognizes that the Cambodians themselves bear primary
responsibility for the implementation of the Paris agreements and for
the future stability and well-being of Cambodia;

Deploring the failure of the Party of Democratic Kampuchea to meet
its obligations under the Paris agreements, notably as regards unrestricted access by the Authority to the areas under its control and as
regards the application of phase II of the cease-fire, and urging the party
concerned to join fully in the implementation of the Paris agreements,

13.
Recognizes in particular that the Cambodians have the
responsibility, after the election for the constituent assembly, to agree
on a constitution and to create a government within three months, and
emphasizes the importance of completing that task on time;

Expressing strong co,icern at recent reports by the Authority of a
small number of foreign military personnel serving with the armed
forces of the Party of the State of Cambodia in violation of the Paris
agreements, calling on all parties to cooperate fully with Authority
investigations of reports of foreign forces within the territory under
their control, and emphasizing the importance of the immediate
removal of all foreign forces, advisers and military personnel from
Cambodia,

14.
Expresses its readiness to support fully the constituent
assembly and the process of drawing up a constitution and establishing
a new government for all Cambodia;
15.
Takes note of the remarks of the Secretary-General in
paragraph 44 of his report concerning the security situation in Cambodia during the period between the election for the constituent assembly
and the end of the mandate of the Authority upon the creation of a
government, and welcomes his intention to submit recommendations
in that connection;

1. Approves the report of the Secretary-General of 13 February
1993;3

16.
Commemuthe decision of the Supreme National Council at
its meeting on 10 February 1993 to adopt measures for the protection
of Cambodia's natural resources, and supports steps taken by the
Technical Advisory Committee on Management and Sustainable
Exploitation of Natural Resources to implement these decisions;

2. Endorses the decision by the Supreme National Council that the
election for the constituent assembly shall be held from 23 to 27 May
1993;
3. U11der/i11es the crucial importance of national reconciliation for
the attainment oflasting peace and stability in Cambodia;

17.
Reiterates its demand that all parties honour in full their
obligations under the Paris agreements, in particular to desist from all
offensive military activity;

4. Urges all Cambodian parties to cooperate fully with the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia in the preparation and
holding of the election for the constituent assembly;

18.
Demands that all parties take all action necessary to
safeguard the lives and the security of Authority personnel throughout
Cambodia, and desist from all threats or intimidation against Authority
personnel and from any interference with them in the performance of
their mandate;

5. Expresses its satisfaction at the extent of voter registration;
6. Calls 011 the Authority to continue to make every effort to create

and maintain a neutral political environment conducive to the holding
of free and fair elections, and requests the Secretary-General to inform

19.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council in the
context of his fourth progress report in April 1993 on the implementation of the present resolution and on any further measures that may be

the Security Council by 15 May 1993 of the conditions and preparations for the election;

92

tional Authority in Cambodia6 has been brought to the attention of
the members of the Council. They endorse the proposal contained in
your letter."

necessary and appropriate to ensure the realization of the fundamental
objectives of the Paris agreements;
20.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
At its 3213th meeting, on 20 May 1993, the Council discussed the
item entitled:

Adopted unanimously at the 3181st meeting.

"The situation in Cambodia:

Decisions

"Fourth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (S/25719); 8

At its 3193rd meeting, on 5 April 1993, the Council discussed the
item entitled "The situation in Cambodia"

"Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of ~aragraph 6 of
Security Council resolution 810 ( 1993) (S/25784 )".
At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier among
members of the Council, the President made the following statement
on behalfofthe Council: 5

Resolution 826 (1993)
of20 May 1993

"The Security Council strongly condemns all attacks on the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC),
particularly the recent attacks which have resulted in the death of
two Bangladeshi members of UNIAC and the cowardly assassination of three members of the Bulgarian contingent of UNIAC on 2
April 1993.

The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolutions 668 ( 1990) of 20 September 1990, 745
(1992) of28 February 1992, 810 (1993) of8 March 1993 and other
relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General of 3 May 1993 9
and 15 May 1993,1°

"The Council expresses its strong support for UNTAC in carrying
out its mandate within the framework of the Paris agreements. It
demands that all hostile acts against UNTAC cease immediately and
that all parties take measures to safeguard the lives and the security
ofUNTAC personnel.

Expressing its strong support for the almost five million Cambodians who, in spite of violence and intimidation, have registered to vote
in the election of a constituent assembly, and have broadly and actively
participated in the electoral campaign,

"It expresses its condolences to the Governments of Bangladesh
and Bulgaria and to the families of the victims; it pays tribute to the
latter for their courage and dedication. It requests the SecretaryGeneral to report urgently to the Council on the circumstances of
these murderous acts and the responsibility for them.

Recognizing the great importance of His Royal Highness Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, Chairman of the Supreme National Council,
continuing his invaluable efforts in Cambodia to achieve national
reconciliation and restore peace,

"The Council also expresses its detennination that the election for

l. Approves the reports of the Secretary-General of 3 May 1993 9 and
15 May 1993;10

the constituent assembly should be held on the dates decided by the
Supreme National Council and endorsed by the Security Council in
its resolution 810 (1993) of 8 March 1993. In this respect, the
Council stresses the importance of ensuring a neutral political
environment in Cambodia, as well as the cessation of acts of violence
and of all threats and intimidation committed on political or ethnic
grounds."

2. Expresses its satisfaction with the arrangements made by the
United Nations for the conduct of the election for the constituent
assembly in Cambodia described in the report of the Secretary-General
ofl5May1993;
3. Demands that all the parties abide by the agreements on a
comprehensive political settlement to the Cambodia conflict signed in
Paris on 23 October 1991 4 and give the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia the full cooperation required under them;

In a letter dated 12 May 1993,6 addressed to the President of the
Security Council for the attention of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General, having completed the necessary consultations,
proposed that Namibia be added to the list of Member States contributing military personnel to the United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia.

4. Commends those participating in the election campaign in
accordance with the Paris agreements despite the violence and
intimidation in order that the Cambodian people may have an opportunity to choose freely their own government;

In a letter dated 13 May 1993,7 the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General as follows:

5. Deplores all acts of non-cooperation with the Paris agreements
and condemns all acts of violence committed on political and ethnic
grounds, intimidation and attacks on Authority personnel;

"I have the honour to infonn you that your letter dated 12 May
1993 concerning the addition of one country to the list of Member
States contributing military personnel to the United Nations Transi-

See Official Records efthe Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year. Supplement for April, May and June I 993.
8

S/25530.
S/25770.

Ibid., document S/25719.

S/25771.

Ibid., document S/25784.
93
