44

General Assembly--Twentieth Session

General 21 and the observations received from ( ;overnments22 in accordance with (;encral Assembly resolution 1960 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963, so that at
the twenty-first session of the Assembly Member States
will be in a position to complete the preparation of
the <lraft International Covenants on Human Rights.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.

2081 (XX). International Year for Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 designating the year 1968 as International
Year for Human Rights,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human
l< ights has been an instrnment of the highest importance
for the protection and promotion of the rights of individuals and the furtherance of peace and stability,
Convinced that its role in the future will be of equal
significance,
Considering that the further promotion and development of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms contributes to the strengthening of peace
throughout the world and to friendship between peoples,
Considering that racial discrimination, and in particular the policy of apartheid. constitutes one of the
most flagrant abuses of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and that persistent and intense efforts must be
made to secure its abandonment,
Reaffirming the belief that the cause of human rights
will be well served by an increasing awareness of the
extent of the progress made, and the conviction that
the year 1968 should be devoted to intensified national
and international efforts and undertakings in the field
of human rights and also to an international review
of the achievements in this field,
Stressing the importance of further development and
implementation in practice of the principles of the
protection of human rights laid down in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination,
Convinced that an intensifica~ion of efforts in the
intervening years will heighten the progress that can
he made by 1968,
Convinced further that the proposed international
review of progress in the field of human rights can
advantageously be carried out hy means of an international conference,
Noting the interim programme of measures and activities to be undertaken in connexion with the International Year for Human Rights and in celebration of
the twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, recommended by the Commission on
Human Right~ and set out in the annex to the present
resolution,
Noting further that the Commission on Human
Rights is C'Ontinuing the preparation of a programme
of observances, measures and activities to he undertaken in 1968,
21 Ibid., Eigliteenth Session, Annexes, agen<la item 48, document A/5411.
22 !Ind., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 65, dornments A/5702 and Add.I.

1. Calls uf'on St;ites Members of the United Natiom
and mcmlwrs of the specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations, tlw specialized agencies
;md the national and international organizations con-·
cerned to devote the vear 1968 to intensified efforts and
undertakings in the· tie Id of human rights. including
an international reYiew of achievements in this field;
2. Urges Member States to take appropriate measures in preparation for the International Year for
Human Rights. and in particubr to emphasize the
urgent need to eliminate discrimination and othe1·
violations of human dignity, with special attention to
the aholition of racial discrimination and in particular
tlw policy of apartheid;
3. lm,1ifes all Member States to ratify before 1%R
the Conventions alreadv concluded in the fit>ld of human
rights, ancl in particul;r the following:
Snpplementary Convention on the Aholitinn oi
Slavery, the Slave Trade and Tnstit11tions :md
Practices Similar to Slavery;
fnternational Labonr Organisation Convention concerning the Abolition of Forced l .ahour;
International Labour Organisation Convention concerning Discrimination in respect of Fmployment
and Occupation;
International I ,abour Organisation Convention concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and \Vomen
\Vorkers for \Vork of Equal Value;
f nternational Labour Organisation Convention concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of
the Right to Organize ;
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultnral
Organization Convrntion against Disnimination in
Education;
Convention on the Preventinn :md Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide :
Convention on the Political Rights of Women;
International Convention on the Elimimtion of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Decides to hasten the conclusion of the following
draft conventions so that they may be open for ratification and accession if possible hefore 1968:
Draft Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
Draft Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights;
Draft International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Religious Intolerance;
Draft Convention on Freedom of Information;
5. Decides to complete by 1968 the consideration and
preparation of the draft declarations which have been
approved by the Commission on Human Rights and
hy the Commission on the Status of Women;
6. Approves the interim programme of measures and
activities envisaged for the United Nations annexed to
the present resolution and requests the SecretaryGeneral to proceed with the arrangements for the measures to be undertaken by the United Nations set out
in the annex;
7. Invites Member States to consider, in connexion
with the International Year for Human Rights, the
possible advantage of undertaking, on a regional basis,
common studies in order to estahlish more effective
protection of human rights ;
8. Invites regional inter-governmental organizations
with competence in the field to provide the international
conference envisaged for 1968 with full information

45

Resolutions adopted on the· reports 0£ the Third Committee

(a) Review the progress which has been made in
the field of human rights since the adoption of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
( b) Evaluate the effectiveness of the methods used
by the United Nations in the field of human rights,
especially with respect to the elimination of all forms
of racial discrimination and the practice of the policy
of apartheid ;
( c) Formulate and prepare a programme of further
measures to be taken subsequent to the celebrations of
the International Year for Human Rights;
14. Decides to establish, in consultation with the
Commission on Human Rights, a Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Human
Rights, consisting of seventeen members, to complete
the preparation for the Conference in 1968 and, in
particular, to make proposals for the consideration of
the General Assembly regarding the agenda, duration
and venue of the Conference, and the means of defraying the expenses of the Conference, and to organize
and direct the preparation of the necessary evaluation
st11dies and other documentation :
l ~- Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint the members of the Preparatory Committee,
eight of whom shall be States represented on the Commission on Human Rights and two of whom shall be
States represented on the Commission on the Status
of \Vomen:
16. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint an
Executive Secretary for the Conference from within
the :,.;ecretariat an(] to provide the Preparatory Comrnittee with all necessary a,sistance;
17. l?rquests tht Preparatory Committee to report
on the progress of the preparation in order that such
rtpnrts might ht considered by the General Asstmblv
;1t its twtnty-First and twtnty-stcond sessions.
1401th plenary meeting,
20 Drcember 100::. .

011 their accomplishments, programmes and other meas-

ures to realize protection of human rights;
9. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women
to participate and co-operate at every stage in the
preparatory work for the International Year for H ttman
Rights;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution and the interim programme annexed
thereto to States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies
and the interested international organizations;
11. R.ecommends that, in view of the historic importance of the observance of the International Year
for Human Rights, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization should be urged
to mobilize the finest resources of culture and art in
order to lend the International Year for Human Rights,
through literature, music, dance, cinema, television and
all other forms and media of communication, a truly
nniversal character ;
·
12. Commends to the States, regional inter-governmental organizations, agencies and organizations mentioned in paragraph 10 above the programme of measures and activities set out in the annex to the present
resolution and invites their co-operation and participation in this programme with a view to making the
eelehrations successful and meaningful ;
13. Decides that, to promote further the principles
contained in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, to develop and guarantee political, civil, economic, social and cultural rights and to end all discrimination and denial of human rights and fundamental
freedoms on grounds of race, colour, sex, language or
religion, and in particular to permit the elimination of
apartheid, an International Conference on Human
Rights should he ronvrned during 1968 in order to:

•

•

•

Th,· President of the Cnzrral Assembly, in p11n11anre of para_qraph 15 of tliF ah>,','
resolution, apf>ointl'd the mn11bers of the Preparatory Committee for the [nlernatio11al
Co11ferenre on Ilunwn Rights.23
Thr Preparatory C 01n111iller will be rompoud of the fnllowinr, tfrmber Starrs:
'f7RAN'1•:,

INlllA,

IRAN,

S1n1ALIA,

TuN1s1A,

UNJON

JlRITA]N AND :°'JORTHERN

23 Ibid.,

ITALY,
OF

J.~:-IAICA,
SovIET

TREI AND,

NF,W

ZEALAND,

SoC'IALIST

l{EPUBLICS,

PHILIPPINES,

UNITED

UNITEII STATES OF AMERICA,

K1N<;uo~1

URUG\TAY

CAN ADA,

1'01,ANll,
oF

GRE.\T

and Yu,;oSLA\'I,\,

Twentieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1408th meeting, para. 179.

ANNEX
International Year for Human Rights: interim programmf'
reeomme·nded by the Commission of Human Rights

mental freedoms of the individual and of human rights every•
where''. The aim should be to dramatize universal respect for
and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms
for a11, without distindion as to race, sex, languag<" or religion.

L Tn E THEME OF CEREMONIES, ACTIVITIES A Nn CELEBRATION s2·1
Tt is recommended that the programme of measures and

activities to be undertaken throughout the International Year
for Human Rights should be calculated to encourage, on as
wicle a basis as possible, both nationally and internationally,
the protection of human rig-hts and fundamental freedoms and
to bring home to all the people the breadth of the concept
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in all its aspects.
The theme of the ceremonies, activities and celebrations shoulr!
be: "Greater recognition and full enjoyment of the funda2 4 See

NIGERIA,

E/CN.4/886, paras. 46-52.

II. A

YEAR

OF

ACT1VITJES 2 J

It is agreed that all the participants in the celebrations sho11l,I
1,e invited to devote the year 1968 as a whole to activities.

ccremunies and observances relating to the question of human
rights, International or regional seminars, national conferences,
lectures and discussions on the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and on other declarations and instruments of the
United Nations relating to human rights, may be organized
throughout the year. Some countries will wish to stress the
entir(' content of the Declaration, as further elaborate,! in
2~ Ibid.,

paras 53-58.

46

General A88embly-Twentieth Se88ion

later United Nations human rights programmes. Some participating countries may wish to emphasize, during particular
periods of the International Year for Human Rights, rights
and freedoms in connexion with which they have faced special
problems. During each such period the Governments would
review, against the standards set by the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and other declarations and instruments of
the United Nations relating to human rights, the domestic
legislation and the practices within their society in respect
of the particular right or freedom which is the subject of that
period's observances. They would assess the extent to which
the right had been effectively secured, give publicity to it
and make special efforts to promote among their citizens a
basic understanding of its nature and significance, so that the
gains already made might not easily be lost in the future. To
the extent that the right or freedom had not yet been effectively secured, every effort would be made during the period
towards its achievement. In the choice of subjects, priority
could of course be given to rights of a civil and political
character and to those of an economic, social and cultural
character.
A. Measures to be undertaken by the United Nations in the
period prior to the beginning of the International Year for
Human Rights
1. E limin.ation of certain practices26

Believing that certain practices which constitute some of the
grosser forms of the denial of human rights still persist within
the territories of some Member States, the Commission on
Human Rights recommends that the United Nations should
adopt and set before the Member States, as a target to be
achieved by the end of 1968, the complete elimination of the
following violations of human rights:
(a) Slavery, the slave trade, institutions and practices
similar to slavery, and forced labour ;
( b) All forms of discrimination based on race, sex, language,
religion, political or other opinion, national, social or ethnic
origin, property, birth or other status ;
(c) Colonialism and the denial of freedom and independence.

Z. Intern.ational measures for the protection and guarantee of
human rights27
Measures for the effective implementation of the rights and
freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other declarations and instruments of the United
Nations relating to human rights have been under consideration
in the United Nations for many years. The Commission on
Human Rights is confident that action on the draft Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the draft Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and measures of implementation, and on 'the other conventions or international agreements in the field of human rights listed in the draft resolution
prepared by the Commission in 1964 for consideration by the
General Assembly, will be completed before the beginning
of the International Year for Human Rights. If, however, by
the beginning of 1968, international machinery for the effective
implementation of these covenants and conventions or international agreements does not form part of the instruments adopted,
international measures for the guarantee or protection of human
rights should be a subject of serious study during the International Year for Human Rights.

B. Measures to be undertaken by Member States in the period
prior to the beginning of the International Year for Human
Rights
1. Review of national legislation28
Governments are invited to review their national legislation
against the standards of the Universal Declaration of Human
2 6 Ibid., paras. 73-77; see also Official Reco1·ds of the Economic
and Social Council, Thirty-ninth Session. Supplement No. 8
(E/4024), paras. 424 and 425.
27 See E/CN.4/886, paras. 93-99.
28 Ibid., paras. 116-120.

Rights and other declarations and instruments of the United
Nations relating to human rights, and to consider the enactment of new, or the amending of existing, laws to bring their
legislation into conformity with the principles of the Declaration
and other declarations and instruments of the United Nations
relating to human rights.
2. Machinery for implementation on the national leve/ 29

All Member States are invited, as one of the measures they
will undertake in connexion with the International Year for
Human Rights, to establish or refine, if necessary by the end
of 1968, their national machinery for giving effect to the fundamental rights and freedoms. If, for example, within any
Member States, arrangements do not exist which will enable
individual persons or groups of persons to bring before independent' national tribunals or authorities any complaints they
may have concerning the violation of their human rights
and obtain effective remedies, the Member State should hl'
invited to undertake that such arrangements will be introduced.
If such arrangements already exist, the Member States should
be invited to undertake to refine and improve them. This is
not a recommendation that any particular improvement in
machinery should be introduced. In one set of circumstances,
what may be needed is the establishment of a special court;
in another, the appointment of an Ombudsman or Procurator
General or similar official; and in still another, simply the setting up of offices to which individual citizens may bring their
complaints. The determination as to what machinery or improvement in machinery is rpquired for giving effect to the
fundamental rights and freedoms would be within the sole
discretion of the Government concerned.

3. National programme of education on human rights8°
Believing that there are limits to the effectiveness of laws
in making the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms a reality, the Commission is convinced that a concentration of efforts on 'legal and institutional guarantees {)f
human rights, although it will go far towards the achievement
of the objectives we seek, will not go all the way. Attention
needs to be concentrated, in addition, on means of changing
some old ways of thinking on these subjects, and of rooting
out deep-seated prejudices in regard to race, colour, sex, religion, and so on. In short, it is necessary to embark upon
a complementary programme of education, including both adult
and child education, designed to produce new thinking on the
part of many people in regard to human rights. Accordingly.
it is recommended that an integral part of any programme of
intensification of effort to be undertaken in the next three
years should be a world-wide educational programme in human
rights. Such an educational programme would he consistent
with the objectives of the United Nations Development Decade
and also with the objectives in the field of human rights
of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research.
This programme should aim at mobilizing some of the energies
and resources of:
(a) Universities, colleges and other institutions of higher
learning, both private and public, within Member States;
( b) The teaching staff of primary and secondary schools;
(c) Foundations and charitable, scientific and researrh
institutions ;
( d) Media of information and mass communication, indurling the Prt,ss, radio and television :
( e) Interested non-governmental organizatiom;
towards the education of the people, adults and children, about
the state of human rights in their communities and elsewhere.
and about the further steps which need to he taken to secure
the fullest and most effective realization of these rights. Member States with federal systems of government are called upon
to encourage the activities in the field of human rights of
local and state educational institutions.
The success of this educational effort would he guaranteed
if the national leaders within Member States would give it
~9 Ibid
30 Ibid:'.

paras. 121-129.
para. 130.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

every encouragement. \Yi thin this eff orl Governments would
organize conferences of universities am! otll<'r institutions of
higher learning within their territories and invite them to
consider how the curricula a11rl their tl'a,·hing prognimmcs
might be utilized to improve the awareness in the student
population of the fundamental questions of human rights, how
their research programmes might be directed to this end, anrl
how they might co-operate with other interested organizations,
through extra-mural am! other programmes, in furthering
the aims of ;ulult crl11crtion in lrnma11 righ!s. In this context.
studies of local customs and traditions cfJt1ld be undertaken
by national authorities with a view to examining to what
extent they might be fostering and encouraging attitudes or
values contrary to lhlC principles of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and how· these customs and traditions can
eventually be elimina--cd. Charitable and philanthropic foundations might be invited to consider making grants for programmes of research and study in this field and to make
bursaries and fellowships available for research in human
rights. Responsible authorities of colleges, and of elementary
and secondary schools, could be invited to review their curricula and textbooks in order to eradicate bias, intentional
and unintentional, towards the preservation of ideas and concepts contrary to the principles of the Universal Declarati011
of Human Rights, and to introduce courses of study which
positively promote respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It has bel'n noticed with appreciation that certain
universities have alrl'arly inclmk<l i11 tlwir curricula courses
in the international protection nf human rights; other universities could be guided by such programmes and benefit by
those experiences. Attention is also called to the Associated
Schools Project in Education for I 11ternational Understanding
and Co-operation, sponsored by the Unit<'d Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Governments· might also convene, or give encouragement to
the convening of, conferences among the radio and television
broadcasting services within their territories, inviting them
to consider how their facilities might most usefully co-operate
with other organizations within the country, and with international agencies, in advancing the effort to educate the people
to have greater respect for individual rights and fundamental
freedoms.
The specialized agencies of the United Nations, especially
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organi
zation all([ the Int<"rnatillnal I ,abo11r Org:rnisation, can make
a particularly valuable contribution towards the intensification
of the educational effort with the co-operation of United
Nations regional institutes, bearing in mind Economic and
Social Council resolution 958 D I (XXXVI) of 12 July 1963.
1t is recommended tl1at they should he invited to do so.

2106 (XX). International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
A

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is appropriate to conclude under
the auspices of tli<' l ·nited Nations an International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,
C onvincrrl that the Convention will be an important
step towards the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and that it should be signed and ratified
as soon as possible by States and its provisions implemented without delay,
Considering further that the text of the Convention
should be made known throughout the world,
I. Adopts and opens for signature and ratification
the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, annexrd to the
present resolution ;

47

2. Invites States referred to in article 17 of the
Convention to sign and ratify the Convention without
any delay;
J. Requests the Governments of States and nongov, ·rnmental organizations to publicize the text of the
Con\"rntion as widely as possible, using every means
at their disposal, including all the appropriate media
of information ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the immediate and wide circulation of the Convention and, to
that end, to publish and distribute its text;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly reports concerning the state of ratificatinns of the Conv~ntion. which will be considered
by the General Assembly at future sessions as a separate
:tgcnda item.
1406th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
ANNEX
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination

The States Partirs to this Convention,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations is based
,m the principles of the dignity and equality inherent in all
human heings, and that all ;\,[ember States have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action, in co-operation with
the Organization, for the achievement of one of the purposes
,f the Unite,! "I at ions ,vhich is to promote and encourage
universal respect for and observance of human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
proclaims that all human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all thr
rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of
any kiml, in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Considering that all human beings are equal before the law
:111d are entitled to equal protect ion of the law against any
discrimination and against any incitement to discrimination,
( ·on.rid,.,-i11.a that the United "\Jations has condemned colonial:sm and all practices of segregation and discrimination associated
therewith, in whatever form and wherever they exist, and
that the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colrmial Countries and Peoples of 14 December 1960 (General
\"emhly resolution 1514 (XV)) has affirmed arnl solemnly
proclaimed the necessity of bringing them to a speedy ancl
1111conditional end,
Considering that the United Nations Declaration on the
l•]imination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 20 November 1963 (General Assembly resolution 1904 (XVIII))
solemnly affirms the necessity of speedily eliminating racial
discrimination throughout the world in all its forms and
manifestations and of securing understanding of and respect
for 1he dignity of the human person,
Com.inced that any doctrine of superiority based on racial
differentiation is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially .mjust and dangerous, and that there is no justification
for racial discrimination. in theory or in practice, anywhere,
Reaffirming that discrimination between human beings on
the grounds of rac<", colour or ethnic origin is an obstacle
to friendly and peaceful relations among nations and is capable
of disturbing peace and security among peoples and the
harmony of persons living side by side even within one and
the same State,
( ·am•inced that the existence of racial barriers is repugnant
lo the ideals of any human society,
Alarmed by manifestations of racial discrimination still in
n·i<lence in some areas of the world and by governmental
policies based on racial superiority or hatred. such as policies
of .1.'nr!hcid, '-.('(!rt_'!~at!r-n or <cp·:L1ti(in,
