S/2006/394

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 June 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 12 June 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1483 (2003) and 1637 (2005), I have
the honour to convey a letter dated 7 June 2006, from my representative on the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board for Iraq (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-38850 (E) 160606

*0638850*

S/2006/394

Annex
Letter dated 7 June 2006 from the representative of the
Secretary-General on the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board for the Development Fund for Iraq
addressed to the Secretary-General
As your representative on the International Advisory and Monitoring Board
(IAMB) for the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI), I am pleased to provide you with
an update on the activities of the Board since my letter dated 7 February 2006 (see
enclosure).
As I mentioned in my letter of 7 February 2006, I had made a request to the
United States Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction for a briefing on the
results of his office’s work related to the use of DFI funds. Representatives of
IAMB had a useful meeting with the Special Inspector General for Iraq
Reconstruction and his colleagues on 5 April 2006. We sought and obtained
clarification of recent reports of the Special Inspector General related to the use of
resources from DFI. The reported concerns of the Special Inspector General echo
concerns consistently raised by IAMB and the DFI external auditors regarding the
use of DFI resources. We will continue to share with the Special Inspector General
issues of mutual concern, and this should be facilitated by the attendance of
representatives of the Special Inspector General at meetings of IAMB.
IAMB met in Washington, D.C., on 30 and 31 May 2006. IAMB was briefed
by Ernst & Young, the appointed DFI auditor, on the status of the audit of the
resources and disbursements of DFI and of the oil export sales from 1 July 2005 to
31 December 2005. There has been slow progress to date. IAMB reiterated the need
for timely completion.
IAMB received a briefing from the President of the Board of Supreme Audit of
Iraq (BSA). He outlined the capacity-building initiative that BSA had embarked on
and a summary of the main findings of recent audits that have a bearing on the work
of IAMB and the financial position of DFI, including relevant audits in regard to the
oil extraction and sales.
IAMB received a briefing from representatives of the United States
Department of Defense regarding pending audits. In my letter of 7 February, I
informed you that IAMB planned to request an independent verification of the
settlement between the United States Government and Kellogg, Brown and Root
(KBR) on 22 December 2005 regarding the work performed by KBR funded from
DFI, as well as a review of the remaining sole-sourced contracts awarded by the
Coalition Provisional Authority and funded from DFI. The representatives of the
United States Department of Defense indicated that the follow-up audit of solesourced contracts has only recently been awarded. The audit of the remaining solesourced contracts is expected to be completed by September. With regard to the
review of the KBR settlement, the United States Government is still in the process
of identifying a suitable audit firm; the major internationally recognized auditing
firms having declined to participate. Progress has been slow. IAMB has urged the
expeditious completion of these special audits.
One of the main concerns of IAMB from the start has been the absence of
metering for crude oil production. IAMB had recommended in 2004 the expeditious

2

S/2006/394

installation of metering equipment in accordance with standard oil industry
practices. The Government of Iraq informed IAMB in March that the Iraqi Ministry
of Oil had concluded an agreement with the United States Government to rebuild
the metering system in the Basrah oil port of the Southern Oil State Company,
funded by a grant from the United States Government and expected to be completed
by the end of 2006. In addition, a preliminary agreement has been entered into by
the Government of Iraq with the Shell Oil Company to act as a consultant to the
Iraqi Ministry of Oil in matters relating to metering and calibrating, which would
include the establishment of a measuring system for the flow of oil, gas and related
products within Iraq, and export and import operations, within the next two years.
IAMB welcomed the action the Government of Iraq is taking on the implementation
of the IAMB recommendations, but continued to reiterate its concern that key
actions, especially the installation of an oil metering system, needed to be
comprehensive and were taking a long time to implement.
The IAMB mandate will expire by 31 December 2006. IAMB believes that it
is important to continue the oversight role over oil export sales, and the related
resources. IAMB believes that an oversight body should be set up by the
Government of Iraq that would be independent, competent and professional, to
ensure the continued oversight of external audits. To assist in a smooth transition to
an Iraqi oversight body, IAMB is in the process of formulating recommendations on
the modalities of such an oversight body and will present them to the Government
of Iraq.
The next meeting of IAMB will take place in July. IAMB expects to review at
that meeting the audit of the resources and disbursements of DFI and of the oil
export sales from 1 July 2005 to 31 December 2005.
All documentation, including press statements, the minutes of all IAMB
meetings, the results of the audit reports and key documents related to the IAMB
mandate and operations, will continue to be posted on the IAMB website
(www.iamb.info).
(Signed) Jean-Pierre Halbwachs

3

S/2006/394

Enclosure
Letter dated 7 February 2006 from the representative of
the Secretary-General on the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board for the Development Fund for Iraq
addressed to the Secretary-General
As your representative on the International Advisory and Monitoring Board
(IAMB) for the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI), I am pleased to provide you with
an update on the activities of the Board since my letter dated 2 June 2005.
At its meeting in October 2005, IAMB received reports of the audit of DFI
covering the period from 1 January 2005 to 30 June 2005 and a briefing by KPMG.
The audits were conducted under the oversight of IAMB, in line with its terms of
reference and the provisions of Security Council resolution 1483 (2003), and are
available on the IAMB website (www.iamb.info).
IAMB noted that these audits of the accounting of DFI resources, oil export
sales and the transfers to spending ministries continue to be critical of the overall
financial control framework currently in place. The reports continue to highlight
numerous exceptions to administrative and accounting procedures in the spending
ministries and by the United States agencies in respect of outstanding commitments
for which they have used DFI resources and use by the Iraqi administration of DFI
resources.
IAMB was also informed that KPMG continued to face lack of cooperation
among some ministries and required the intervention of the Ministry of Finance to
conduct/complete its work.
IAMB sought and received a briefing from representatives of the Government
of Iraq on the implementation of the recommendations contained in the audits and
on measures to address the shortcomings identified by IAMB and in the audit
reports and to improve internal financial controls generally. The steps reported by
the Government of Iraq are detailed below.
The Government of Iraq has enacted a Financial Management Law, which has
established a comprehensive framework for the conduct of fiscal and budgetary
policy in line with international best practices by setting a structured process for the
formulation of the federal budget and a number of reporting requirements aimed at
increasing the accountability and transparency of the budgeting process.
A department has been set up within the Board of Supreme Audit (BSA) to
follow up on all audit and investigation reports, including those commissioned by
IAMB.
A specialized directorate has been established within each ministry, headed by
an Inspector General who reports directly to the Minister and whose duties are to
audit and oversee public funds administered by the ministry.
The Constitution adopted specifies the organizations which will be responsible
for the audit and oversight of public funds. These organizations are BSA and the
Integrity Commission.
on

4

IAMB believes that it is extremely important for the Government of Iraq to act
the audit recommendations to strengthen financial controls and the

S/2006/394

administration of DFI resources, and looks forward to working with BSA and the
Government of Iraq to continue strengthening the overall framework for public and
financial management in Iraq. IAMB welcomed the action the Government of Iraq is
taking on the implementation of IAMB recommendations, but also reiterated its
concern that key actions, especially the installation of an oil metering system, were
taking a long time to implement. IAMB urged the Government of Iraq to implement
all audit recommendations promptly.
With regard to DFI-funded contracts administered by United States agencies,
IAMB was informed by representatives of the United States that the Finance
Minister of Iraq signed on 24 December 2005 a memorandum extending the
Designation of Authority and Responsibility to the United States Chief of Mission
and Commander, Multinational Forces-Iraq, to continue to administer the DFIfunded contracts until 31 December 2006 in view of the small number of contracts
remaining and the fact that those contracts would be completed by the end of 2006.
IAMB was also informed that the Joint Contracting Command-Iraq continues to
work on a handover of records to appropriate Iraqi ministries before the end of
2006.
In my previous letter, I had informed you that IAMB agreed to the terms of
reference for a special audit of sole-sourced contracts using DFI funds proposed by
the United States Government, to be completed by an independent auditor. The
special audit of sole-sourced contracts called for (a) identifying all contracts
awarded non-competitively by the Coalition Provisional Authority valued at over
$5 million that used DFI funds; (b) providing a summary of the findings of audits of
such contracts that have already been conducted by various United States
Government audit agencies; and (c) conducting additional audit procedures on noncompetitively awarded contracts that have not been the subject of audit, including
with regard to whether such contracts were in accordance with the purposes outlined
in Security Council resolution 1483 (2003).
The United States Government had informed IAMB that KPMG LLP had been
selected to undertake the special audit of sole-sourced contracts that were funded
from DFI. The audit reports were scheduled for completion and transmission to
IAMB by the end of August 2005.
In September 2005, the United States Government informed IAMB that KPMG
had determined that a potential conflict of interest had arisen in respect of auditing
the sole-sourced contract awarded to Kellogg, Brown and Root (KBR) due to the
existing client relationship of KPMG with Halliburton, the parent company of KBR,
and had recused itself from auditing the KBR contract. In the light of this, the
United States Government informed IAMB that it had requested the assistance of
the United States Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction to perform the
procedures of the special audit with respect to the sole-sourced contract awarded to
KBR.
IAMB regretted that KPMG had recused itself from conducting the KBR part
of the audit only after it had been awarded the audit contract. IAMB also regretted
the fact that it was informed very late by the United States Government of the
recusal of KPMG and the appointment of the Special Inspector General to conduct
the audit of the sole-sourced contract relating to KBR, and that IAMB had not been
consulted in this matter. This did not make it possible for IAMB to pursue
alternatives within the available time frame.

5

S/2006/394

Of the 24 contracts (value: $1.963 billion) identified as sole-sourced, 23
(value: $0.563 billion) were audited by KPMG and one (value: $1.4 billion) was
audited by the Special Inspector General. The KPMG audit revealed exceptions in a
number of cases, including (a) insufficient documentation to justify non-competitive
contracting; (b) lack of support for the provision of services or receipt of goods; and
(c) discrepancies in the amounts billed. The report of the Special Inspector General
revealed that “the non-competitive award of contract ... to Kellogg, Brown and Root
was properly justified”. The contract was a cost-plus-award-fee, indefinite-delivery,
indefinite-quantity contract. Determination of fair and reasonable costs for such
contracts, according to the Special Inspector General, was made upon
“definitization” of each task order. Six task orders used DFI funds. One of the six
task orders had been “definitized” and the costs were determined to be fair and
reasonable. The remaining five task orders had not been “definitized” and the
process to substantiate expenditures, amounting to $208 million, which had been
questioned by the United States Defense Contract Audit Agency (DCAA) was still
ongoing. IAMB also noted key findings in the DCAA audit report stating that (a) the
contractor’s proposals as submitted were not acceptable for negotiation of a fair and
reasonable price; (b) supporting data for subcontract costs were not always
adequate; and (c) proposals were not prepared in all respects in accordance with
applicable cost accounting standards and appropriate provisions of the United States
Federal Acquisition Regulation.
IAMB was also informed that $1.2 billion out of the $1.4 billion earmarked for
the KBR contract had already been disbursed from DFI. Given the amounts involved
and the length of time that this process was taking, IAMB recommended that the
United States Government seek resolution with the Iraqi Government concerning the
use of resources of DFI which might be in contradiction of the Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003) and that the amount disbursed to contractors that cannot be
supported as fair be reimbursed expeditiously.
IAMB followed up on the results of the special audit of sole-sourced contracts,
and in particular the KBR task orders funded from DFI. At its meeting in January
2006, IAMB was informed by representatives of the United States Government that
a global settlement of all six DFI-funded task orders under the KBR contract was
reached between the United States Government and KBR on 22 December 2005.
The settlement provided for a reduction of contract costs of $9 million. IAMB
resolved to request an independent verification of the settlement as well as a review
of the remaining sole-sourced contracts. IAMB is in the process of defining the
scope of work for this task and will be pursuing this with representatives of the
United States Government.
On 28 December 2005 IAMB held a press briefing on the work of IAMB and
replied to questions raised by members of the press. The webcast of the briefing, as
well as a transcript, is posted on the IAMB website (www.iamb.info).
The United States Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction issued on
26 January 2006 an audit report relating to the administration of DFI funds by the
Coalition Provisional Authority South-Central Region. That audit report discusses
the processes used for the authorization, award, execution and oversight of contracts
within the Coalition Provisional Authority South-Central Region.
The overall audit objective was to determine whether disbursing officers in
selected locations in southern Iraq complied with applicable guidance and properly

6

S/2006/394

controlled and accounted for DFI cash assets and expenditures. The report indicates
that during the audit, the Special Inspector General observed deficiencies in
contract-award documentation and expanded its scope to determine whether
Coalition Provisional Authority South-Central Region personnel properly managed
contracts.
The audit concluded, based on the documentation examined, that the Coalition
Provisional Authority South-Central Region failed to adequately manage its Rapid
Regional Response Program contracts and micro-purchases. IAMB has concluded
that a briefing by the Special Inspector General on the results of the Special
Inspector General’s audits involving DFI funds would be desirable, and I have today
made a request to the Special Inspector General for such a briefing.
The next meeting of IAMB is scheduled for May 2006. IAMB expects to
receive by then the audit of DFI for the period from June to December 2005 and
further reports on the implementation by the Government of Iraq on measures to
address issues identified in the audit reports.
IAMB will continue to exercise its oversight role and plan for a smooth
transition to an Iraqi oversight body.
All documentation, including press statements, the minutes of all IAMB
meetings, the results of the audit reports and key documents related to the IAMB
mandate and operations, will continue to be posted on the IAMB website
(www.iamb.info).
(Signed) Jean-Pierre Halbwachs

7
