THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

26 MAY 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.......,.................

1

.. . . ., . .. . . .. . . .. ... . . ... . ,. .. . ,.. .. ..

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (S/12333)
....,..........,.,...............,.,....

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/20 1O/Rev. 1)
Adoption of the agenda

S/PV.2010

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
,The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiom and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2010TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).

26 May 1977, at 3.30 p.m.
Force will continue to do its utmost to maintain quiet in
the area in accordance with the terms of the Disengagement
Agreement [see S/l 1302jAdd. 1 of 30 May 19 741.

Present: The representatives of the following States: Benin,
Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic of,
India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

4.. Members of the Council will note from the report that
the past six months have been a period of quiet in the
Israel-Syria sector. I wish to emphasize once again, however, the fundamental instability and danger of the Middle
East situation as long asprogress is not made towards a just
and durable settlement of the problem in all its aspects. As
members of the Council are aware, the Disengagement
Agreement, as specifically indicated in its paragraph H, is
not a peace agreement but only a first step towards a just
and durable peace on the basis of Security Council
resolution 338 (1973). I very much hope that the efforts
now being made will result in the early resumption of the
negotiating process and further progress towards a settlement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2010/Rev.l)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/12333)
The meeting wascalled to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank
the Secretary-General for the additional information which
he has just given us.

The agenda wasadopted,
The situation in the Middle East

6. I take it that the members of the Council are ready to
vote immediately on the draft resolution in document
S/12337. Since there is no objection, I therefore now put
the draft resolution to the vote.

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (S/12333)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from I;Fench): I
should like to draw the attention of members to the two
documents before the Council. The first is the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force [S/12333/ for the period 23 November
1976 to 23 May 1977. The second is the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 12337.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted b.y 12 votes to none. 1
Three members (Benin, China and the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya) did not participate in the voting.
7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
connexion with the adoption of the resolution on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized to make the
following complementary statement on behalf of the
Security Council regarding the resolution just adopted:

2. The Secretary-General has expressedthe wish to make a
statement concerning the report to which I just referred. I
now invite him to addressthe Council.
3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The Council has before it
my report on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) for the period 23 November 1976 to 23
May 1977 /S/12333/. I do not have much to add to what
has already been stated in the report. I wish to inform the
Council, however, that, since the report was published, I
have been informed by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic of its assent to the extension of the mandate of
UNDOF for a further period of six months. The-Government of Israel has also expressed its agreement. I am
gratified that the parties have agreed to the extension of the
mandate of UNDOF and I can assure the Council that the

“As is known, the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
[S/12333] states in paragraph 31 that ‘the present quiet
in the Israel-Syria sector should not obscure the fact that
the main elements of the Middle East problem remain
unresolved and that the situation in the area will continue
to be unstable and dangerous unless real progress can soon
be maae towards a just and durable settlement of the
1 See resolution 408 (1977).

1

aspects’. This statement of the
Secretary-General reflects the view of the Security
Council.”

problem

in

all

its

made-efforts which we hope will be pursued-to bring
about a resumption
of the peace negotiations within the
framework of the Geneva Conference.

13, During the Council’s debate on the .Middle East
situation, at the end of last March, I stressed [1995th
me&g]
the need for the Security Council to encourage
the continuous process of diligently seeking the path
towards peace. We share the view of the vast majority, who
believe that this year holds greater chances for beginning
real negotiations and for setting in motion the diplomatic
8. Mr. CHOU NAN (China) (trandation
from Chinese):
process leading to a final settlement of the Middle East
With regard to the United Nations Disengagement Observer conflict. That is why the parties to the conflict and the
Force, we have alwaysheld a different position in principle.
States concerned should not let this opportunity slip,
This is well known to all. On the basis of our consistent
whatever
the difficulties-whether they are old ones or new
position,
the Chinese delegation did not participate in the
ones-which
remain to be overcome. We believe that the
vote on the draft resolution contained in document
Secretary-General
should, as soon as possible, resume his
S/12337.
contacts with the parties and with the States concerned,
9. Mr, DATCU (Romania) (inteqretation from French): 1 with a view to trying to clear the way for the reconvening
of the Peace Conference with the participation of all the
should like, first of all, to thank the Secretary-General for
parties
to the conflict, thus including the representatives of
his report on the activities of the United Nations Disengagethe Palestinian people.
ment Observer Force, as well as for the tireless efforts he
has made during the past six months with a view to
14. Romania favours an overall negotiated settlement of
obtaining the implementation of United Nations resolutions
the Middle East conflict. The just and lasting peace that
concerning the Middle East situation.
would result therefrom should include Israel’s withdrawal
from all Arab territories occupied during the 1967 war, the
10. As can be seenfrom the Secretary-General’s report,
solution of the problem of the Palestinian people in keeping
with
its legitimate aspirations including the creation of a
“The United Nations Disengagement Observer
free
and
independent Palestinian State, and the guarantee of
Force . . . has continued to perform its functions effec
the
sovereignty,
integrity and the right to free
tively with the co-operation of the parties.” [S/1.2333, and independent territorial
development
of all the States of the
para. 30.1
region.
Further, I have been asked by the delegations of Benin,
China and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to say that, asthey
have not participated
in the vote on this resolution, they
take the same position with regard to the statement which I
have just read out on behalf of the members of the Council

The Secretary-Generalyonsiders it essential to maintain the
UNDOF presence in the area, and has recommended that
we renew the mandate of the Force for a further six-month
period, that is, until 30 November 1977.
11. Convinced that the activities of UNDOF represent a
contribution to the maintenance of a favourable atrnosphere for the efforts at achieving a peaceful settlement of
the conflict, the Romanian delegation, as in the past, voted
in favour of the draft resolution that the Council has just
adopted. We are particularly satisfied with the wise decision
of the Syrian Government, which, despite recent events in
the region, has once again agreed to the extension of the
mandate of the Force, which, of course, is stationed on
Syrian territory. We should be grateful to Syria for that
decision which is further proof of its determination to
promote peacein the region.
12. We ~SO wish to stress on this occasion that the
maintenance of the Force cannot be considered as an end in
itself, but only as a provisional measure of limited duration,
pending the establishment of a true peace, Moreover, it
should be noted that the resolution which established
IJNDOF, as well as subsequent resolutions on the subject,
called upon the parties concerned to implement immediately Security Council resolution 338 (1973). NOW,, for
more than three years, there has been no real progress
towards a just and lasting settlement of all the aspects of
the Middle East problem and, therefore, the situation in
that Part of the world remains unstable and dangerous. It is
true that at the beginning of this year efforts were

15. The dispatch and maintenance of United Nations
forces to separate the belligerents on the Golan Heights and
in the Sinai illustrate the very important role played during
the past three years by our Organization, by the Council, in
the creation of favourable conditions for the establishment
of a Middle East peace. But we believe that the United
Nations could play a much more important role in the
efforts to achieve an overall political settlement in the
Middle East. We are firmly convinced that, despite the
remaining obstacles to a resumption of peace negotiations,
the conflict can be solved by peaceful means, through the
joint efforts of all States and, of course, primarily by the
peoples directly concerned, which have the most to gain
from a just and lasting peace and the most to lose, should a
new war break out.
16. MY country is determined to make its active contribution by encouraging all efforts aimed at the attainment
Of the objectives of peace and justice in the Middle East.
17. Mr. ELHOFARI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): I should
like to reiterate once again the position of the Socialist
People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya with regard to the
creation of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force and the prolongation of its mandate. My delegation
has already expressed this attitude many times in the
Security Council and the General Assembly. We are
convinced that Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), on which the presence of the Force is based,
are irrelevant to any solution to the Palestine question and
the Middle East problem.

18. We believe that the General Assembly adopted a
proper attitude in dealing with the Palestine question in
adopting resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237 (XXIX), reaffirming the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
resolution 3376 (XXX), proposing means designed to enable the Palestinian people to achieve their national rights,
resolution 3379 (XXX), condemning Zionism as a racist
movement, and resolution 3 l/20, regarding the implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
return to their homes and properties and to achieve
self-determination, national independence and sovereignty.

We have a keen appreciation of the difficulties that lie in
the way of even the beginning of substantive negotiations,
but we have also been impressed by the sincere desire for
peace on the part of both Israel and its Arab neighbours. It
is a desire that grows out of a profound weariness among all
the peoples of the Middle East of continuing conflict. It is a
hope nurtured by dreams of a better, more secure and more
prosperous life for all. With those hopes in mind, the
United States will persist in its deliberate and determined
search for ways to bring the parties together and help them
to realize the just and durable peace that is the wish of all.
We firmly believe, in the words of President Carter, that:

19. Those General Assembly resolutions reflect profound
and important changes. Basically, they call for a review of
the entire question and of the ways of dealing with it. For
that reason, we did not participate in the debate or the
voting on the draft resolution which the Council just
adopted.

“This may be the most propitious time for a genuine
settlement since the beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
To let this opportunity passcould mean disaster, not only
for the Middle East but perhaps for the international
political and economic order aswell.”

20. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): The
United Nations and the Security Council accepted an
important responsibility in deciding, on 31 May 1974
/resolution 3.50 (197411, to establish the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force. The calm which has prevailed during the intervening three years in the areas under
United Nations supervision testifies to the wisdom of that
decision. None the less, as we accept the additional
responsibility of extending the mandate of the Force for a
further six months, we should review once again briefly the
political and military context in which we take this action.

24. In closing, I should like to express once again our
admiration and gratitude to Major-General Hannes Philipp
and the forces under his command for the exemplary
manner in which they continue to discharge their duties on
the Golan Heights. We should also single out for special
recognition
those nations-Austria, Tran, Canada and
Poland-that
contribute forces to UNDOF. At the same
time, we must urge all nations promptly and fully to pay
their assessed amounts in support of these shared international responsibilities, Finally, I should like to acknowledge the constructive and statesman-like approach to this
renewal on the part of the Governments of Israel and Syria
and to thank both the Secretary-General and the President
of the Council for their efforts, which have made possible
our action today.

21. Any such review must begin with the observation that
the Force has to date been an unqualified success. The
parties have scrupulo,usly observed their obligations under
the terms of the Disengagement Agreement. There have
been no serious incidents, nor has the area of disengagement been a source of significant military tension between
the armed forces of Israel and Syria. Much of the credit for
this is due to the professionalism and dedication of the
officers and men who serve in UNDOF. In addition,
however, we should recognize that the United Nations has
built up, over the years, an impressive institutional experience and expertise in the area of peace-keeping operations. We should keep this very much in mind in the Middle
East and elsewhere in our efforts to negotiate solutions to
long-standing problems.

25. Mr. BARTON (Canada): My delegation was pleased to
vote in favour of the resolution that we just adopted to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force for a further six months to the end of
November 1977. We did so in the knowledge that the
presence of UNDOF has contributed measurably to the
present relative lack of tension along the lines of the area of
separation of forces in the Golan Heights. Our vote in
favour was also an affirmation of our hope that the parties
to the dispute will avail themselves of the present calm,
which is a credit to both parties, to take steps towards the
establishment of the just and lasting peace to which we
were all committed in Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

22. The mission of UNDOF and other peace-keeping
forces is, of course, to help to maintain calm in the area so
that the search for peace can go forward-as it must-in an
atmosphere most conducive to success. The United States,
in the last few months, has embarked on a new round of
consultations with the aim of resuming the Middle East
Peace Conference at Geneva. President Carter has met with
the principal leaders on both sides. He has further indicated
a desire to meet with the Prime Minister of Israel at the
earliest appropriate time. Secretary of State Vance has
recently discussed with Foreign Minister Gromyko the
shared responsibilities of the United States and the Soviet
Union as co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference, and we
have agreed to direct our efforts towards reconvening the
Conference this fall.

26. This is the first time since Canada’s election to its
present term on the Security Council that I have had an
opportunity to speak to the Council on one of its principal
Charter responsibilities, which is, namely, “the maintenance
of international peace and security” as reflected in the
peace-keeping operations of the United Nations. On the last
occasion when Canada was a member of the Council, 10
years ago, the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations was in its infancy. Today that Committee could be
described as being in its adolescence or its old age,
depending on your point of view; but the fact is that it has
not yet completed its assigned task of providing guidelines
for peace-keeping. But we are not discouraged and will
continue to do all we can to bring about an agreement on

23. In the course of all those discussions, we have gained
considerable insight into the thinking of the various parties.
3

as
peace-keeping procedures, an agreement which we regard
t0
successful
operations
in
the
a necessary complement
field.
27. In &is connexion, as the representative of the only
State member of the Council contributing
troops
to
UNDOF, I am pleased to bc able to report that
my
Government has authorized me to state that the Canadian
contingent, in numbers approximating its existing level,
will
continue to serve for the further mandate period. Members
of the Canadian contingent look forward to working,
as
always, in close co-operation with the forces of Austria,
Iran and Poland in that common and worthy endeavour.

panied by peace-making dctivity fail to prevent further
outbreaks of fighting. The dispute between Israel and Syria
may not be solvable bilaterally, but we are all aware that
the machinery exists for multilateral negotiations. We urge
all the parties concerned to convene and attend a renewed
Geneva Conference, with the aim of establishing peace in
the Middle East in conformity with resolution 242 (1967).
3 1. Mr. President, as this seems likely to be the last
occasion on which I shall be speaking under your presidency, I should like to express the sincere appreciation of
my delegation for the fine manner in which you have
carried out your duties during the past month. I only hope
I can do as well in the coming month of June.

28. I personally was fortunate enough to visit
UMDOF
earlier this year, in the course of a tOW Of the United
Nations peace-keeping operations to which Canada provides
troops or observers. 1 visited the Force COmmander,
Major-General Hannes Philipp, at his headquarters at Damasws, I spoke to some of the observers from
the united
Nations Truce Supervision Organisation Who are attached
to UNDOF and was able to visit each of the contingents
in
the UNDOF area of responsibility. I came away hi&ly
impressed by the job which Major-General Philipp
and hia
officers and men are doing in the service of peace. We.ixi the
United Nations community can be proud of the service
which they are performing on our behalf, often
under
trying, difficult and, as may bc seen from the SecretaryGeneral’s report, hazardous circumstances. III this regard,
1
should like to express the Canadian Government’s
sympathy to the Austrian Government and to tile farrtfiy
of
Major Ernst Pellegrini, the Deputy Chief Operations Officer
at UNDOF headquarters, who wasso tragically killed
on 20
April; I should also like to express our sympathy
to the
Government of Iran in connexion with the injuries
sustained by Lieutenant-Colonel Firooz Ferdows, the Chief
Operations Officer, in the same accident.

32. Mr, TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Security
Council has just adopted a resolution on the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Force supervising the
disengagement of Syrian and Israeli forces in the Golan
Heights. The question of the renewal of the mandate of
that Force is closely linked with the problem of a Middle
East settlement, and it must be noted that the Middle East
remains an extremely dangerous source of international
tension. The present situation in the Middle East requires
immediate further efforts in order to ensure a change of
direction towards a comprehensive political settlement.
33. The Soviet Union has constantly made efforts to do
away with the results of Israel’s aggression’and to establish
in the Middle East a lasting peace and tranquillity. The
Soviet Union will continue to pursue that policy as
consistently as it can. We are convinced that a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict can and must
be achieved on the basis of the complete withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied in 1967.
The exercise of the inalienable rights of the Arab people of
Palestine, including its right to self-determination and to
the establishment of its own State, the guarantee of the
right to existence and security of all the States directly
involved in the conflict and also the provision of appropriate international guarantees for those States are principles which are closely linked to one another and which
pay due regard to the lawful rights and interests of all the
parties involved in the conflict.

29, We are pleased to note from the Secretary-General’s
report that the cease-fire has been maintained over the last
six months and that UNDOF has continued ta receive
the
co-operation of the parties in carrying out the
tasks
entrusted to it; but we are concerned that colnplete
freedom of movement has not been granted to members
of
the Force in the execution of their duties, particularly
with
regard to the inspection of areas of lirnitation
of armaments. We are also pleased to note thhat UNDOF
seems
to
be operating with due regard to economy and that
the
financial arrangements for the Force arc based on a firmer
foundation than those of some other forces established
in
the past, in other words, that its financing is based upon a
universal scale of assessments.

34. It is clear that a peace built on the seizure of foreign
territory as a result of aggression can be neither just nor,
therefore, listing. The Soviet Union is in favour of the
unconditional return to Syria and the other victims of
aggression of their ancestral lands which were seized by
Israel.
35. A peace cannot be lasting if it flouts the vital interests
of any State or people in the Middle East. This applies,
above all, to the Arab people of Palestine, which is engaged
in a courageous struggle for the creation of its own State.
At the same time, it must be noted that all the peoples of
the Middle East, including the people of the State of Israel,
are entitled to national independence and to a secure
existence.

30. We must not, however, be Iullcd into a complacent
mood by the fact that the peace-keeping operation is going
smoothly. The basic purpose in establishing a peace-keeping
force is to provide an opportunity to the parties
to a
dispute ta take the steps necessary to settle it. It is a sad
fact that, since UNDOF was established three years
ago,
there seem to have been no further significant steps bY the
parties principally concerned to establish the “just
and
durable peace” which the Agreement signed at Geneva
II-I
May 1974 envisaged. A lesson of United Nations histoW
has
been ,that peace-keeping operations which are not accom-

36. The Soviet Union is convinced of the need to continue
and to intensify the efforts speedily to reconvene the
4

L

General Peace Conference on the Middle East, with a view
to the early achievement of a comprehensive political
settlement in that part of the world based on justice for all.
It goes without saying that the Palestine Liberation
Organization should take part in the work of the Conference on an equal footing. The Soviet Union firmly
believes that no decision affecting the Arab people of
Palestine should be adopted without the Palestinians, and
especially not against their will.

concern of the participants in the conflict themselves. The
Soviet delegation deems it necessary to take special note of
the constructive approach of the Syrian side in the search
for ways of establishing a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. We fully share Syria’s view to the effect that
this latest renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force should not be viewed as
automatic or routine. On the contrary, it is essential to use
this renewal to speed up the implementation
of United
Nations resolutions concerning the complete withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab territories and the
exercise of the national rights of the Palestinian people.
There is no doubt that Syria’s constructive position eases
the task of the United Nations, especially that of the
Security Council, which is to promote in every possible way
the attainment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

37. The proposals of the Soviet Union concerning a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem and
the convening to that end of the Geneva Peace Conference
are realistic and well balanced, and it is no coincidence that
the views of the Soviet Union concerning the main
principles and directions of any future peace settlement,
which were set out in the speech of the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, at the sixteenth Congress of
Trade Unions of the USSR in March this year, elicited a
broad and favourable response throughout the world. In
expressing its views on the possible bases for peace in the
Middle East, the Soviet Union is guided by its duty as a
co-Chairman of the Geneva Conference and as a State
which is situated in direct proximity to the area of the
Middle East conflict.

4,O. The Security Council cannot overlook the warning
contained in the Secretary-General’s report, which states:
“The present quiet in the Israel-Syria sector should not
obscure the fact that the main elements of the Middle
East problem remain unresolved and that the situation in
the area will continue to be unstable and dangerous unless
real progress can soon be made towards a just and durable
settlement of the problem in all its aspects.” [S/12333,

38. Of course, considerable significance attaches to COoperation between the co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference-the Soviet Union and the United States. The joint
communiqu6 on the results of the talks between the
Foreign Minister of the USSR, Mr. Gromyko, and the
Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Vance, which
took place recently at Geneva, states the following:

para. 31.1

41. In view of what I have said and especially in the light
of Syria’s position, the Soviet Union has not objected to
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force in the Israel-Syria sector for
a further period of six months. However, the USSR
delegation deems it necessary to stress once again that the
stationing of United Nations forces in the Middle East is, in
our opinion, of a temporary nature and cannot be used for
delaying a comprehensive settlement in that part of the
world. The USSR also stresses again its position to the
effect that the United Nations forces in the Middle East
must be maintained with the maximum economy.

“Both parties believe that the elimination of the
continuing source of tension in the Middle East is one of
the primary tasks ‘in the work of ensuring peace and
international security. They are convinced that the
Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East has an
important role to play in the attainment of that goal. It is
the international forum especially established for negotiations on a settlement of the Middle East problem in the
interests of all the interested parties.

42. The delegation of the USSR expresses the hope that
the renewal of the UNDOF mandate will be used for the
purpose of seeking a Middle East settlement within the
fnamework of the Geneva Peace Conference.

“Having confirmed that co-operation between the
USSR and the United States, the co-Chairmen of the
Geneva Conference, is extremely important for the
attainment of a just, lasting and firm peace in the Middle
East, the parties agreed to make joint efforts for the
renewal of the work of the Conference during the autumn
of 1977 and they recognized the importance of detailed
preparations.”

43. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): On the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that, as he considers the continued
present of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force on the Golan Heights to be essential, its mandate
should be extended for a further period of six months, and
with the consent of the parties concerned, the Security
Council has just extended the mandate of the Force for
another six months. Pakistan voted in favour of that
decision since we fully share the view that UNDOF is
performing a valuable task in keeping the peace in the area
and that its continued presence will be conducive to the
efforts which are being made to bring a just and lasting
peace to the Middle East.

As the Foreign Minister of the USSR noted:
“The solution of this problem concerns not only the
United States and the Soviet Union, as major Powers and
co-Chairmen of the Conference, but also other States. We
should like them to display the necessary willingness. The
main thing is that such activities should move in the right
direction.”

44. We note with satisfaction the fact that the Force has
continued to perform its functions effectively and that,
during the past six months, the situation in the area has

39. It is perfectly evident that the working out of
conditions for peace in all their details is mainly the
5

arrangements for the Middle East will be viable unless the .
inalienable rights of the Palestinians to return to their
homes, to exist as a nation and to have a State of their own
are recognized and implemented.

remained quiet. We join other members of the Council and
the Secretary-General in paying a well-deserved tribute to
the officers and men of the Force for the performance,
under the command of Major-General Hannes Philipp, of
their difficult tasks with diligence and devotion. Our thanks
are also due to the countries which have so readily provided
those sentinels of peace to the United Nations.

5 1. The Government of Syria has agreed to the extension
of the mandate of UNDOF in order to facilitate efforts for
the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region
and in order not to exacerbate the prevailing tension. The
Syrian position not only merits our appreciation but calls
for reciprocation from the other side. Unfortunately the
Middle East situation is still filled with uncertainty-an
uncertainty which seems to have been compounded by the
recent change of leadership in Israel.

45. We offer our condolences to the Government of
Austria and to the family of Major Pellegrini, whose tragic
death lengthens the roll of honour of those who have laid
down their lives in the service of international peace. We
offer our sympathy to the Government of Iran for the
injuries sustained by Lieutenant-Colonel Ferdows in the
course of performing his duties.

52. On the other hand, one must admit that the policies
advocated by the new Israeli leadership do not so much add
new difficulties to the situation as make more manifest the
real nature of the obstacle which has all along prevented
progress towards a just and lasting settlement, that is, the
refusal of Israel to accept the basic elements-set out in
Security Council resolutions and universally recognized as
such-of such a settlement.

46. Once again we have to recall the fact that, in
resolution 398 (1976), by which the Security Council
extended the UNDOF mandate last time, in November
1976, the Council also decided to call upon the parties
concerned to implement immediately Council resolution
338 (1973) and requested the Secretary-General to submit
a report on the developments in the situation and the
measures taken to implement that resolution.

53.. In the circumstances, special responsibility obviously
lies with those who are in a position to influence the
situation. Cease-fires and peace-keeping arrangements are
no substitute for peace and should not be allowed to
become a protective screen behind which Israel can pursue
a policy of annexation and expansion. They must, on the
contrary, lead to the establishment, at an early date, of a
peace which ensures the rights and security of & the
peoples of the region and brings about the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from alI occupied territories. We hope and
expect that, at this crucial juncture in the region, all
possible efforts, through the United Nations and outside it,
will be made and intensified to that end.

47. We wish to place on record our deep appreciation of
the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General in discharging his mandate under General Assembly resolution
31/62 and Security Council resolution 338 (1973), efforts
such as are described in his report in document S/12290 of
28 February 1977.
48. The visit of the Secretary-General to the Middle East
in February of this year and his meetings with the leaders
of the parties involved, including Mr. Arafat, Chairman of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), confirmed the
desire of all parties for an early resumption of the
negotiating process through the convening of the Geneva
Peace Conference on the Middle East. While that is indeed
encouraging, the prospect of actually holding a peace
conference continues to be clouded by disagreement over
the question of participation. Israel’s insistence that one of
the principal parties, the PLO, should not be invited to the
Peace Conference is untenable. The Secretary-General has
quite correctly concluded that that difficulty cannot be
surmounted by purely procedural means,

54. Mr. JAIPAL (India): We have studied the report of the
Secretary-General with a good deal of interest. As a
peace-keeping operation, the activities of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force have been quite
successful. We are glad to note that the cease-fire was
maintained during the past six months. The violations of
the Agreement in regard to the ‘areas of separation and
limitation have been of a minor character.
55. It is particularly satisfying that the Force has been
able to avoid incidents. What is disturbing, however, is that,
in the zones where it carries out responsibilities, landmines-some of them newly planted-continue
to endanger
human life. One officer has already lnnt his life and there
have been several casualties among civilians and livestock.
The Force has been in position for three years. It seems to
us that, if it is to carry out its responsibilities-as indeed it
must-, it should receive the co-operation of all parties
concerned in regard to clearing old mines and refraining
from planting new ones.

49. We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment that
the main elements of the Middle East problem remain
unresolved and that the situation will deteriorate once
again, unless progress is made towards a just and lasting
settlement of the problem in all its aspects. We can only
add that a reversal of the present trend towards such a
settlement will have incalculable consequences not only for
the Middle East but also for the international community as
a whole.
50. The basis for a just and lasting settlement of the
Middle East conflict is laid down in resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), which call for the withdrawal of Israel
from all the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967 and
for the establishment of a real peace which would ensure
the security and safety of all the countries and peoples in
the region. In addition, and equally important, no peace

56. My delegation wishes to place*on record its tribute to
the various contingents in the Force for their valuable work
in keeping the peace in an extremely sensitive area.
57. My delegation would like also to extend its congratulations to the Secretary-General for his persistent efforts to
6

maintain contacts wi,th the parties concerned and with the
two co-Chairmen. We attach considerable importance to his
role in the implementation of Security Council resolution
338 (1973). We hope that all parties concerned and the two
co-Chairmen will recognize this role and keep him fully in
the picture and, indeed in the mainstream of the ongoing
negotiations. We have no other source of authoritative
information about what is going on except the reports of
the Secretary-General. All of us, of course, as members of
the Security Council, have a right to be kept informed from
time to time of the developing situation, and in this context
also the Secretary-General’s role is very important.

Council time and again that it cannotbe the purpose or the
justification of UNDOF to serve as a substitute for a peace
settlement, that is, for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 338 (1973), which is overdue. My
delegation shares the concern of other members at the fact
that this goal is still far from being achieved. The
Secretary-General, in his excellent report, has expressed the
feeling of my delegation and, I think, of the Council as a
whole, by his observation in paragraph 3 1
‘<The present quiet in the Israel-Syria sector should not
obscure the fact that the main elements of the Middle
East problem remain unresolved and that the situation in
the area will continue to be unstable and dangerous unless
real progress can soon be made towards a just and durable
settlement of the problem iu all its aspects. As indicated
earlier in this report, efforts at various levels are under
way to further this goal. I must reiterate my belief that,
unless the opportunity is seized to resume as soon as
possible negotiations in a meaningful way, there will be a
growing and serious danger that the situation will
deteriorate once again.”

58. We observe from the Secretary-General’s report that,
although the situation in the area has been quiet, the
problem nevertheless remains unsolved and the -situation
will continue to be unstable and dangerous unless real
progress can soon be made towards a just and durable
settlement of the problem in all its aspects. The Secretary
General has reiterated his belief that, unless negotiations are
resumed m a meaningful way as soon as possible, there is a
growing and serious danger that the situation will deteriorate once again. We are inclined to agree with the
Secretary-General’s assessment. My Foreign I&nister stated
only last month, at the New Delhi meeting of the
Coordinated Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries:

62. It also seems necessary to endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s statement that the continued present of UNDOF
in the area is essential for the maintenance of the cease-fire
and thus for the prevention of armed hostilities. It is
gratifying to note, in this connexion, that UNDOF has been
able, with the co-operation of the parties, to carry out the
task entrusted to it, thereby maintaining the cease-fire
during the whole period under review. The quiet situation in
the area, while certainly doing credit to UNDOF’s outstanding performance, also testifies, in the opinion of my
delegation, to the desire of the parties to maintain an
atmosphere conducive to serious peace efforts. In his
report, the Secretary-General points to peace efforts at
various levels during the recent months, including his own
important mission of good offices. While not allowing for
undue optimism, this nevertheless reflects a general feeling
that the efforts towards a peaceful solution of the Middle
East crisis have recently gained greater momentum than in
any former period of UNDOF’s existence. It is imperative
that that momentum be maintained and that the general
move towards a more realistic and conciliatory attitude by
all the parties concerned not be allowed to suffer a tragic
setback.

“The search for peace in the Middle East continues to
be as elusive as ever. The situation remains a source of
great anxiety. Israel must vacate occupied Arab territories. The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
should be recognized. It is our hope that ways and means
will soon be found to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and that there will be an early
resumption of the Geneva Conference with the participation, among others, of the PLO.”
59. In the light of the Secretary-General’s assessment and
our own, we agree that the mandate of the peace-keeping
Force between Israel and Syria should be extended for a
further period of six months. In saying that, we should like
to make it clear that we are not in favour of automatic
extensions of the mandate of the Force. The purpose of
maintaining the Force is not to enable any party to freeze
the situation but, rather, to enable the parties concerned to
negotiate a lasting peace on the basis of Security Council
resolutions. We hope that negotiations will begin soon-at
any rate, during the next six months-and make some
progress towards a just and lasting settlement.

63. In concluding, I should like to express our sincere
appreciation of the inspired and devoted efforts undertaken
during the last six months by the Secretary-General and his
staff. My delegation feels a special obligation to pay a
tribute to the memory of Major Ernst Pellegrini, Deputy
Chief Operations Officer of UNDOF who died ,in the
performance of his duties and thus gave his life for the
cause of peace. May I express through you, Mr. President,
the deeply felt condolences of my Government, my
country and my delegation to the family of Major Pellegrini
and to the people and the Government of Austria. I should
also like to voice our sympathy to Lieutenant-Colonel
Firooz Ferdows of Iran, Chief Operations Officer, who was
injured in the same incident.

60. Mr. von WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
My delegation gladly joined in voting in favour of the draft
resolution just adopted, renewing, on the recommendation
of the Secretary-General, the mandate of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force for a further period
of six months. My delegation notes with satisfaction that
the parties to the conflict have again accepted the continuation of UNDOF’s presence and have thereby made the
extension of its mandate possible.
61. It is the understanding of my delegation that this
renewal, like the previous ones, is meant to provide the
parties with another opportunity to achieve progress
towards a peace settlement. It has been noted in the

64. My delegation’s gratitude and appreciation also extend
to all countries contributing contingents to UNDOF.
7

65. Finally, may I congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your persistent and successful efforts in bringing about the
agreement of the parties, which has made possible this
further renewal of the UNDOF mandate.

70. We therefore express the hope that all &the conditions
for the resumption of the Geneva Conference will be met as
soon as possible and that real negotiations will begin with
the aim of implementing the principles which I have just
mentioned.

66. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (intelpretahcw
from
French): The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force on the Golan Heights is
undoubtedly a sign of goodwill and hope which we should
welcome since it removes the most immediate threats.
However, there is no need to make the point that it does
not deal with the substance of the problem. That is why
our pleasure in ensuring the retention of this instrument
which, we feel, has been useful in the present circumstances, in no way diminishes our concern over the lack of
progress towards a settlement. That lack of progress is all
the more regrettable because, when the mandate of the
Force was renewed last November, we unanimously expressed the hope that the intervening period would be used
by the parties to make renewed efforts for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. Such
was at that time and such remains today the meaning of the
presence of the United Nations forces in the Middle East.

71. In conclusion, I should like to say how much my
Government appreciates the manner in which the Secretary-General and his associates, as well as the Commander
of the Force and its various contingents, have been carrying
out the difficult‘ tasks which have been assigned to them. I
should like here to pa)r a tribute to the memory of Major
Pellegrini, Deputy Chief Operations Officer of UNDOF,
who was killed in the performance of his duties and to wish
Lieutenant-Colonel Ferdows a speedy recovery. UNDOF’s
entire staff has shown with distinction that the United
Nations has an indispensable role to play in the search for
and maintenance of peace.
72. Mr. FIFOOT (United Kingdom): My delegation was
pleased once again to join with other members of the
Council in voting in favour of the resolution we have today
adopted renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for a further six months.
The role played by the Force in supervising the cease-fire
and the Disengagement Agreement remains extremely
important.
We fully support the judgement of the
Secretary-General that the extension of the mandate and
the continued presence of the Force remain essential at the
present time.

67. fn the circumstances, and inasmuch as there is still
uncertainty, it seems to us that the renewal of the mandate
of the Force is a sign of wisdom. There can be no doubt
that the parties concerned will thus still have the opportunity to arrive at a peace settlement by peaceful means.
However, their mutual trust and the trust placed in ,them by
the international community must not be betrayed. We are
indeed aware that, as indicated by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 31 of his report, “the situation in the area will
continue to be unstable and dangerous unless real progress
can soon be made towards a just and durable settlement of
the problem in all its aspects”. It is for that reason that we
voted as we did today, since, in our view, the presence of the
Force can be truly meaningful only if it is part of the setirch
for peace.

73. At the same time, I ihould like to take this occasion to
reiterate our view that the renewal of the mandate should
not be seen as an end in itself but as the means to an end,
that is, to the establishment of a full, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East through negotiations between the parties
con&med. The presence of the Force cannot act as a
substitute for peace but is there to provide the conditions
which are necessary to permit negotiations to take place. In
his report, the Secretary-General has voiced his concern,
which is shared by many of us, that the present opportunity must be seized if we are to avoid the danger of a new
deterioration in the situation. Over the last six months, a
certain amount of progress has been made towards preparing the way for negotiations to resume in the second
half of this year, though a number of important differences
between the parties still remain. This fresh renewal of the
mandate of UNDOF provides further time to carry on with
the process that has been begun and to help in narrowing
those differences. It is vital that this time should be well
used and that the pace of the peace-making process should
not now be allowed to slacken.

68. The Force whose mandate we have renewed today is
not in itself an active factor in the negotiation process. But
it is a sign of our hope for a just and lasting solution, our
desire to see progress towards a settlement based on
reasonable and carefully considered views. Everyone here
realizes that delaying too long does not promote peace. As
the Secretary-General also pointed out, unless the opportunity is seized to resume negotiations as soon as possible in
a constructive spirit, the risk of a further deterioration in
the situation will increase and become ever more serious.
69. I should like here to quote the President of the French
Republic, who said a few days ago that 1977 could be the
year when a decisive step would be taken towards peace if
everyone were to show goodwill together. The head of the
French Stare went on to say that he was convinced that it
was necessary to arrive at an overall, just and lasting
solution in the near future. I should like to recall that, in
our view, this solution must be based on the following three
principles: withdrawal from the territories occupied by
Israel in 1967; recognition of the right of the Palestinians to
a homeland; finally, recognition of the right of all States of
the area to live in peace within secure, recognized and
guaranteed borders.

74. Once again, we should like to offer our congratulations to the Secretary-General and his staff and to the
Commander, Major-General Philipp, and the members of his
Force for the way in which they have fulfilled their
important and sometimes delicate role over the past six
months. The skill, tact and efficiency which they have
demonstrated is worthy of the highest praise. My delegation
would also like to offer its condolences to the Austrian
Government for the tragic death, on 20 April, of an
Austrian officer of the Force in an incident in which an
Iranian officer was also injured.
8

75. ‘The tasks which the members of the Force are
Performing
remain of the highest importance to the
maintenance
of the present calm and the achievement of a
future peace. Their performance of those tasks does lasting
credit both to themselves and to the Organization which
they serve.

has made it possible for the Council to reach a decision to
which my delegation lent its support.
83. We wish also to voice our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his associates,in particular to MajorGeneral Hannes Philipp, Commander of the Force, and to
Lieutenant-General Ensio Siilasvuo, Chief Co-ordinator of
United Nations Peace-keeping Missions in the Middle Fast.
We also express our appreciation to those countries which
have contributed contingents to the Force, namely, Austria,
Canada, Iran and Poland, as well as to those countries
which contribute the United Nations military observers
attached to the Force.

76. Mr. RAMPHUL
(M auritius): My delegation is happy
that the draft resolution contained in document S/12337
has been adopted unanimously. I am particularly happy
that, in. the resolution, the Council calls upon the parties
concerned
to
immediately
resolution
implement
338 (1973) and, at the same time, renews the mandate of
UNDOF
for a further period of six months, until 30
November
1977. Your statement, Mr. President, which
included
a quotation from the report of the SecretaryGeneral, has given true meaning to the resolution.

84. According to the Secretary-General’s report,
“Despite the efforts made towards resolving the question of freedom of movement, the existing arrangements
still fall short of what is required and of what is provided
for in the Protocol to the Agreement on Disengagement.”

77. Syria has shown great restraint and understanding. It is
obvious that Syria is bending backwards not to escalate the
present tension in the region. It is my understanding,
however, that Syria’s agreement to the extension of the
mandate of UNDOF should in no way be construed as an
automatic
or routine acceptance. The United Nations
should avail itself of the chances thus provided for the
establishment
of a just and lasting peace within the
framework of resolutions 242, (1967) and 338 (1973).

[Ibid., para. 16.]

This is a matter which we wish to stress once again. We
recognize the importance of the Force as an element which
contributes to the creation of peace conditions in the
region, and the parties should, without any reluctance,
provide the Force with all the necessaryfacilities so that it
may carry out its functions, not only out of consideration
for the Force itself, but as a sign of respect for Security
Council resolutions.

78. In this respect, our esteemed Secretary-General and his
staff deserve a special tribute for all their constructive and
positive efforts in search of justice and peace in the Middle
East.

85. My delegation wishes also to voice its deep regrets at
the death of Major Ernst Pellegrini of Austria, Deputy Chief
Operations Officer, who lost his life as a result of a mine
explosion on 20 April, We wish to convey to the Government of Austria, as well as to the family of Major Pellegrini,
the condolences of the people and Government of Panama.
We would also extend our sympathy to the Government of
Iran and to Lieutenant-Colonel Firooz Ferdows, Chief
Operations Officer, who waswounded in the, same incident.

79. Other, similar dialogues and ddmarches at the highest
level are also encouraging. However, certain difficulties
seem to have cropped up recently, and I hope that, whether
they be procedural or substantive, they will be ironed out
soon and that the Geneva Conference can be resumed
before the end of this year.
80. In the meantime, those participating in UNDOF
deserve our deep appreciation and encouragement. Our
sympathy
goes to the families and Governments of those
participants
in the disengagement action who have fallen or
been injured.

86. Finally, we wish to point out that the decision taken
today by the Council is reflected in two documents: the
draft resolution in document S/12337 and the note by the
President of the Council in document S/12338. Those two
documents, taken together, form the decision in which the
Council calls upon the parties concerned to implement
immediately resolution 338 (1973) extends the mandate of
the Force for an additional six months, that is, to 30
November 1977, and asks the Secretary-General to submit
another report to the Council at the end of that period. In
the opinion of my delegation, it is very important to bear in
mind that, by adopting this resolution, we are not freezing
the situation, but rather creating favourable conditions for
a just and lasting settlement.

81. I cannot imagine a just and lasting peace in the region
without a complete withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
Arab territories and an unqualified respect for the inalienable rights of the Palestinians. The absence of the true
representatives of the Palestinians-namely the PLO-at the
conference table at Geneva will not be helpful to anyone.
On the other hand, it must be understood that Israel does
exist and that it has the right to exist within secure
boundaries. I pray that good sense will prevail on all sides
and that, once again, peace will settle on the Middle East
before long.

87. Today’s decision specifically cites the opinion of the
Secretary-General that:

ILLUECA
(Panama)
lintelpretution
from
82. Mr.
Qmnish):
The Secretary-General has presented to the
C0unoi.I a report on the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement
Observer Force for the period 23 November
I976 to 23 May 1977 (S/12333/. My delegation wishes to
note fiat this comprehensive, useful and objective report

“the main elements of the Middle East problem remain
unresolved and that the situation in the area will continue
to be unstable and dangerous unless real progress can
soon be made towards a just and durable settlement Of
the problem in all its aspects” [ibid, era. 311.
9

involved in the conflict, and we hope that that will bring US
closer to an understanding in the area.

In this connexion, my delegation listened with great
interest to and welcomed the statements made at this
meeting of the Council by the representatives of the United
States and the Soviet Union, since those countries are
co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference. Essentially, their
statements indicate a willingness to take advantage of the
favourable circumstances that exist for a resumption of the
Conference and for the parties to sit down at the
conference table.

92. We should also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-Gereral for his continuing
efforts on behalf of a lasting peace in the Middle East.
93. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Frenchj: Since
there are no further speakers on my list, I shall now address
the Council in my capacity as the representative of BENIN.

88. My country hopes that, when the Secretary-General
submits his next report, the Security Council and world
public opinion will receive positive information about the
efforts made by the co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference
and about effective and genuine United Nations participation, in the person of the Secretary-General, in the Geneva
talks, since this is something to which the third world
attaches particular importance.

94. The position of my country, the People’s Republic of
Benin, on all aspects of the Middle East conflict is well
known to everyone. Benin supports unreservedly the cause
of the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their legitimate
struggle to free themselves from imperialist domination and
the exploitation of man by man. My country has followed
with great interest the efforts made up to now by the
Secretary-General to obtain the resumption of the Geneva
Conference which, for the moment, appears to be the most
appropriate framework for bringing together all the parties,
--..achieve a negotiated
without exception, in order
settlement of this crisis Pf--@
ovoked and maintained by
international imperialism.

89. In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to convey to YOU
my delegation’s appreciation for your diplomatic tact, your
devotion and the wisdom with which you have conducted
the deliberations that have culminated today in what we
view to be a positive decision, one towards which the
parties have demonstrated an attitude which-in spite of the
great difficulties we know exist-offers hope that the
Arab-Israeli conflict will be solved in a just and lasting
manner.

95. My delegation reaffirms that there will be no lasting
peace in the Middle East without the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Arab
territories. Furthermore, my delegation would like to state
that there is no chance for a negotiated settlement of the
Middle East crisis if the Palestinian national entity continues to be disregarded.

90. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spnnish,J: We voted in favour of the resolution which has
just been adopted in accordance with our position with
regard to the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force. We believe that the Force has been a valuable factor
in relieving tension in the area. It is for that reason that we
favour its existence and will continue to do so until a
settlement has been found.

96. As concerns the non-participation of Benin in the
renewal of the mandate of the Force, I should like to state
that our position remains the same as that which we
assumed in November 1976, at the time of the adoption of
resolution 398 (1976), the text of which is similar to the
one that the Council has just adopted.

91. We are very pleased that the Governments of Syria and
of Israel have agreed to accept the renewal of the mandate
of the Force, and we hope that the spirit of flexibility and
compromise that has made that decision possible will be
applied to other complex aspectsof the situation, so that
those problems that obstruct the achievement of peace in
the area may be resolved. We hope that every means will be
used to make it possible for the Geneva Peace Conference
to be resumed with the participation of all the parties

97. My delegation commends the efforts made in recent
times by the Arab States of the region towards achieving a
peaceful and just resolution of all ‘aspects of tie crisis
within the framework of the Geneva Conference.
The meetingroseat 5.25 p. m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equitialent

in other currencies)

77.70001-April

1978-2,200
