S/PV.6813

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6813th meeting

Tuesday, 24 July 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Eick
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Madureira
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2012/548)

12-43581 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1243581*

S/PV.6813

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2012/548)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, Joint African Union-United Nations Special
Representative for Darfur, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/548, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gambari, whom I
warmly welcome to the Council.
Mr. Gambari: I thank you very much, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Council once again on
the situation in Darfur and the implementation of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Further to the report
of the Secretary-General on UNAMID of 16 July
(S/2012/548), which is before the Council, I would like
to highlight several key developments related to the
political and security situation.
While the signatory parties to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, namely, the Government of the
Sudan and the Liberation and Justice Movement, have
made notable progress towards its implementation,
to date that has been focused mainly on establishing
the institutions provided for in the agreement and
associated political appointments. In that connection,
the parties recognized that many provisions of the Doha
Document remained unimplemented several months
after their stipulated deadlines.

2

A committee consisting of the signatory parties
and UNAMID has revised the implementation
timetable to allow for new deadlines on implementing
the agreement’s provisions. Representatives of the
parties initialled the revised timetable at a ceremony
in Khartoum on 18 July, during which they committed
to promptly fulfilling their obligations under the
agreement. Unlike the situation following the adoption
of the Darfur Peace Agreement of 5 May 2006 — which
was signed in my country’s capital, Abuja — when the
Government of the Sudan had far more resources than
political will to implement the agreement, it now appears
the Government has the political will to implement the
Doha Document but fewer financial resources to fully
implement its provisions.
It is in this context that the Darfur Regional
Authority (DRA), with the support of UNAMID and
other international partners, has initiated the Darfur
Joint Assessment Mission provided for in the Doha
Document. The Mission, which is intended to identify
and assess needs for economic recovery, development
and poverty eradication in Darfur, is projected to
be completed by the end of the year and to form the
basis for resource mobilization. Its initiation is a
positive step that deserves our commendation. As
the announcement by President Al-Bashir on 18 June
of austerity measures indicates, while the principal
responsibility for implementing the Doha Document
rests with the signatory parties, they will require the
support of the international community to implement
the major provisions effectively and in a timely manner.
In my capacity as Joint Chief Mediator ad interim, I
have continued to work, in consultation with the Deputy
Prime Minister of the State of Qatar, His Excellency
Ahmed bin Abdullah Al-Mahmoud, who has retained the
portfolio for mediation on the Darfur conflict, towards
the resumption of negotiations between the Government
of the Sudan and non-signatory armed movements. In
this regard, in addition to my engagement with the
major movements, several smaller armed movements
and factions have approached me expressing interest
in holding talks with the Government using the Doha
Document as a basis for discussions. These movements
are listed in the latest report.
In my recent discussions with Deputy Prime Minister
Al-Mahmoud, we agreed that the environment was
suitable for a relaunch of the mediation process through
preliminary consultations with all interested opposition
movements. The intention would be to consolidate the

12-43581

S/PV.6813

gains being made through the implementation of the
Doha Document and apply pressure on the hold-out
movements to join the process. During our discussions
with the Sudanese Government Minister and Chairman
of the Darfur Peace Follow-Up Office, Mr. Amin Hassan
Omar, he expressed the Government’s willingness to
engage with the movements using the Doha Document
as a framework for discussions.

The Conference’s principal achievement is that it
provided a forum, for the first time since Doha and
inside Darfur, for Darfuri stakeholders to take stock
and recommend the way forward. Over 110 people
expressed their views freely and clearly during the
Conference. Almost all of them were very critical of
the Government in their approach. We have heard of
no instances of reprisal or intimidation of participants.

UNAMID has continued to assist the parties in
their efforts to disseminate the Doha Document, in
conjunction with civil society organizations. On 5 July,
the last dissemination workshop was held at El Fasher
University, bringing the total of completed workshops
to 140, with the participation of over 25,000 individuals
in the five Darfur states, over 30 per cent of whom were
women. Almost all the workshops took place without
restrictions.

The Conference, in combination with the Doha
Document dissemination workshops conducted
throughout Darfur, provided lessons learned in
preparations for the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugee returns conference planned by the DRA in
the fall, as well as the eventual Darfur internal dialogue
and consultations. UNAMID will continue to monitor
the establishment of elements that facilitate an enabling
environment ahead of the conduct of the internal
dialogue. With the experiences gained and views
expressed by Darfuris during the Doha Document
dissemination exercise, and also at the All Darfur
Stakeholders Conference, prospects appear positive for
the proposed dialogue and consultations.

Within the context of the dissemination efforts, the
Mission has sought the views of Darfuri stakeholders
on the role of the Darfur internal dialogue and
consultations in consolidating peace and encouraging
reconciliation, as provided for in the Doha Document.
While they expressed concern about whether the
majority of stakeholder groups would be allowed to
participate in a process free from manipulation by the
parties to the conflict, they nevertheless called for the
process to start immediately.
I had the privilege of attending the DRA’s
preparatory All Darfur Stakeholders Conference in
El Fasher from 10 to 12 July. The stated objective of the
Conference was to
“mobilize popular, political and diplomatic
support for the Doha Document; mobilize efforts
and potentials for supporting development
programmes; promote principles of team work
and values of democracy and dialogue; create an
environment conducive to repairing the social
fabric and voluntary return of internally displaced
persons; and create good conditions for launching
the Darfur-Darfur dialogue”.
The Conference was opened by the First
Vice-President of the Republic, Mr. Ali Osman Taha.
It was attended by several ministers, members of the
diplomatic corps based in Khartoum and members
of the Doha Document Implementation Follow-Up
Commission. UNAMID provided logistics support to
the conference, transporting more than 800 participants
from a broad range of Darfuri stakeholder groups.

In this regard, the Darfur Regional Authority
should be commended for organizing the All Darfur
Stakeholders Conference during the current atmosphere
of economic crisis and frustration. It is a manifestation
of the DRA’s commitment to dialogue and partnership
with the people of Darfur on the region’s future.
Further to the military clashes described in the
report before the Council, UNAMID peacekeepers
verified that, on 8 July, Sudanese Armed Forces
(SAF) aircraft dropped 24 bombs approximately 20
kilometres south of Tawilla, in North Darfur, seven
of which landed four kilometers from an IDP camp. A
UNAMID patrol visited and confirmed the safety of
four non-governmental organization personnel stranded
in Khartoum Jadid village by the bombing. The patrol
provided security information to the aid workers and
offered to escort them to safety. They subsequently
reached El Fasher safely after opting to proceed of their
own accord.
On 16 July, Government and unidentified armed
movement forces then clashed 29 kilometres south-east
of Tawilla. Local sources corroborated reports that a
SAF helicopter was shot down by movement ground
forces during the fighting. A further two bombs were
dropped by SAF aircraft on 18 July, 23 kilometres south
of Tawilla. The clashes followed reports of carjackings

12-435813

S/PV.6813

and robberies of civilians by unidentified armed groups
active in the area, as well as, on 26 June, the ambush of
a Sudanese Armed Forces convoy 30 kilometres south
of Tawilla. Government soldiers were allegedly killed
and vehicles stolen in the attack.
UNAMID peacekeepers verified the reports of
bombings and clashes and assessed the populations’
protection needs. There were no reported civilian
casualties. An ordnance disposal team safely disposed
of eight unexploded bombs and several unexploded
rockets. A UNAMID patrol to Dally IDP camp, eight
kilometres south of Tawilla, ascertained that the
fighting had displaced approximately 750 people.
A humanitarian assessment mission to the area was
conducted on 18 July, the findings of which will inform
assistance to be provided by the aid agencies.
In other incidents, on 8 July two unidentified
armed men who entered Hamadiya camp near Zalingei,
Central Darfur, were confronted and fatally assaulted
by residents who suspected them of criminal activity.
The following day, nine camp residents were abducted
from the camp. The abductees have demanded a ransom
for the hostages, compensation for the two persons
killed, and the handing over of the perpetrators of the
assaults.
Camp leaders, many of whom support the
non-signatory movement Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid, have refused to allow Government authorities
access to the camp to investigate the killings. UNAMID
is engaging with local authorities, camp leaders and
neighbouring communities to ease tensions and facilitate
a peaceful resolution of the situation. Peacekeepers
have been deployed around the camp to deter further
violence. Furthermore, the frequency of UNAMID
police patrols within the camp has been increased.
On 16 and 18 July, clashes between groups of
Rezeigat and Misseriya at Abu Jabra, East Darfur, near
the border with Southern Kordofan, were triggered by
a dispute over land and grazing rights. According to
local sources, approximately 60 people were killed in
the fighting. Upon receiving reports of the fighting,
UNAMID dispatched a team to the area to avert further
conflict. The mission also transported local authorities,
including the East Darfur Wali and tribal leaders, for
discussions with community leaders in order to call
for calm. Sudanese armed forces have been deployed
between the groups. Tensions have eased following
the intervention by UNAMID and local authorities.

4

UNAMID, whose intervention earned commendation
by local authorities in East Darfur, continues to monitor
the situation closely and to support local reconciliation
efforts.
The challenges facing Darfur today are many,
but through the determination and commitment to
sustainable peace championed by the staff of UNAMID
and the people of Darfur, considerable progress has been
made. Politically, the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
and the African Union and United Nations framework
for the Darfur peace process are key documents capable
of steering Sudanese and international engagement
in Darfur along a path towards a comprehensive and
inclusive settlement of the conflict. Furthermore, both
documents offer a means through which the everyday
lives of Darfuris can be improved.
With the establishment of the Darfur Regional
Authority, we in UNAMID now have a new and direct
partner with which to advance our common goal of peace
in Darfur. I would like to emphasize the importance
of working with the DRA and other institutions to
build their capacity at this critical juncture in the
peace process. It is time for the task of peacekeeping
to be complemented by initiatives that advance
peacebuilding and early recovery and development in
Darfur. We must redouble our commitment to restore
basic services to more communities and facilitate
early recovery and reconstruction. In my view, that is
the key to consolidating our gains in the region and to
persuading communities ambivalent about the peace
process to join it.
I should like to say, with respect, that while
sustainable peace is in sight, there remains some way to
go. What progress has been made remains fragile and
is easily reversible, should we lose focus. The people
of Darfur have suffered too long, and too deeply, for us
to allow any setbacks or regression. We must instead
remain focused, determined and committed to making
progress along the path to peace and reconciliation in
Darfur.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Gambari for his briefing on the situation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council

12-43581

S/PV.6813

for this month. Through you, I should also like to
convey my gratitude to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Joint
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
African Union and the United Nations for Dafur, for
the briefing he has given us on the report (S/2012/548)
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Darfur and
on the state of the implementation of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We hope that our discussion today
will lead to the strengthening of the peace process and
to stability throughout Darfur, following an arduous
path towards the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace.
The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council emphasizes that there has been progress on the
political front when it comes to the implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace. That came about once
the Darfur Regional Authority embarked upon its task
of establishing its offices in both Darfur and Khartoum.
Paragraph 17 of the report also refers to the austerity
measures recently introduced by the Government of the
Sudan. In spite of them, however, between 3 and 18 April
the Government earmarked approximately $27 million
for the Darfur Regional Authority. The Government of
the Sudan continues to make all the necessary efforts to
fund the Authority.
I would also like to refer to paragraph 6 of the
report, which mentions our Government’s issuance of
two decrees intended to expedite the implementation
of the Doha Document. The first established the High
Follow-up Committee for Peace in Darfur, which is
chaired by the President himself. The second decree
broadened the membership of the Darfur Peace
Follow-up Office, which had been established pursuant
to the Doha Document itself.
We note that the draft resolution on extending the
mandate of UNAMID does not adequately reflect that
progress. Various parts of the draft resolution contain
negative references with respect to serious delays in
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, which contradicts what we have just hear from
Mr. Gambari. He pointed out that a number of rebel
movements had been in contact with him and with the
Deputy Prime Minister of the State of Qatar in an effort
to join the Doha Document.
Mr. Gambari also pointed out that 140 workshops
had been jointly organized by UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan, including the participation

of many individuals from Darfur, with a view to
considering the Document and its implementation.
Mr. Gambari also mentioned that those workshops
were organized without restrictions and that women
made up more than 30 per cent of the participants. All
of that bears witness to the fact that there has been real
progress in the march towards peace in Darfur, but the
draft resolution to extend the mandate of UNAMID
does not reflect all of that progress.
Similarly, we have heard Mr. Gambari say, and as
is also positively reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report, that the Darfur conference held in El Fasher
from 10 to 12 July enjoyed the participation of a large
number of members of the rebel movements. They
were perfectly free to participate in the conference
with no restrictions on their freedom of speech, and
they all criticized the Government. Does that not bear
witness to the seriousness and the commitment of the
Government to the peace process in Darfur? We expect
the Security Council to reflect that commitment in the
draft resolution in order to encourage all the parties to
implement and meet all expectations.
Paragraph 5 of the report of the Secretary-General
reflects the fact that the high committee consisting of the
signatory parties of the Doha Document and UNAMID
met in June 2012 and agreed on a precise timetable
for the implementation of the Doha Document. That
new, positive development is reflected in the context
of a detailed schedule for implementation of the Doha
Document.
We also expected the draft resolution to include
provisions that would be more firm vis-à-vis the
movements that are refusing peace, and contain more
binding and stringent language, especially after
the Secretary-General indicates in the report that
the rebel movements rejecting peace in Darfur are
backing their declarations through their adherence to
the so-called Sudan Revolutionary Front, according
to which their goal is to overthrow the Government.
Moreover, the representatives of these movements have
made it crystal clear to Mr. Gambari, according to the
Secretary-General’s report, that they are committed to
the goal of the Sudan Revolutionary Front to overthrow
the Government by force and military action.
Is it possible that the draft resolution concerning
the extension of the mandate of UNAMID does not
mention or condemn those serious developments,
since the principle task of the Council is to maintain

12-435815

S/PV.6813

international peace and security? The absence of a clear
condemnation of movements that have openly declared
their goal to overthrow the Government is tantamount
to encouraging that grave trend.
The report before us makes it clear that
development and reconstruction projects enjoy the
priority attention of the Government and the Liberation
and Justice Movement in order to meet the need for
stability in Darfur and to secure the voluntary return
of displaced persons, as noted in the humanitarian
section of the report, which in paragraph 36 states that
37,444 internally displaced persons and 1,145 refugees
returned home and resumed their normal daily lives in
the period between 1 January and 31 March 2012. That
is a welcome and positive development, as were the
continuing voluntary returns in April, May and June,
which confirms the current stability and security in the
governorate of Darfur.
At the same time, it makes clear that the international
community in general should offer the support necessary
to implement quick-impact projects and programmes in
support of returnees. In that regard, we welcome the
meeting held on 28 May, in which representatives of
the African Development Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank and a
number of international partners participated. The
meeting marked the start of joint planning for the
Darfur Joint Assessment Mission provided for in the
Doha Document in order to assess development needs,
eradicate poverty and ensure sustainable economic
activity in Darfur.
What is striking is that, while the Secretary-General’s
report notes the political activities of the various parties
under the Doha Document, embracing civil society in
Darfur, the draft resolution circulating among Council
members does not refer to all aspects necessary to
extend the Mission’s mandate.
With respect to the contents of the draft resolution
concerning the movement of the Mission, we note that
UNAMID has stepped up its daily patrols to some 160
a day, as compared to 90 in previous periods. This
is evidence of the freedom of movement enjoyed by
UNAMID. We further note that before coming to New
York, Joint Special Representative Mr. Ibrahim Gambari
himself participated in a helicopter patrol over the five
administrative capitals El Fasher, El Geneina, Nyala,
Zalingei and El Daein in only two days. First of all, we
thank him for his commendable efforts in undertaking

6

that task. What is important to me is that those patrols
prove the complete freedom of movement of all
UNAMID staff given the visits to the various corners
of Darfur. Those visits demonstrate the stability, peace
and security in Darfur.
Another significant issue that I would like to share
with the Council at the end of my statement concerns a
matter that is extremely important to my Government,
namely, linking the Lord’s Resistance Army to the
Darfur issue. As the Council knows, UNAMID has
a mandate only for the Darfur region. Moreover, the
Lord’s Resistance Army is a rebel movement within
the territory of Uganda, and the Sudan has no common
border with Uganda. Furthermore, there are no elements
of the Lord’s Resistance Army rebellion inside Darfur
and there is no official information based on credible
reports to that effect in Darfur. My country rejects the
inclusion of the issue of the Lord’s Resistance Army in
the question of Darfur.
I would like to state openly to all Council members
that we have cooperated wholeheartedly in order to
further the peace process in Darfur. We continue to
cooperate with UNAMID and its officials, who have
borne witness to our cooperation. However, including
the issue of the Lord’s Resistance Army will be an
impediment and a matter for condemnation that could
perhaps affect our cooperation with UNAMID and its
work in Darfur. If we truly wish to establish peace,
stability and security, we should keep that issue very
distinct from UNAMID and Darfur. Otherwise, we will
have hampered the peace process.
I want to make that important message very clear.
There are no grounds for linking the two issues of the
Lord’s Resistance Army and UNAMID. If the draft
resolution includes it, that will complicate relations
between the Government of the Sudan and UNAMID,
and those who support such a position will be responsible
for the consequences arising therefrom.
Finally, I would like to say that the Government of
the Sudan vigorously condemns the Lord’s Resistance
Army movement. We are ready to cooperate with all
members of the international community in order to put
an end to it. However, linking it to Darfur and UNAMID
is something that we condemn and deem unwarranted.
In conclusion, I would briefly like to say that we
trust the Council to commit itself to peace and security
by ensuring that its draft resolution contains a clear
condemnation of the so-called Sudan Revolutionary

12-43581

S/PV.6813

Front and its declared objective of overthrowing the
Government of the Sudan by force.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on the list. I invite Council

members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

12-435817
