OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

19 JUNE

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2595/Rev.2)

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation

...,............................

1
1

*.,..........,.....,...,,,........,...,.*..,....

in Namibia:

(a)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);

(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242) . . ..I.......................
.**...*.*..........*

WPV.2595

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicatesthe supplementin which it appearsor in which information about
it is given.
The resolutionsof the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964,are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council.The new system, which has beenapplied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operative on that date.

2595th MEETING
Held in New York
President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

on Wednesday,

(Trinidad and Tobago).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2595/Rev.2)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(b) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/I 7222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)
The meeting was called to order at 5.40 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Namibia:

(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
@I Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kofa (Liberia) tack
a place at the Council table.

19 June 1985, at 3.30 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting Resident of
the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sinclair, Acting
President of the United Nations Councilfor Nomibiu, and the
other members of the delegation took a place at the Council
table.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite Mr, Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a place
at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at previous meetings on this item [2583rd to 2587th, 2589th,
259Oth, 2592nd and 2594th meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, the Congo, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Inn, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Poland, Seychelles, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(AfghQnistan),
Mr. Bessaieh (Algeria), Mr. Van-Dunem (Angola), Mr. Muiiiz
(Argentina), Mr. Choudhury (Bangiadesh), Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Mr. Tshering (Bhutan), Mrs. Carrasco (Bolivia), Mr.
Legwaila (Botswana), Mr, MacieI(Brazil). Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Engo (Cameroon), Mr. Lewis (Canada), Mr.
Gayama (Congo), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. C&ar (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Luutenschlager (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. Asamoah (Ghana), Mr. Karran (Guyana),
Mr, Charles (Hoi@, Mr. Foldeak (Hungury), Mr. Kusaonaatmadja (lndonesia), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic
of Iran), Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr, Kuroda (Japan), Mr.

Kiilu (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait) Mr. Vongsay (Lao
People’s Democratic Republic), Mr. Makeka (Lesotho), Mr.
Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Zain (Malaysia),
Mr, Gauci (Malta), Mr. Muhoz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Nyamdoo
(Mongolia), Mr. AIaoui (Morocco), Mr. Murargy (Mozambique), Mr, D’Escoto Brockmann (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari
(Nigeria), Mr. Shah Nawaz (Pakistan), Mr. Cabrera Jovane,
(Panama), Mr. Nowak (Poland), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles),
Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Wijewardane (Sri
Lanka), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey), Mr. Odaka (Uganda), Mr.
AI-Mosfir, (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Mkapa (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam), Mr.
Golob (Yugoslavia), Mr. Goma. (Zambia) and Mr. Mudenge
(Zimbabwe) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

“(4

7. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/17253, which contains the text of a
letter dated 10 June 1985from the representative of Mongolia to the Secretary-General.
8. The first speaker is the representative of Guatemala. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
9. Mr. FAJARDO
MALDONADO
(Guatemala)
(interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and the members of the Council for allowing
my delegation to speak. As this is the first time we have
participated in the debate on Namibia, we should like to
express our pleasure at seeing, you, Sir, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of ‘Trinidad and Tobago, a fraternal
country of the Caribbean, presiding over these series of
important meetings. We are sure that your skill and
knowledge of international problems guarantee success
for the Council’s deliberations.

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Guatemala in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

10. I should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the representative of Thailand on the effective
manner in which he conducted the work of the Council
during the month of May.
11. Guatemala is taking part in the debate on the question of Namibia because we are concerned over recent
events, which affect the interests and daily life of the population of the Territory and which endanger international
peace and security.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fajardo Maldonado
(Guatemala) took the place resewedfor him at the side of the
Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/17284/Rev.l, which contains the
revised text of a draft resolution submitted by Burkina
Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad and
Tobago. On behalf of the sponsors of the draft resolution,
I should like to inform the Council of the following further
changes in the text, which will be reproduced as document
S/17284/Rev.2.
Operative paragraphs 13 and 14, as
revised, now read as follows:

12. Once again the Council finds it necessary to discuss
the question of Namibia, as it already has on innumerable
occasions. The General Assembly has been dealing with this
matter for 20 years and has adopted a number of resolutions
demanding Namibian independence, but those resolutions
have been completely ignored. In its resolution 2145 (XXI)
of 26 October 1966, the General Assembly terminated
South Africa’s mandate over the Territory of Namibia, and
the United Nations assumed direct responsibility for the
administration of the Territory and the preparation of a
programme that would allow the Namibian people to exercise its right to self-determination and independence. Then
the General Assembly adopted resolution 2372 (XXII) of 12
June 1968, recommending that the Security Council
urgently take measures, in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure the immediate removal of the South African presence from Namibia
and to secure for Namibia its independence in accordance
with resolution 2145 (XXI). Subsequently the Council reaffirmed the legal responsibility of the United Nations in
relation to Namibia, and it adopted resolution 435 (1978),
which my Government fully supports.

“13. Strongly warns South Africa that failure to do
so would compel the Security Council to meet forthwith
to consider the adoption of appropriate measures under
the Charter, including Chapter VII, as additional pressure to ensure South Africa’s compliance with the
above-mentioned resolutions;
“14. Urges States Members of the United Nations
that have not done so to consider in the meantime taking
appropriate voluntary measures against South Africa,
which could include the following:
“(a) Suspension of new investments and application
of disincentives to that end;

13. Guatemala feels enough time has passed and every
avenue has been explored to bring about an orderly, peaceful transition to independent life in Namibia within a unifled, integrated territory. We believe that resolution 435
(1978) is the only acceptable basis for the peaceful, final
settlement of the question of Namibia. We are therefore

“(b) Re-examination of maritime and aerial relations
with South Africa;
“(c) Prohibition of the sale of krugerrands
other coins minted in South Africa; [and]

Restrictions on sports and cultural relations.”

and all
2

concerned at the actions and attitudes of the South African
Government, which seem to be aimed at perpetuation of
the colonial situation in that territory or at unacceptable,
partial and conditional independence,

focus the attention of the international community on the
installation by South Africa of a so-called interim government in Windhoek, in violation of the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council on Namibia.

14. The international community cannot remain silent in’
the face of the South African Government’s intransigence,
which by obstructing implementation
of the Security
Council’s categorical decisions on Namibia is thus violating its resolution 435 (1978) and 439 (197Q as well as
resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly. Thus it
is endangering not only regional but international peace
and security.

21. Statements were made at that meeting by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, the President of
the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the Chairman of the Special Committee against
Apartheid and the chairmen of regional groups. Statements
were also made by members of the United Nations Council for Namibia, including its Acting Presidrnt.

15. The South African Government decision to set up a
so-called interim government, ignoring the Council’s decisions on this question, flouts the opinion of the international community. That is why Guatemala joins all other
nations in rejecting that manoeuvre, in keeping with the
Secretary-General’s report to the Council [S/1724zlj. We
hope that Pretoria will carefully consider the consequences
of its decision and desist from taking actions that contravene decisions adopted by the Council.

22. Participants unanimously condemned this unilateral
action by South Africa, declaring it null and void in
accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, as well as the decisions of the
United Nations Council for Namibia recently adopted at
its Extraordinary Plenary Meetings at Vienna. They
declared that the installation of the so-called interim
government was an affront to the efforts of the United
Nations Council for Namibia and of the United Nations
for the early implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978)-approving the United Nations plan for
the independence of Namibia-and wasproof of the criminal duplicity of the South African regime.

16. Guatemala endorses the efforts of the international
community, and strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
efforts aimed at accelerating Namibia’s accession to
genuine and internationally recognized independence. We
support the demand for an end to the unlawful occupation
of that Territory and the call for the adoption of urgent
measures for the immediate and unconditional implementation of the United Nations plan for Namibia, as
approved by resolution 435 (1978).

23. They reaffirmed their fullest support for the struggle
of the Namibian people and for SWAPO, their sole,
authentic representative, emphasizing the necessity for the
co-ordination of efforts with SWAP0 for the independence of Namibia.

17. At the present crucial stage of our consideration of
the problem of Namibia, my Government considers it a
matter of capital importance that the Council firmly
assume the United Nations responsibility for the process
leading to that Territory’s independence. The Council is
responsible for implementation of its resolutions, and it
should adopt a clear position regarding defiance of its
efforts. At the same time it must reaffirm and ensure full
implementation of resolution 435 (1978), the sole, fundamental basis for a peaceful settlement of the question, Consequently, the Council must unanimously reject any action
aimed at contravening decisions already adopted.

24. They expressed concern about the tense situation in
the southern African region, in particular about South
Africa’s recent acts of aggression against Angola and Botswana; they emphasized the need for appropriate measures
to be taken by the international community, and urged the
Security Council to impose comprehensive mandatory
sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
25. They reaffirmed the decisions recently adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia at its Extraordinary
Plenary Meetings, held at Vienna, in particular those contained in its Programme of Action [seeS/17184, annex], to
the effect that the Council would promote the imposition
of mandatory sanctions against South Africa by the Security Council in conformity with Chapter VII of the Charter
at its next meeting on the question of Namibia, with the
aim of ensuring the implementation of the United Nations
plan and that it would further urge members of the Security Council which have protected South Africa in the past
to show the necessarypolitical will to exert maximum pressure on South Africa to ensure its compliance with the
terms of resolution 435 (1978).

18. Solution of the problem of Namibia and the final
eradication of the outrageous system of apartheid are inescapable obligations of the international community. Failure to fulfil those obligations can only jeopardize
international peace and security,
19. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Acting
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, Mr.
Noel Sinclair, upon whom I now call.
20. Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana), Acting President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia: I have been mandated by the United Nations Council for Namibia to
inform the Council that the United Nations Council for
Namibia held a special meeting on 17 June in order to

26. The PRESIDENT: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolu3

tion before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.

33. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/17284/Rev.2.

27. I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, France, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet ‘Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

28. Mr. MAXEY (United Kingdom): In my statement
[259&h meering], I said that my delegation regarded resolution’435 (1978) as central to our discussions. I expressed
the hope that we would reach an outcome which gave new
impetus to the Council’s efforts to implement that resolution. It was clear from the debate that members of the
Council were unanimous in condemning South Africa’s
installation of an interim government in Windhoek; in
condemning recent attacks by South African forces in
neighbouring countries; in regarding resolution 435 (1978)
as the only internationally accepted basis for a peaceful
settlement of the Namibian problem; and in pressing for
an urgent decision by South Africa to implement that resolution. These elements should and could have provided the
basis for a draft resolution commanding the unanimous
support of thd Council. The adoption of such a draft resolution would have sent a clear signal of our disapproval
and our determination to the South African Government.
It would have assisted continuing efforts to negotiate the
implementation of the settlement plan.

Against: None.
Abstaining: United Kingdom of Great Britain
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

and

The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes against none,
with 2 abstentions [resolution 566 (1985)J.

34. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements
after the voting.
35. Mr, WOOLCOTT
(Australia): In the Australian
statement to the Security Council on this question six days
ago [258&h meeting], my delegation urged the Council to
send to the South African Government to clear, strong
and unambiguous message. The Council’s debate on this
*matter can have left South Africa in no doubt as to the
strength and the unanimity of international opinion.

29. My delegation therefore went to great lengths to try
to bring about a draft resolution on these lines. As the
Council knows, we formulated specific and constructive
proposals which, in our view, should have been acceptable
to all Council members. I must pay tribute, Mr. President,
to the constructive efforts you made to the same end. I
much regret that these proposals did not meet with the
response for which we had hoped, and that a draft resolution has been submitted which it is known we cannot
support.

36. Today, in agreeing to a resolution, the Council has
reinforced that opinion. My delegation would like to pay
tribute to you, personally, Mr. President, to the representatives of the front-line States, to the members of the Council
and to SWAP0 for the efforts that have been made to
bring about a draft resolution which could be adopted by
the Council.

30. We cannot support any suggestion that armed struggle is to be preferred to negotiations. We do not think it
helpful to ask the Secretary-General to undertake steps
which, in their nature or time frame, are unrealistic.

37. Australia supported the resolution we have just
adopted. We did so because our commitment to the United
Nations plan and its early implementation is complete. We
have on many occasions signalled quite clearly our attitude
to South Africa’s intransigence which is the reason for the
intolerably long delay in implementing the plan.

31. Above all, we do not think that the Council should
seek to tie the hands of Members States in the manner
proposed or to prejudge the outcome of future meetings.
Our vote on this draft resolution therefore does not imply
acceptance that, in future circumstances which are as yet
unknown, the Council will embark on a predetermined
course of action. Each Member State should act in the way
it considers most appropriate to assist the Council in the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The Council has
a responsibility to protect and advance the settlement plan.
It is in accordance with that responsibility as we see it that
the United Kingdom is obliged to abstain in the vote
today.

38. We have rejected the linkage of the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). To us, this puts the cart before the horse.
Moreover, Australia resolutely condemns the establishment of the interim government in Namibia, In voting in
favour of this resolution, we wish to join other countries in
demonstrating clearly to South Africa that the patience of
the international community is close to exhaustion.
39. We are dealing with a Government which applies a
universally condemned system of State-controlled racism,
which has consistently and illegally defied the Council in
relation to Namibia and which has, in recent days, broken
again yet another norm of international behaviour with its
aggression against Botswana. The Australian Prime Minister has made it clear only recently, in speaking of Austra-

32. It remains our firm intention to continue our efforts
to bring about the earliest possible implementation of the
United Nations plan. We hope that this aim is shared by
all other .members of the Council.
4

President DOS Santos to the Secretary-General [S/16838),
setting out Angola‘s specific proposals for resolving this
issue. This was an important step forward. Our contacts
with the parties since that time suggest that there exists a
real potential for further progress, but this will only
happen if they summon the political will to take further
decisions towards peace.

lia’s total rejection of the policies of apartheid, that
Australia will remain ready to support the imposition of
mandatory economic sanctions against South Africa in
response to its apartheid policies. In the context of the
current resolution, our belief is that only fully respected
and universally applied economic sanctions can be really
effective. The alternative to mandatory economic sanctions-uncoordinated
unilateral measures-is, in our
view, unlikely to be effective. This is not, of course, to deny
the rights of States to take voluntary measures of the type
referred to in the resolution. Indeed, Australia has freely
chosen to take a number of such measures. Rut, in the
absence of mandatory economic sanctions, the scope for
taking such measures remains a matter for consideration
by individual Governments.

45. Our desire to make clear our opposition to South
Africa’s action in Namibia has convinced us not to oppose
this resolution. However, there were a number of elements
in it on which we are not in agreement and which led us,
reluctantly, to abstain. We find it hard to reaffirm resolutions that we did not affirm in the first place. Our central
concern is that mandatory sanctions are not likely to
advance the cause of peace and Namibian independence.
Rather, it is our judgement that they are likely to retard
that goal. We also believe that economic development is
likely to encourage the necessary social and political
changes in South Africa and promote the elimination of
the abhorrent policy of apartheid.We cannot, therefore, in
good faith conscientiously join in urging others to undertake actions which we believe would slow down the
achievement of that objective.

40. We express the hope that the adoption of this resolution will serve to induce South Africa finally to heed the
call of the world community for the early implementation
of the United Nations plan for an independent Namibia.
41. Mr. CLARK (United States of America): We especially wish to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President,
for your tireless efforts over the past several days to bring
about a unanimous resolution. Your tact, wisdom and
endurance have guided us, impressed us and left us greatly
in your debt.

46. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationfromRussian):The Soviet delegation supported the draft resolution introduced by a group
of non-aligned countries members of the Council. We
voted in favour of that resolution because it condemns the
racist regime of South Africa for its continued illegal occupation of Namibia, in flagrant defiance of resolutions of
the General Assembly and decisions of the Security Council, and also for its installation of a puppet regime in
Windhoek.

42. As you know, Sir, from our long conversations, my
delegation sought to support a strong resolution on Namibia which would have sent a clear, united, unambiguous
message to the Government of South Africa. We regret
that, despite these efforts, unanimity was not achieved, Let
me be clear in saying that the United States rejects the
establishment of a so-called interim government in Namibia as null and void. These institutions created by Pretoria have no standing. We condemn any act by any party
which could be seen as leading to a settlement outside
resolution 435 (1978), the only internationally acceptable
basis for a peaceful solution to the Namibia problem. We
have also condemned South Africa’s attack on Gaborone,
Botswana, and its attempted raid in Cabinda, Angola.

47. A positive aspect of the resolution that has been
adopted is the fact that it unambiguously rejects linking
the independence of Namibia to irrelevant and extraneous
issues. The resolution contains a warning for the racist
regime in Pretoria that its failure to give independence to
Namibia would compel the Security Council to consider
the adoption of appropriate measures against South Africa
as provided in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

43. The United States remains committed to and actively
involved in the search for Namibian independence, in
accordance with resolution 435 (1978). We have come a
long way in this search and will continue to pursue our
objective, an objective we share with all members of the
international community, for as long as there is a prospect
for success.

48. However, we are firmly convinced that this resolution does not go far enough in providing for genuinely
effective measures that could compel the racist regime of
Pretoria to comply with the will of the Council and force it
to implement the resolutions of the Council on the granting of immediate independence to Namibia. The measures
called for in the resolution are clearly inadequate to alter
the conduct of the racist regime of South Africa.

44. In spite of the recriminations and condemnations we
have heard in the Council chamber over the past several
days, and in spite of some of the formulations in the resolution before us, it is clear to all of us here that one key
issue remains to be resolved before resolution 435 (1978)
can be implemented: finafizing an agreement on the withdrawal of foreign combat forces from Angola. It is not a
matter of doctrine or of juridical pre-condition. It is, however, an objective fact that must be dealt with, This has
been recognized by all parties to the negotiations. In this
regard, we welcomed the letter of 17 November 1984 from

49. Recent events, and in particular the flagrant acts of
aggression by the Pretoria racists against Angola and Botswana, the massive repression of the indigenous population of South Africa itself and the establishment of a
puppet regime in Namibia, demonstrate with utter clarity
that the Government of South Africa will be brought to
see reason only by the adoption of sanctions against it, as
provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.
5

50. Verbal condemnations of the actions of the South
African racist regime are clearly inadequate. Such condemnations have been frequent in the past, but ‘the racists are
aware of the support of the Western Powers and are
becoming increasingly arrogant,

58. More than 70 speakers, including Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other high-ranking officials, participated
in the debate. The attendance of the Prime Minister, President of the Council of Ministers and Foreign Minister of
Peru was particularly gratifying to us. We thank all those
statesmen and dignitaries for the strong reaffirmation of
their countries’ solid support for and solidarity with our
struggle for national independence and social liberation.

51. We were prepared to vote in favour of a stronger
draft resolution, specifically the text initially introduced by
the non-aligned countries members of the Council
[S/2727@ That draft resolution, as members know, provided for the imposition, at a certain stage, of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against the racist rCgime under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. To ourregret-and, I think, to the regret of all those who
genuinely support the people of Namibia in its struggle for
freedom and independence-that draft resolution was not
brought to the vote. Everyone knows who prevented it
being put to the ‘vote and why.

59. I also reiterate SWAPO’s sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his continuing efforts to help end the
needless suffering and colonial violence, and to bring
about Namibia’s independence, which has been delayed
for too long, We welcome the Secretary-General’s latest
report on Namibia [S/17242$
60. The Council’s debate started with repeated expressions of indignation and condemnation directed at the
rticist regime of Pretoria for its generalized and persistent
acts of aggression, apartheid violence and colonial tyranny
in southern Africa. The notorious policy of constructive
engagement, together with its hated offshoot, the precondition of linkage, was roundly condemned, and the
collusion of its authors, Washington and Pretoria, thoroughly exposed. These pernicious and racist policies stand
firmly rejected by all because their objective is to entrench
apartheid further, to delay the independence of Namibia,
and to weaken the independent States in the region, in an
effort to make them dependent on apartheid South Africa,
The primary interest of the United States, in collaboration
with the Afrikaner regime, is to perpetuate the status quo,
namely the continued, unfettered plunder of natural
resources by the transnational corporations, and the
enslavement of the African majority in South Africa and
Namibia.

52. For its part, the Soviet Union will continue its unflagging support of the people of Namibia in its just struggle
for freedom and independence against the outrageous
upurtheid regime. We are confident that, sooner or later,
despite the resistance of the forces of racism and imperialism, the just cause of the Namibian people will triumph.
53. Mr. de KEMOULARIA
(France) (interpretation
from French): The international community is increasingly
irritated by South Africa’s delaying tactics and intransigence on the question of Namibia,
54. For its part, France wishes to reaffirm here the position stated on 31 May 1985 by its Prime Minister. If there
has been no significant movement by the South African
Government within 18 months, France will take unilateral
economic measures against South Africa.

61. On the positive side, the debate reassured our
oppressed but struggling people of the endless support that
we continue to enjoy from the overwhelming majority of
the nations, peoples and Governments of the world. We
know that we can count on their increased all-round material assistance. Virtually all the speakers strongly condemned the racist regime for its decision to install in
Namibia a puppet administration composed of Namibian
reactionaries and traitors. The racists were warned to
desist from that dangerous course, but they contemptuously ignored the demand of the international community
and proceeded, using brute force to seek to rearrange the
instruments of their colonial and illegal rule. They did this,
imposing yet another fait accompli, even as the Council
was considering the question of Namibia.

55. In the Council, France is prepared, when the time
comes, to consider the adoption of appropriate measures
under the Charter of the United Nations. We do not
believe that now is the time to resort to measures on the
basis of Chapter ,VII.
56. The PRESIDENT: Mr. Sam Nujoma, to whom the
Council extended an invitation at its 2583rd meeting,
wishes to make a further statement. With the consent of
the Council, I call on him now,
57. Mr. NUJOMA: At the beginning of the debate, Mr.
President, we declared our complete trust and confidence
in your wise and enterprising leadership, convinced that
you would steer the deliberations of the Council to a successful conclusion. You have not disappointed us in this
regard, either -in terms of your judicious conduct of the
meetings or in terms of the complicated consultations
behind the scenes. We are grateful to you for your cooperation and understanding. The delegation of SWAP0
extends to you its best wishes as you continue to carry out
your demanding mandate during the remainder of your
term of office.

62. In the course of the debate we also heard speeches
being made by South Africa’s friends, which have always
shielded it in the Council. They too sounded tough in their
pronouncements against the racist Pretoria regime. But
speech-making is one thing, and taking concrete action is
another thing altogether.
63. Among a series of soul-searching questions that we
asked of this august body at the beginning of the debate
was the following: “Is this not the time for the Security
6

lcil to declare that enough is enough?” [2583rd meetrkwa. 1491.
Just a short while ago the Council was called upon
lo sponsors of draft resolution S/17284/Rev.2, as
or revised, to take a unanimous decision on it. That
enjoyed our wholehearted support. It was the bare
num that we could take back to our suffering people
:assurance that the Council has fully assumed its
bnsibilities in respect of the independence process of
ibis. Yet, when the going got serious and demanded
rpt and decisive action, two of the Western permanent
bers skirted their responsibilities and instead abstained
2 vote, thus sending a clear message to our people that
sin liberty and justice are meaningless ideals when it
:s to protecting the economic, strategic and ideologiMerests of those recalcitrant States.
We welcome the adoption of the resolution and
c the members of the Council who voted in favour.
t also be said that abstention means a polite no, but
cannot say “no” to the will and determination of our

valiant people to fight for their liberation. This is not the
first time that those imperialist Powers have abstained in
the vote and it will not be the last. However, outside this
building the reality is different: the progressive peoples of
the world community are taking positive actions in favour
of our cause. Their actions are being organized and carried
uut
in active solidarity with our struggle and will eventually force their Governments to see the light. I express the
hope that those who abstained in the vote today will vote
in favour the next time around, for we shall return.
66. There are many fronts on which to wage the struggle.
We are committed to the total liberation of our motherland, and in pursuit of that precious goal we are prepared
to make the ultimate sacrifice to end colonial conquest and
exploitation,
until independence is achieved in our
country.
67. The struggle continues, Victory is certain.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.
