United Nations

S/PV.6502

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6502nd meeting
Tuesday, 22 March 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-27294 (E)

*1127294*

S/PV.6502

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I am
very pleased to deliver to the Security Council the
seventeenth 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in
accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of the resolution.
The report covers the period from 10 December 2010
to 22 March 2011, during which time the Committee
held two informal consultations — on 10 December
and 4 March — and conducted additional work using
the silence procedure.
On 10 December 2010, under the chairmanship of
my predecessor, Ambassador Tsuneo Nishida, the
members of the Committee met for the first time with
the Panel of Experts appointed under paragraph 29 of
resolution 1929 (2010). The Coordinator of the Panel,
Ms. Salome Zourabichvili, introduced the Panel’s
provisional programme of work, including travel plans,
following which members of the Committee outlined
their expectations of the Panel’s future activities. The
members of the Committee expressed their support for
the Panel and its work.
On 4 March 2011, under my chairmanship, the
members of the Committee received an oral briefing
from the Coordinator of the Panel, in which she
summarized the key points of the Panel’s interim report
of 4 February, which was submitted to the Council, with
a copy to the Committee, in accordance with paragraph
29 (d) of resolution 1929 (2010). In the report, the Panel

2

referred to the first eight weeks of its activities, during
which it, first, held a series of consultations in Vienna,
London, Brussels, Paris and Tokyo to discuss its
programme of work and to receive information relevant
to its mandate; secondly, investigated a reported
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007),
which imposes a ban on the export of all arms and
related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran; and,
thirdly, conducted an assessment of Member States’
implementation reports under paragraph 31 of resolution
1929 (2010), which had previously been circulated to
the Committee on 1 February.
In the course of the discussion that followed the
oral briefing by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
and in the light of the recommendations made by the
Panel, the members of the Committee agreed to
consider, among other actions, disseminating additional
optional guidance on submitting implementation
reports, possibly via a note verbale and/or through the
Committee’s website, and to periodically organize open
briefings at United Nations Headquarters for interested
Member States.
In following up on the implementation of its own
programme of work of 23 July 2010, the Committee
agreed to request from Member States additional
information about the individuals and entities on the
Committee’s consolidated list and to work on updating
its guidelines for the conduct of its work.
Previously, my predecessor informed the Council
of two new cases of reported violations of paragraph 5
of resolution 1747 (2007), one of which the Panel of
Experts had already investigated and independently
confirmed with the exemplary cooperation of the
reporting State. I would like to inform the Council of
two additional reported cases of alleged violations, this
time of paragraph 3 of resolution 1737 (2006), which
imposes a ban on the export to and procurement by
Iran of items that could contribute to enrichmentrelated, reprocessing or heavy water-related activities
by Iran, or to the development of nuclear-weapon
delivery systems. These cases are being examined by
the Committee and its Panel of Experts.
While the increase in the number of reported
sanctions violations is a matter of serious concern,
Member States’ continuing readiness to report these
violations is positive and should be encouraged.
Reports of sanctions violations by Member States
represent an important source of information regarding

11-27294

S/PV.6502

patterns of procurement and means of circumventing
sanctions.
During the current reporting period, the
Committee received three notifications — namely,
from a Member State with reference to paragraph 5 of
resolution 1737 (2006), concerning the delivery of
items for use in the nuclear power plant in Bushehr,
Iran; from the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) pursuant to paragraph 13 (d) of resolution 1737
(2006), which provides for an exemption to the assets
freeze for activities directly related to the items
specified in paragraphs 3 (b)(i) and 3 (b)(ii) of the
resolution; and from a Member State pursuant to
paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006), in connection
with the receipt and/or unfreezing of funds in order to
make a payment due under a contract entered into prior
to the listing of an entity.
The Committee answered a query from a Member
State that sought information on the reasons for the
designation of an entity as subject to the assets freeze,
as well as clarification on the scope of the financerelated measures, particularly as contained in
resolution 1929 (2010). The Committee will shortly
answer another query of a similar nature.
In accordance with paragraph 18 (b) of resolution
1737 (2006), the Committee has sought certain
information from the IAEA.
Finally, the Committee concluded the process of
consideration of a request for de-listing submitted by
an entity through the focal point process outlined in
resolution 1730 (2006). The Committee decided that
this listing remains appropriate and that therefore the
entity remains on the Committee’s consolidated list,
and thus remains subject to the assets freeze.
That concludes the submission of my report to the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Osorio for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today and for his
leadership over the past three months.
It has now been more than nine months since the
Council adopted its sixth resolution on Iran, and its
fourth to impose sanctions in response to Iran’s

11-27294

continued refusal to comply with its international
nuclear obligations. Unfortunately, once again, when it
comes to Iran’s actions, little has changed since the
Council met three months ago.
Let me make three key points. First, the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) continues to report Iran’s ongoing violation of
its Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Security Council and IAEA safeguards
obligations. Most troubling, the Director General has
stated that Iran has once again refused to discuss the
possible military dimensions to its nuclear programme,
including credible reports of Iranian efforts to develop
a nuclear warhead — an issue that Iran incorrectly
asserts is closed. The report details Iran’s many
ongoing failures to cooperate with the Agency’s
investigation and its violations of international nuclear
obligations, including its failure to suspend
enrichment-related activities and its work on heavy
water-related projects.
After a careful presentation of the facts, the
Director General concludes that the Agency is unable
to provide credible assurance about the absence of
undeclared nuclear material and activities in Iran, and
therefore is unable to conclude that all nuclear material
in Iran is in peaceful activities. This conclusion is
cause for grave concern to this Council and the
international community at large.
Secondly, it is absolutely critical that all Member
States continue to take the necessary steps to fully and
robustly implement resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010). This includes
taking the necessary steps domestically to ensure
effective implementation. It also includes submitting
national implementation reports and cooperating fully
with the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts. In this regard,
we welcome Nigeria’s excellent example of enforcing
these measures, including its recent seizure of an
Iranian shipment of arms and related materiel and its
cooperation with the Committee and Panel in
investigating that violation. Recent press reports of
other potential violations, such as the Iranian weapons
seized on the MV Victoria, underline the continuing
need for a high level of vigilance on the part of all
Member States.
In addition to the important role played by
Member States, the 1737 Committee and the Panel of

3

S/PV.6502

Experts are critical to better implementation and
enforcement of the Iran sanctions regime. The United
States thanks the Panel for its efforts in the few months
that it has been operational. That group has started
strongly. We have been impressed by its hard work.
The 1737 Committee should be prepared to act quickly
to implement the recommendations of the Panel and to
take additional steps, in line with its programme of
work, to tighten sanctions enforcement.
A few weeks ago, my Government hosted the
Panel in Washington, D.C., for a series of
consultations. We encourage other Member States to
take similar steps and do what they can to fully support
the Panel’s efforts.
Finally, let me reiterate my Government’s
commitment to a diplomatic solution. We met with Iran
a little more than a month ago with a sincere intent to
start a process of meaningful and constructive
engagement between the P5+1 and Iran. The P5+1
came to the meeting without preconditions and with
specific, practical proposals aimed at building
confidence. We made every effort to secure agreement.
We had hoped to have a detailed, constructive
discussion about those ideas, but instead Iran presented
unacceptable preconditions.
Iran’s performance in Istanbul was deeply
disappointing. We now look to Iran to show the
international community that it has decided to address
the international community’s serious concerns about
its troubling nuclear activities. Our goal remains to
prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons. We
remain committed to working closely with our partners
in this Council and the international community
towards that goal.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): As
this is Ambassador Osorio’s first such briefing to the
Council, I wish him well in his time as Chair of his
important Committee. As he begins that role, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) is well equipped to continue to fulfil its
important mandate. The Panel of Experts appointed last
year has already begun to play a vital part in promoting
the implementation of resolution 1929 (2010). The
work of the Committee and its Panel is critical as we
pursue the dual-track strategy to resolve the Iranian
nuclear issue.
Iran’s behaviour is correctly identified in today’s
report as part of a pattern of deliberate circumvention

4

of sanctions. The two transfers of the proliferationsensitive goods seized that came before the Committee
during the period covered by the report are clear
violations by Iran of paragraph 3 of resolution 1737
(2006). We are also extremely concerned by Iran’s
violation of the arms export ban imposed by resolution
1747 (2007). Earlier this month, NATO confirmed that
weapons seized in a recent operation by Afghan and
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) forces
in Nimroz, Afghanistan, were supplied by elements
within the Iranian regime and were destined for the
Taliban. The detailed technical analysis, together with
the circumstances of the seizure, leave us in no doubt
that the weaponry recovered came from Iran, despite
the fact that it was crudely doctored to make it look as
though it had originated in a country represented on
this Council.
This is completely unacceptable and not the
behaviour of a responsible neighbour. Supplying
weapons of that sort, clearly intended to provide the
Taliban with the capability to kill Afghan and ISAF
soldiers, is at odds with Iran’s claim that it supports
stability and security in Afghanistan. The Committee
and its Panel of Experts should examine that case.
Moreover, there has been a recent report of the
seizure of an arms shipment believed to have
originated in Iran. This was the 15 March seizure of the
anti-ship weaponry on board the ship MV Victoria. I
commend the action taken by the authorities of the
interdicting State, and look forward to the Committee
and its Panel investigating the cases further.
These persistent violations demonstrate the
importance of the 1737 Committee in ensuring
implementation both by monitoring implementation
and by advising States. They also emphasize the vital
role of its Panel of Experts in managing its full agenda,
investigating the recent reported violations and
travelling to key regions to focus on implementation.
We support the Committee’s wider outreach efforts to
promote implementation. We are pleased that the
Committee is considering open briefings to the wider
United Nations membership and plans further guidance
for States on submitting further implementation
reports.
While many Member States have acted promptly
to adjust their laws and procedures, we would remind
those yet to report to the 1737 Committee on measures
taken to do so as soon as possible. More complete

11-27294

S/PV.6502

reporting would help the Panel of Experts to identify
any key gaps in implementation.

provided its members with an opportunity to express
their concerns and expectations.

Today’s briefing follows the publication on
25 February of the IAEA’s latest report on Iran. The
report reinforces the point that Iran continues to defy
multiple Security Council resolutions and documents
Iran’s failure to cooperate fully with the IAEA. Like
previous reports, it makes clear that Iran has not
suspended its enrichment-related activities or work on
its heavy water-related projects. Iran does not need to
enrich uranium itself, and the way it is doing so is
manifestly inconsistent with the needs of a peaceful
nuclear programme.

We welcome the establishment of the Panel of
Experts as laid out in resolution 1929 (2010). The
Panel is operational and is pursuing its tasks with
dedication and commitment. The Panel’s interim report
contains a number of practical recommendations. We
fully support those useful recommendations, which
provide a solid basis for improving the implementation
of existing sanctions measures. Let me draw the
Council’s attention to three issues mentioned in the
report.

The latest report again shows that the IAEA is
still concerned about the possible existence of past or
current undisclosed nuclear-related activities involving
military-related organizations, including activities
relating to the development of a payload for a missile.
Iran continues to fail to answer a range of outstanding
questions about these issues. The report also says
clearly that Iran has not cooperated to such an extent
that the Agency’s knowledge about Iran’s enrichment
activities continues to diminish. As a consequence, the
Agency cannot confirm that all nuclear material in Iran
is for peaceful uses.
We remain committed to engaging Iran to address
these concerns, but it is clear that Iran continues to
proliferate and to pursue a nuclear weapons
programme. If the dual-track strategy is to succeed,
rigorous implementation by States of the measures
contained in resolution 1929 (2010) and the Council’s
previous resolutions is essential.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): May I join others in
thanking Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his first
briefing in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). As he
assumed responsibility for that crucial Committee at
the beginning of this year, let me congratulate him on
taking over that important task. I assure him that my
delegation will support him unconditionally.
The Committee plays a vital role in pursuing the
dual-track strategy. That strategy can only produce
results if the existing measures as agreed by the
Council in four resolutions are thoroughly
implemented. Germany wishes to express support for
the Committee’s work. We welcome the fact that the
first meeting of the Committee two weeks ago

11-27294

First, Germany is concerned about the high
number of cases of violations recently uncovered and
reported to the Committee. Many of those cases
involve the extensive delivery of weapons from Iran to
unstable regions in West Africa and the Middle East. I
join others in expressing our particular concern about
two cases that occurred last week and that underline
once more the urgency of proper sanctions
implementation. We now need a proper assessment of
the patterns of sanctions violations to better understand
the circumvention of the existing regime.
More accurate reporting by Member States will
be helpful in that regard. We encourage Member States
to cooperate with the Committee and the Panel of
Experts and urge them to promptly report incidents of
sanctions violations and denials of export licenses in a
detailed and comprehensive manner. We welcome the
report of the Panel on implementation reporting in
accordance with resolution 1929 (2010). That report
contains a useful checklist that may enable Member
States to improve their reporting practice.
Secondly, let me state the obvious: obligations
deriving from resolutions of the Council have to be
fulfilled by all Member States. We are aware that this
requires firm commitment and significant efforts. Best
practices may prove to be useful in that regard. I would
like to recommend that the Panel of Experts develop a
toolbox
for
best
practices
concerning
the
implementation of sanctions.
Thirdly, with regard to a proactive outreach
campaign with the broader membership, Germany
welcomes outreach activities to inform Member States
of the current sanctions regime. The efficiency of
measures could be improved by providing other States
with
assistance
in
developing
export-control

5

S/PV.6502

mechanisms and by pursuing in-reach activities on
internal compliance procedures of private companies.

sides be ready to engage. We are. The door remains
open for Iran. We call on Iran to seize this opportunity.

Today’s briefing follows the latest report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons safeguards agreement and relevant
provisions of the Council’s resolutions on Iran. The
report clearly states that Iran has not suspended work
on all heavy-water-related projects, which is a
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Council.
Although it is obliged to suspend all enrichmentrelated activities by the same resolutions, Iran is
continuing to pursue enrichment activities and is once
again in violation of its international obligations.

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues in thanking Ambassador Néstor
Osorio for presenting his first 90-day report on the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We appreciate the work of the Committee and
will participate actively in it under Ambassador
Osorio’s chairmanship.

The IAEA summarizes Iran’s obligations in its
report, which need to be fully implemented in order to
restore confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme. In that regard, we call on
Iran to cooperate with the Agency by implementing
and ratifying the additional protocol. We also believe it
is time to finally apply the modified Code 3.1 of the
subsidiary arrangements to the safeguards agreement.
We are particularly concerned about possible
military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We urge Iran to discuss the outstanding issues with the
Agency and to facilitate the provision of additional
information, as well as to grant access to persons and
installations as required by the Agency.
Let me conclude by highlighting that, together
with our partners in the international community, in
particular in the framework of the E3+3, we remain
committed to finding a long-lasting and peaceful
solution to the Iranian nuclear file. Iran must restore
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. The first step in that direction is
the establishment of mutual confidence. The recent
talks in Istanbul were meant to create such confidence.
From our perspective, the conversations in Istanbul
were very disappointing.
We call on Iran to reconsider its intransigent
attitude and to return to the negotiating table in good
faith — ready to engage constructively. We deplore the
fact that talks have not yet led to substantial
conclusions. As set out in resolution 1929 (2010), we
remain committed to our offer of June 2008. Additional
proposals were made in Istanbul. We continue to
believe that a solution will only come about through
negotiations and dialogue. Dialogue requires that both

6

Iran is part of what has been defined as India’s
proximate neighbourhood. We share a historical and
civilizational relationship. The two countries maintain
vibrant and lively people-to-people and cultural
relations. Iran is a major source of our energy and
hydrocarbon supplies, and is thus important for our
energy security. We are also discussing with Iran
various projects in the energy sector.
Iran, located at the crossroads of the Indian
subcontinent, Central Asia and the Middle East, is an
important country and has a role to play in regional
issues. We have cooperated with Iran on issues such as
the restoration of peace and stability in Afghanistan
and on development projects such as the construction
of the Zaranj-Delaram road in western Afghanistan.
Other areas of cooperation include trade and transit to
Afghanistan, Central Asia and beyond within the
framework of the International North-South Transport
Corridor, as well as the fight against common threats
we face from cross-border terrorism and extremism.
As a country that abides by all of its obligations
under international treaties and has strong
non-proliferation credentials, India has taken a
consistent stand on the Iran nuclear issue. We support
the right of all States, including Iran, to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. However, the exercise of that
right should be consistent with States’ international
obligations.
As mentioned in the joint communiqué issued at
the tenth Russia-India-China Ministerial Meeting, held
in Wuhan in November 2010, Iran is entitled to the
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and
should, at the same time, restore international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear activities. To that end, we support the
intensification of efforts to address the Iranian nuclear
issue by peaceful means through dialogue and
negotiation. We also believe that the International
Atomic Energy Agency has a central role to play in the

11-27294

S/PV.6502

resolution of technical issues concerning Iran’s nuclear
programme.
We call on all sides to fully implement the
resolutions the Council has adopted. There should be
no violation of the measures mandated in those
resolutions. At the same time, every effort should be
made to ensure that the legitimate trade and economic
activities of Iran, Iranian entities and other countries
should not suffer. As a member of the 1737 Committee,
we will contribute to the Committee’s work in that
direction.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the new Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Permanent Representative of Colombia Néstor
Osorio, and assure him of our support and cooperation.
We are grateful to the Chair for his briefing on the
work of the Committee over the past three months.
In the reporting period, the Committee continued
to work actively while strictly abiding by its mandate.
That is how it should continue to work in the future,
including on those cases that were mentioned in the
briefing. We note that the Panel of Experts has
provided the Committee with professional assistance,
and we expect it to continue its practical work in
completing its tasks under the Committee’s leadership.
Russia fully supports the ongoing implementation of
all elements of the sanctions regime on Iran. We
believe that if the regime is to be optimally effective,
all members of the international community should
strictly implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions and not go beyond their framework.
With respect to the current situation of the Iranian
nuclear programme, we have consistently advocated
addressing the problems related to the programme
through dialogue and engagement with Iran. The core
of Russia’s policy remains based on negotiations and
the diplomatic track, working with Iran to seek a
settlement and with the full involvement of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That is
how our representative at the IAEA Board of Governors
session on 9 March presented our position, along with
the declaration of six States: Russia, the United
Kingdom, Germany and China, the United States and
France. The statement underscores that the E3+3 group,
with the participation of the High Representative of the
European Union, is fully resolved and committed to
seeking a comprehensive long-term negotiated

11-27294

settlement that would enable the restoration of
international confidence in the genuinely peaceful
nature of the Iranian programme, while acknowledging
Iran’s full right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. We believe that Iran will react
positively to the six States’ proposal and will launch a
constructive dialogue with the E3+3 on the basis of
cooperation and a gradual approach.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I
want to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio for the 90-day
report on the activities of his very important
Committee. And while wishing him all success in
conducting the work of the Committee, I also want to
assure him and his team of my country’s full support
for the fulfilment of his mandate.
I wish to convey my appreciation to the Panel of
Experts for the work they have done in a very short
time, and to thank them for the pragmatic and useful
recommendations offered in the interim report of
24 February, the first after their appointment by the
Secretary-General in November in accordance with
resolution 1929 (2010). The adoption of that resolution
was the most important event of last year regarding
Iran’s compliance with its international obligations.
In order to restore international confidence and
allow it to sustain the nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme and its related activities, the quality of
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has to be enhanced and moved up to a
satisfactory level by putting fully into practice the
safeguards agreement of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and its
Additional Protocol, thus granting access to all sites,
equipment, persons and documents, as requested by the
Agency.
Unfortunately, the report of the Director General
of the Agency to the Council of the Board of
Governors on 7 March reiterated the fact that certain
activities being undertaken by Iran and some of its
nuclear facilities are contrary to relevant resolutions of
the Board of Governors and the Security Council. The
report further indicates that Iran has not suspended its
enrichment-related activities, did not supply the
Agency with information regarding the construction of
new uranium enrichment facilities, and has not
suspended work on all heavy water-related projects.
Without full access to the Iranian nuclear facilities,

7

S/PV.6502

Director General Amano concludes that the IAEA is
unable to provide credible assurances about the
peaceful nature of these activities.
Allow me to say a word on the diplomatic track.
We regret that Iran does not seem willing to negotiate
meaningfully, as was indicated at the Istanbul meeting
in January. We call on Iran to engage fully in this
process. My country remains committed to a negotiated
solution, and we fully support High Representative
Ashton in this regard.
It is in the larger context to which I just referred
that the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) has a particularly important role
to play. While expressing deep concern about the
various incidents reported in the 90-day report,
indicating that violations and attempted violations of
the sanctions regime continue to occur, I agree with
Ambassador Osorio that the recent increase in the
reporting of such violations by Member States sets a
positive example and should be encouraged. To that
end, I very much support the intention of the Chair to
follow up on the implementation of the programme of
work of 23 July 2010, disseminating additional
optional guidance on implementation reports,
reviewing the Committee’s consolidated list, and
updating its guidelines in accordance with the new
provisions of resolution 1929 (2010).
Being very much attached to transparency and
outreach initiatives as one of the best ways to stimulate
the overall implementation of the relevant resolutions,
I also very much welcome periodical open briefings for
interested Member States.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I join previous speakers in
thanking the Permanent Representative of Colombia,
Ambassador Néstor Osorio, for his briefing, and pledge
Brazil’s full support to him as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
My delegation values the work undertaken by the
Committee. In particular, we support efforts to clarify
the circumstances surrounding reported violations of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), as pointed out
in the Committee’s most recent report. It is important
that the Committee receive timely and adequate
information from Member States so that it can properly
fulfil its mandate. We also stress the need for all
Member States to fully implement their obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions.

8

Brazil has incorporated into its domestic
legislation the provisions contained in all resolutions
regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran. We have always
been firmly committed to doing so as a matter of
principle and respect for the United Nations decisions.
We believe that bona fide cooperation between
Member States and the Committee can contribute to
effectively addressing pending issues and, more
broadly, to strengthening the United Nations and the
multilateral system as a whole.
The Committee has been tasked by the Security
Council to apply the measures decided in resolution
1929 (2010). Such measures include a work
programme covering several areas and the creation of
the Panel of Experts to carry out a number of activities
in connection with the implementation of the
resolution. We took note of the interim report of the
Panel of Experts circulated to Council members in
February. We welcome the Panel’s willingness to
engage in consultations and exchange views with
Member States on issues pertaining to its mandate.
With this in mind, we have invited the Panel of Experts
to visit Brazil. This two-day collaboration is necessary
to take into account not only concerns over the
implementation of the resolution but also other matters,
such as the side effects of sanctions on legitimate trade.
The lack of progress in the latest round of talks
with Iran, particularly during the January meeting in
Istanbul, is cause for concern. The trust deficit is still
high. We can only regret that situation. Brazil
continues to encourage the Iranian Government to fully
and promptly cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) in order to clarify all
outstanding questions. At the same time, we reaffirm
Iran’s right, like that of any State, to the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy under IAEA safeguards. We share the
goal of ensuring that Iran’s nuclear programme is
entirely peaceful. We want Tehran to fully clarify
legitimate doubts regarding its nuclear activities. If that
is to happen, Iran’s cooperation is required.
Brazil believes that negotiations, understanding
and persuasion constitute the only viable way to
resolve disagreements over the Iranian nuclear
programme. We regret that an opportunity to create
mutual confidence through the implementation of the
Tehran declaration of May 2010 was missed. We hope
that dialogue will continue and lead to the desired
results.

11-27294

S/PV.6502

Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his 90-day report on the
activities of the Committee. We pledge our support for
the Committee’s work.
South Africa shares the concerns regarding the
threats posed by the use or threat of use of weapons of
mass destruction. Due to their reach and indiscriminate
nature, those weapons threaten not only individual
countries but also the international community as a
whole.
South Africa has closely followed developments
in Iran’s nuclear programme and welcomes the vital
role played by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) with regard to Iran’s implementation of its
Safeguards Agreement and the Agency’s continuous
verification of Iran’s declared nuclear material.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about
Iran’s lack of compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We note, inter alia, that contrary to
the resolutions of the IAEA Board of Governors and
Security Council, Iran has not suspended its
enrichment-related activities. My delegation urges Iran
to comply with the Council’s resolutions and cooperate
with the Agency so as to clarify the remaining
outstanding issues and restore confidence in Iran’s
peaceful nuclear programme.
South Africa has repeatedly stated that it would
not want to see any country denied its rights under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We have said that the call on Iran to suspend
enrichment activities should not be a goal in itself. We
have also cautioned against actions that could be
undertaken that would minimize the capacity of the
IAEA to perform its verification work in Iran. We take
note of the recent statements of the E3+3, which
emphasize diplomatic dialogue. South Africa strongly
encourages all parties to resume constructive dialogue
in that regard.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I, too, should like to welcome Ambassador
Néstor Osorio and thank him for his report and for the
high quality of his work in the months since his
appointment as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). My delegation
welcomes the work he has undertaken with the
assistance of the Panel of Experts to ensure the

11-27294

implementation of resolution 1737 (2006) and other
relevant resolutions of the Council.
We urge the Panel to continue its consultations in
a manner consistent with those it has held recently with
international and non-governmental organizations and
several capitals in an effort to better explain its
programme of work and request the information it
needs to fulfil its mandate. My delegation supports the
recommendations detailed in the report of the Panel of
Experts and encourages the organization of regional
and multilateral meetings to further clarify the specific
details of the implementation of sanctions.
We are deeply concerned over violations of the
sanctions imposed on Iran. We commend the Nigerian
authorities for having seized a ship transporting
prohibited weapons originating in Iran, in violation of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), which
highlights that country’s contempt for Security Council
sanctions.
Furthermore, the recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) describes Iran’s
ongoing pursuit of its uranium enrichment activities.
We call on the Iranian authorities to comply with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, fulfil its
obligations to the IAEA and return to the E3+3
negotiating table. That is the price of restoring
confidence between Iran and the rest of the
international community in this matter.
Gabon remains committed to the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime, of which the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is the
cornerstone. In that regard, we will continue to support
the work of the 1737 Committee and its Panel of
Experts.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate Ambassador Osorio on
his appointment as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and to thank him
for his first quarterly report.
Once again, the report emphasizes the increasing
number of violations. At its previous meeting on this
issue (see S/PV.6442), the Council discussed two
incidents of violations of the arms embargo. Since
then, the Council has been notified of two new
incidents, which show that Iran is persisting in its
attempts to acquire materials for its ballistic missile
programme and its heavy water-related activities.

9

S/PV.6502

Beyond incidents that have been brought to the
Committee’s attention, we wish to express our grave
concern over last week’s interception by Israeli
authorities of a new shipment of Iranian weapons, in
violation of resolution 1737 (2006). We hope that the
Panel of Experts will investigate the matter in
accordance with its mandate. We also note with
concern the seizure of an Iranian weapons shipment to
the Taliban early in February in Afghanistan, as
reported by the United Kingdom.
Lastly, we note with concern Iran’s recent
announcement that it had again launched a rocket into
outer space. Space launch vehicles and ballistic
missiles use similar technologies. We recall that
resolution 1929 (2010) prohibits Iran from conducting
launches using ballistic missile technology. We
therefore hope that the Committee and the Panel of
Experts will investigate that test, as well as Iran’s
space and ballistic missile programmes and the recent
weapons seizures.
Over time, a real pattern of Iranian violations has
emerged before our eyes, affecting all regions of the
world — yesterday, Africa and Europe; today, Asia and
the Middle East — and involving significant flows of
weapons and other illicit and dangerous materials.
Entities well-known to the Council, such as the
Revolutionary Guards, have been implicated. We
cannot overemphasize the seriousness of those
violations, which threaten our collective security and
security and stability in regions that are often already
quite vulnerable. They require our utmost vigilance.
As Ambassador Osorio did his briefing, I wish to
commend the States that have sent their notifications,
because they give the Committee and the Panel
valuable and detailed information on the methods used
by Iran to circumvent sanctions. We also welcome the
fact that the Panel of Experts has launched an in-depth
investigation into those cases, in accordance with its
mandate. We hope that it will make specific
recommendations to address the vulnerabilities
highlighted by those cases, particularly in the areas of
transport, export controls and banking. In that regard,
the Committee must take the necessary measures in
response.
I wish to commend the Panel for the excellent
quality of its quarterly report on its activities. In its
eight weeks of activity, the Panel, led by
Ms. Zurabishvili, has spared no effort. We fully support

10

her initial observations and her first recommendations
to help States meet their obligations under the
resolutions, especially in submitting their national
reports. We hope that she will make regular
recommendations to substantively improve sanctions
provisions. It is imperative that the Panel receive the
full support of all Member States and of the
Secretariat. In particular, we call on all States to
provide the Panel as much information as possible so
that it can have the most precise picture possible of the
implementation of resolutions. We welcome the
intention of the Chair of the Committee to continue
with outreach efforts, in particular by regularly holding
meetings open to all interested Member States.
The 1737 Committee has not been alone in noting
the alarming situation whereby Iran continues to violate
its obligations. Our concerns regarding the Iranian
nuclear programme are further heightened by the latest
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of 25 February. The
report, the first to be issued following the meetings
between the six and Iran held in Geneva and Istanbul,
unfortunately shows no improvements. On the contrary,
Iran continues to reject its international commitments
and to refuse to meet the requirements of the Security
Council and the Board of Governors of the IAEA. Iran
continues its enrichment activities, accumulating, in the
absence of credible civilian purposes, 3.5-per-cent- and
20-per-cent-enriched uranium and fuelling an ever
greater number of centrifuges, which now total more
than 5,000. Iran continues its activities relating to
heavy water, in violation of Security Council
resolutions.
Moreover, the report deplores Iran’s continued
failure to cooperate with the IAEA. In its report, the
Agency also states that its knowledge of Iran’s
enrichment activities continues to deteriorate. For
example, Iran has not provided the clarification
requested by the IAEA as to the background and
purpose of the Fordow plant; it has not provided design
information regarding several installations; it is
denying the Agency access to its heavy water
production and storage installations; and it is not
implementing the Additional Protocol.
Finally, and above all, Iran is refusing to respond
to the Agency with respect to the very serious signs of
the militarization of its programme and the
development of a nuclear payload for a ballistic
missile. The Agency notes, however, that it has

11-27294

S/PV.6502

received supporting information since 2008, including
recently. In this context, we encourage the Director
General of the IAEA to continue his efforts to
investigate these matters.
In that regard, it is regrettable in our view that
Iran, during the recent meetings in Geneva and
Istanbul, did not wish to seriously consider the offers
of cooperation made by the six or our specific
proposals aimed at building trust and promoting
dialogue. On the contrary, Iran has set out
preconditions, which goes against Security Council
resolutions and is unacceptable for the six.
By refusing to respect its international
commitments and undertake genuine negotiations to
address the concerns raised by its nuclear programme,
Iran is further isolating itself from the international
community. The door to negotiations is of course still
open, but it is up to Iran to demonstrate its desire to
undertake serious negotiations. It is up to Iran to show
that it is a responsible member of the international
community.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I wish to say that my
delegation appreciates the enormous sense of duty and
the enthusiasm with which Ambassador Néstor Osorio
has conducted the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I want to assure
him that my delegation supports him with the same
level of enthusiasm and responsibility.
Nigeria remains committed to the ideal of a
nuclear-free world. We regard the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery as a serious threat to our collective security.
Indeed, it is a global challenge that requires concerted
and sustained effort on the part of the international
community, including the Security Council. The
Committee must therefore remain vigilant, as its
actions and decisions will guide the international
response to this potent threat.
We welcome the role and the work of the
Committee and its Panel of Experts during the
reporting period. In particular, we commend the
reported increase in the reporting of sanctions
violations by Member States. It is edifying to note that
the Panel of Experts made tremendous progress during
the first eight weeks of its activities. For its part,
Nigeria will continue to cooperate with and
demonstrate strong support for the work of the
Committee.

11-27294

We are concerned that little progress was made in
the interaction between the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran on the outstanding
issues relating to Iran’s nuclear activities. It is also
distressing to note that the Istanbul and Geneva talks
were unable to yield the desired results. These are
developments of grave concern, which underscore the
need for sustained engagement with Iran on its nuclear
activities.
We are, however, confident that, despite the
challenges, diplomatic negotiation, which has served us
relatively well in the past, still remains relevant — and
perhaps the only sustainable mechanism to resolve all
outstanding issues relating to Iran’s nuclear activities.
We call on the IAEA to be unrelenting in its effort
to explore measures to build confidence in consonance
with the resolutions of the Security Council. We call
for efforts to be stepped up by all actors, including the
E3+3, towards facilitating a negotiated solution. It is
absolutely vital that Iran attempt to build confidence
among the international community with regard to the
peaceful nature of its nuclear activities. But in order to
achieve this, it must follow through on its commitment
to engage in talks on its nuclear programme by more
strident and substantive engagement in the process.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). Allow me to make the
following observations.
Lebanon was one of the first countries to adhere
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), is party to all international
non-proliferation instruments and is fully committed to
its responsibilities. We warmly welcome the
international interest in disarmament. We believe that
weapons of mass destruction, and nuclear weapons in
particular, can never be a source of peace, security or
stability; quite to the contrary, they can compel other
States to seek to acquire these weapons and lead to an
unbridled arms race.
Resolution 1929 (2010) and other relevant
resolutions reaffirmed the rights of the parties to the
NPT to undertake nuclear research and use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The resolution also
affirms the importance of political and diplomatic
efforts for seeking negotiated solutions. We call for the
relaunching of negotiations and a return to dialogue,

11

S/PV.6502

which is the best way to find a comprehensive and
final solution that will increase international
confidence in the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme and open the way to the development of
fruitful development agreements with the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
We fully subscribe to the statement made by the
representative of Brazil to the effect that the Tehran
declaration represented an opportunity that ought to
have been seized.
Lebanon also hopes to see the dream of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. We affirm that
the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)) calls
on Israel to adhere to the Treaty, as it is the only
country of the Middle East that has not done so. It
should place its installations under the comprehensive
safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
We reaffirm Lebanon’s commitment to continuing
to cooperate with the Committee and to assist in its
efforts to fulfil its mandate.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.
I thank Ambassador Osorio for briefing the
Council on the most recent 90-day programme of work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). I believe that, under his outstanding
leadership and with his effective coordinating skills,
the Committee will advance its work in a balanced and
orderly manner. China attaches great importance to the
work of the Committee and will, as always, support it.
Negotiation and dialogue are the appropriate
avenue for addressing Iran’s nuclear issue. Since
December 2010, the six, the European Union and Iran
have held two rounds of talks in which we confirmed
the basic approach of engaging in dialogue in the
interests of cooperation and finding common ground,
and expressed our readiness for continued dialogue. At
the recent meeting of the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the six also
reaffirmed their common position of pursuing
engagement with Iran on the basis of reciprocity and a
phased approach and of establishing a cooperative
relationship with Iran in various fields.

12

As a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Iran is entitled
to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. At the same time,
it should also fulfil its relevant international
obligations. We hope that Iran will take measures to
enhance the international community’s confidence in
the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
China believes that, so long as all sides remain
patient, flexible and pragmatic and take practical
measures to enhance mutual confidence, dialogue and
negotiation will make headway. China will continue to
work with all sides in this respect and play a
constructive role in this process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Osorio to respond
to comments made and questions raised.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank all my colleagues for the kind
words they have addressed to me. I should also like to
note that the work of the Committee is moving forward
in an atmosphere of great seriousness and
responsibility, given the sensitive nature of the matters
it addresses.
I should like, through you, Sir, and my
colleagues, to convey my gratitude to the Panel of
Experts for their contributions. As Council members
have also noted, the work of the Panel of Experts,
under the coordination of Ms. Zurabishvili, has been
truly outstanding. Its heavy workload and wide range
of activities have allowed the Panel very closely to
follow the implementation of resolution 1737 (2006)
and to identify violations or attempted violations of the
sanctions imposed by the Council.
I cannot conclude without also expressing my
appreciation to the members of the Secretariat for their
excellent support. They work tirelessly and with great
dedication to ensure that the Committee can fulfil its
tasks. We will continue to work thus to complete the
mandate entrusted to us.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

11-27294
