A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/78
11 January 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 78
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/50/598) and A/50/L.55]
50/78.

Final text of the African Nuclear-WeaponFree Zone Treaty (the Pelindaba Treaty)

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa 1/
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17 to 21
July 1964, in which they solemnly declare their readiness to undertake,
through an international agreement to be concluded under United Nations
auspices, not to manufacture or acquire control of atomic weapons,
Recalling its resolution 2033 (XX) of 3 December 1965, in which it
endorsed the above-mentioned Declaration and expressed the hope that the
African States would initiate studies, as they deemed appropriate, with a view
to implementing the denuclearization of Africa, and take the necessary
measures, through the Organization of African Unity, to achieve that end,
Recalling also article VII of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, 2/ which acknowledges the right of any group of States to
conclude regional treaties in order to ensure the total absence of nuclear
weapons in their respective territories,
Bearing in mind paragraph 60 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 3/ the first special session devoted to

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Annexes,
agenda item 105, document A/5975.
2/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

3/

Resolution S-10/2.

96-76111

/...

A/RES/50/78
Page 2

disarmament, which states that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region
concerned constitutes an important disarmament measure,
Bearing in mind also the provisions of resolution CM/Res.1592
(LXII)/Rev.1 on the implementation of the Treaty declaring Africa a nuclearweapon-free zone, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity at its sixty-second ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
21 to 23 June 1995, 4/
Noting the adoption by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-first ordinary session, held
at Addis Ababa from 26 to 28 June 1995, of the African Nuclear-Weapon-FreeZone Treaty (the Pelindaba Treaty), 5/
Noting also that the Treaty contains three Protocols open to the
signature of States that, de jure or de facto, are internationally responsible
for territories that lie within the limits of the geographical zone
established in the Pelindaba Treaty and to the signature of States possessing
nuclear weapons, and convinced that the cooperation of such States is
necessary for the greater effectiveness of the Treaty,
Recognizing that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
contributes to the strengthening of the international non-proliferation
regime,
Considering that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
especially in the Middle East, would enhance the security of Africa and the
viability of the African nuclear-weapon-free zone,
1.
Welcomes with special satisfaction the adoption by the African
leaders of the final text of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zone Treaty (the
Pelindaba Treaty), 5/ which constitutes an event of historic significance in
the efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to promote
international peace and security and which, at the same time, recognizes the
right of African countries to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in
order to accelerate the economic and social development of their peoples;
2.
Invites the African States to sign and ratify the Pelindaba Treaty
as soon as possible;
3.
Calls upon all States to respect the continent of Africa as a
nuclear-weapon-free zone;
4.
Calls upon the States contemplated in Protocol III to the
Pelindaba Treaty to take all necessary measures to ensure the speedy
application of the Treaty to territories for which they are, de jure or de
facto, internationally responsible and which lie within the limits of the
geographical zone established in the Treaty;
5.
Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to bring the necessary
support to the Pelindaba Treaty by signing the Protocols that concern them as
soon as the Treaty becomes available for signature;
6.

Expresses its profound gratitude to the Secretary-General for the

4/

A/50/647, annex I.

5/

See A/50/426.
/...

A/RES/50/78
Page 3

diligence with which he has rendered effective technical advice and financial
assistance to the Organization of African Unity towards the six meetings of
the Group of Experts to Prepare a Draft Treaty on an African Nuclear-WeaponFree Zone, set up jointly by the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations;
7.
Also expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity and the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency for the diligence with which they assisted the Group of
Experts to Prepare a Draft Treaty on an African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to
extend assistance to the African States in 1996 in order to achieve the aims
of the present resolution;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session an item entitled "African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty".
90th plenary meeting
12 December 1995
