S/PV.9194

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9194th meeting

Wednesday, 16 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Kambangoye Ankassa
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Ms. Muigai
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (S/2022/838)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-69585 (E)
*2269585*

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

weakened by the withdrawal of Mali in May. The second
coup d’état in Burkina Faso, in September, also had a
negative impact on the Force’s operational capacity and
further undermined regional cohesion.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(S/2022/838)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa in the Departments of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations; Mr. Eric
Tiaré, Executive Secretary of the Group of Five for the
Sahel; and Mr. Zakaria Ousman Ramadan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/838, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee (spoke in French): I thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to present the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Since the most recent
Security Council meeting on the Sahel (see S/PV.9147),
the security situation in the region has continued to
deteriorate. The indiscriminate use of violence by
terrorist groups means that thousands of innocent
civilians are suffering, while millions more are forced
to leave their homes. Insecurity is exacerbating an
already dire humanitarian situation. Women and
children in particular suffer from the lack of access
to basic services and are the primary victims of the
violence and increasing inequality.
(spoke in English)
Against that backdrop, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
remains an important regionally led component of
the response to insecurity in the Sahel. The initiative
complements the multifaceted engagement by the
United Nations and other regional and international
partners. It is therefore regrettable that, in addition to
its financial difficulties, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force was
2/21

16/11/2022

Despite those challenges, the Joint Force continued
to conduct military operations across the three sectors
of the Joint Force, namely, the central sector in the triborder area, the western sector at the border between
Mali and Mauritania and the eastern sector at the
border between Chad and the Niger. In total, seven
major military operations have been conducted since
May. Looking forward, the development of a new
concept of operations for the Joint Force is being
considered. The new concept of operations would
address the challenges resulting from the evolving
security and humanitarian situation and the withdrawal
of Mali, while acknowledging the bilateral operations
undertaken by neighbouring countries.
Meanwhile, the Executive Secretariat and other
components of the G-5 Sahel continued their activities,
including the operationalization of its gender policy
and training for women leaders on dialogue, in
conjunction with the African Union (AU) and the West
African Network for Peacebuilding. Other activities
were organized jointly by G-5 Sahel entities and donors
to strengthen the prevention of violent extremism
and empower local authorities in the area of security
governance. Several United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes continued to implement their programmes
in support of the G-5 Sahel, including those involving
regional capacity-building in the areas of criminal
justice, border security management and the prevention
of radicalization and violent extremism.
In line with its Security Council mandate, and
as provided for by the technical agreement between
the United Nations, the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
continues to provide support to the Joint Force. The
Mission works with contractors to deliver life-support
consumables to the four contingents of the Force
outside Mali. The technical and operational challenges
remain a matter of concern, while insecurity and a
lack of infrastructure along supply routes continue to
pose multiple challenges. As detailed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, divergences among the G-5 Sahel
member States, which culminated in the withdrawal
of Mali from the organization, further complicated
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

the implementation of MINUSMA’s support to the
Joint Force.
Through the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Organization
also supports the Joint Force in operationalizing its
human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework. Defeating terrorism and
violent extremism requires a comprehensive response
and will not be attained through military gains alone.
It is important to ensure that the Joint Force integrates
human rights and international humanitarian law into
the core of its operations. Otherwise it risks fostering
further breeding grounds for violent extremist groups,
causing ever-increasing suffering for the populations.
Similarly, at a national level, G-5 Sahel countries
should ensure that their military strategies to counter
terrorism and violent extremism are fully anchored in
human rights and put the protection of all populations at
their core, including when they partner with non-State
actors to operate alongside national armies.
A coordinated breakthrough in our response to
violent extremism is urgently needed. If we fail in that
effort, the effects of terrorism, violent extremism and
organized crime will be felt far beyond the Sahel region
and, indeed, the African continent. We need to rethink
our collective approach and be creative, going beyond
existing efforts. In the coming months, it will be crucial
for stakeholders in the region to maintain a political
dialogue in pursuing their common security objectives.
We remain deeply committed to supporting them in
that endeavour, working closely with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the African Union as they lead in resolving the current
tensions in the region. Meanwhile, progress can be
made at a bilateral level. For instance, we have recently
seen national authorities in Burkina Faso and Mali
seeking to strengthen their bilateral cooperation in the
area of security and defence.
As the security situation worsens in the Sahel,
armed groups are tightening their destructive grip on
the broader region. The northern regions of the coastal
States of the Gulf of Guinea are being increasingly
exposed to a spillover of violence and insecurity. In
that regard, international partners have indicated their
willingness to actively consider extending their support
to neighbouring countries in the Gulf of Guinea and
West Africa, based on their demands. That is a positive
development that will bolster the relevant regional
organizations in their counter-terrorism efforts, support

S/PV.9194

initiatives such as the Accra Initiative and strengthen
national strategies for improving living conditions,
security and resilience in the most vulnerable regions.
It will necessitate a continuing dialogue between the
concerned Governments and international partners to
ensure that the support is aligned with national and
regional priorities.
The Secretariat remains committed to supporting
the region as well as the G-5 Sahel. We firmly believe
that it is only by working together in a coordinated and
complementary manner that we can effectively address
the multiple challenges before us. It is in that spirit
that the United Nations and the African Union, along
with ECOWAS and the G-5 Sahel, are supporting the
work of the Independent High-Level Panel on Security
and Development in the Sahel led by former President
Mahamadou Issoufou of the Niger. At the behest of
the Secretary-General and the AU Chairperson, that
exercise aims to marshal greater attention and resources
at the national, subregional, regional and international
levels and propose innovative ways to address the
security, governance and development challenges in
the region. The initiative will also reach out to national
stakeholders and the region’s bilateral and multilateral
partners to address that shared responsibility. As
we await the recommendations of that independent
assessment, we look forward to the continued support
of the Security Council in working towards a stable,
secure, peaceful and prosperous Sahel. Faced with
the growing threats to the region and beyond, we urge
the international community to remain engaged in a
spirit of shared responsibility and solidarity with the
populations of the region.
The President: I thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tiaré.
Mr. Tiaré (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Ghana on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I also want to thank Ambassador Agyeman for
his invitation to brief the Council on the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and all
the members of the Council for their attention to my
briefing today in this particular context, in which we
are considering how to better contribute to combating
terrorism in the G-5 Sahel area. I would like to
congratulate the Secretary-General on the quality of
the report (S/2022/838) just presented, and to thank him

22-695853/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

sincerely for his commitment and his steadfastness in
support of the G-5 Sahel cause.
It will not have escaped the Security Council’s
attention that Mali’s withdrawal on 15 May from all the
G-5 Sahel entities, including its Joint Force, plunged
our subregional organization into an institutional crisis,
the effects of which are being felt even more strongly
by the Joint Force. The consequences of the withdrawal
include the relocation of the headquarters from
Bamako to N’Djamena, the suspension of support for
the operations of the Joint Force by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the impossibility of carrying
out joint operations in the three axes, as provided for in
the strategic concept of operations (CONOPS).
However, because the G-5 has to continue its mission
with the other countries, it was necessary to conduct a
review of the CONOPS, and the strategic consideration
process for a new reconfiguration of the Force began in
Niamey with the fourteenth extraordinary meeting of the
Defence and Security Committee on 21 September and
a meeting of the Ministers of Defence on 22 September.
A number of decisions were taken on the new format of
the Joint Force and a road map was drawn up, providing
for a meeting of military experts in Ouagadougou and
a meeting of ministers in N’Djamena, which was to be
held no later than 31 October. Unfortunately, due to the
events in Burkina Faso and Chad, those two meetings
could not be held. However, the meeting of military
experts is now scheduled to take place on 5 December
in Nouakchott. In the meantime, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union has been seized with
extending the fifth mandate of the Joint Force, a
mandate endorsed by the Security Council.
During the current mandate, and despite many
difficulties, the Force has been able to conduct
operations, as indicated in the report. The positive
results have contributed in various ways to improving
the security environment in the area of operations.
Armed terrorist groups have been neutralized, a number
of their members have been arrested and hundreds
of weapons and thousands of rounds of ammunition
and large quantities of drugs have been seized. All of
that was handed over to the national administrative
authorities of the territory where the judicialization
operation took place. Since the mandate stipulates that
the Force must have preventive and investigative police
who can support military action, the judicialization
of the field of operations of the Joint Force is now a
4/21

16/11/2022

reality. It is reflected in the growing numbers of people
who have been captured, handed over by the provosts
to the specialized investigation units and transferred to
the specialized judicial units of the G-5 Sahel States for
criminal proceedings. Over the past two years, more
than a hundred people have been apprehended, the
majority of whom were arrested in 2022 alone. These
operations, conducted with strict respect for human
rights and with the support of international partners,
the United Nations, the European Union, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and many others, have had mixed
results given the magnitude of the threat.
Today the Joint Force has distinguished itself by
significantly improving the protection of civilians in its
operations and by living among the civilian populations
in its areas of operation. In order to strengthen military
action to protect civilians, the Executive Secretariat has,
working alongside the Joint Force, initiated a process
for developing a regional protection-of-civilians
strategy with the technical support of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
through its project to support the Joint Force in the
implementation of the compliance framework. This
strategy, which we hope to see finalized as soon as
possible, will be translated into an operational action
plan that, when implemented, will help strengthen
collaboration and trust among the defence and security
forces and the populations to benefit from their actions.
With respect to the implementation of the tripartite
technical agreement between the United Nations, the
European Union and the G-5 Sahel, we welcome the
continuity of MINUSMA’s operational and logistical
support for the Joint Force battalions, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. Even
if this continuity was achieved without the need for
a tripartite meeting, it would be good to consider
holding a formal meeting between the three parties
after the validation of the new CONOPS. Indeed,
Council members will recall that at least one survey
on the perception of MINUSMA’s support for the
Joint Force was conducted, and suggestions were
made following the identification of shortcomings.
Taking these shortcomings into account, the SecretaryGeneral made proposals to the Security Council,
some of which remain relevant because the United
Nations must provide operational, tactical and strategic
logistical support to the Joint Force, funded by assessed
contributions — and for good reason.
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9194

The observations in the Secretary-General’s report
make it very clear that the growing persistence of
terrorism in the Sahel constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security. Indeed, the SecretaryGeneral has said this on several occasions. It has always
been the message of the leaders of the G-5 Sahel. The
struggle they are waging is not for the benefit of the
G-5 Sahel countries alone. It is clear today that the
situation is even more worrisome than it was in 2017,
when the joint military force was created to fight
terrorism, cross-border organized crime and human
trafficking in the G-5 Sahel space. Today the dam that
countries such as Burkina Faso constituted has burst,
causing terrorism to spread to the countries of the Gulf
of Guinea. Again, this is very sad.

instability coupled with the security crisis is hampering
the response initiatives undertaken so far to contain the
threat, which is characterized by States losing control
over growing areas of their national territories and the
displacement of millions of people.

Fortunately, a few days ago, in Ouagadougou, the
ECOWAS Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security, Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah — a personality
well known to the United Nations — declared that
ECOWAS has begun to reflect on its role in order
to enable it to assist its members on such issues as
terrorism and humanitarian action, because, as he said,
one cannot talk about a return to constitutional order
in a country that is under the control of terrorists and
which is experiencing serious humanitarian problems.
In particular, he revealed that the next ECOWAS summit
will address the issue of the operationalization of a
framework to fight terrorism in the subregion and that
it will be a matter of seeing, together with the African
Union and the United Nations, how to mobilize a force
to come to the aid of Burkina Faso, as the problem
is regional.

The countries of the Sahel in general, and
the G-5 Sahel in particular, are greatly weakened
by multifaceted crises — security, humanitarian,
economic, climatic, and so on — even though they are
brimming with enormous potential. There are therefore
many vast challenges to be met if peace, security,
development and inclusive growth are to be promoted
in the Sahel. That is why we welcome and place great
hope in the Secretary-General’s initiative to conduct a
joint strategic assessment on security and development
in the Sahel, coordinated by the former President of
the Niger, Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou. We strongly hope
that this initiative will receive support and assistance
from the international community and all partners and
friends of the Sahel in the implementation of the strong
measures to be recommended by the Independent HighLevel Panel.

We are all well aware that despite the undeniable
efforts of the Joint Force and the large sums of
money spent by countries to build capacity and
equip their defence and security forces through
various means — and at the expense of other basic
social sectors — the security situation continues to
deteriorate considerably, as stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. This deteriorating security situation
is undermining the G-5’s development actions, as they
simply cannot be carried out.

In the meantime, I reiterate the firm commitment
of the Heads of State to continue working together
because the reasons that justified the creation of the
G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force are even more relevant
today. This is therefore not the time to give up. Indeed,
the opposite is true, as evidenced by the many meetings
I have just mentioned, the continued activities of the
Executive Secretariat and the Joint Force, and the
development of the new development and security
strategy and the drafting of the new priority investment
programme, which will be the subject of a workshop
on 23 and 24 November in Niamey. Our hope is to
submit these important documents, as well as the new
CONOPS, to the G-5 authorities, which we expect will
meet very soon.

The resilience and hope long nourished by the people
of the Sahel to see the end of the tunnel are gradually
giving way to anger and frustration towards the public
authorities and certain international partners. This
feeling, which is widely shared among the population,
has been the main reason put forward by the military to
justify unconstitutional regime changes. The political

That provides me with the opportunity to salute
the dynamic actions of the United Nations agencies
in the affected countries to help care for the millions
of internally displaced persons. It is obvious that the
most ardent wish of all these people, most of whom are
women and children, is to return to their respective
villages, to live there with dignity, even if they do so
in poverty, because what they are experiencing in the
camps is unbearable.

Before concluding, allow me to insist once again on
the urgency and necessity of encouraging the G-5 Sahel

22-695855/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

and, above all, giving it the greatest possible support.
I would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
who has just reaffirmed her great support for this
original regional initiative in its fight against the threat
of terrorism and violent extremism in our area. It is
unthinkable today to imagine a fight against terrorism
that would not start in the Central Sahel or would not
rely on existing initiatives to limit or even prevent the
expansion of terrorism to the countries of the Gulf of
Guinea. In the secrecy of the Council’s deliberations,
I urge its members to understand the seriousness of
the situation and take into account the reality on the
ground — a reality that clearly indicates that the hour
is grave and that, without a rapid and urgent response,
we should fear the emergence of an even greater threat
to international peace and security.
The President: I thank Mr. Tiaré for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramadan.
Mr. Ramadan (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the President, the Ambassador of the Permanent
Mission of Ghana to the United Nations, for giving me
the honour of briefing the Security Council to provide
it my analysis, as an independent expert, on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), a
multilateral force that was born of the need to respond
to complex and interdependent security issues in the
Sahelo-Saharan region — a Sahel that is dying but
refuses to die. I will discuss the type and nature of the
threats as well as the characteristics of the States they
affect. I will deliver a shortened version of my statement.
First, it must be stated that the Sahel’s downward
spiral began with the great drought of 1973, which
is part of what we are experiencing today. The
developments in the Sahel over the past 20 years
have been characterized by emerging security
threats. The Sahelo-Saharan region has faced natural
shocks — such as climate change, including drought
and floods — as well as regular attacks, including air
attacks, and epidemics, pandemics and other hardships.
It has also faced political shocks, including coups d’état,
rebellions and civil wars and, more recently, terrorism
and organized crime.
The result is that the States that are geopolitically
part of the Sahel — I say geopolitically because there
are 22 countries in the greater Sahel and there is also
a geographical and geostrategic Sahel, so that they are
therefore part of the G-5 Sahel — are weak, fragile,
vulnerable and have little human institutional capacity.
6/21

16/11/2022

Some of those States face tremendous difficulties in
ensuring the security of their own territory and have
more areas that are ungoverned or poorly governed
than areas that are under effective State control. Some
of those States are therefore confronted with internal
strife. In such countries, the construction of the nation
State has remained an unfinished project. Worse still,
the communities that make up the populations of many
of the Sahel States have no common aspirations. The
establishment of the G-5 Sahel was therefore a welcome
regional cooperation initiative.
The collapse of Libya in 2011 had a knock-on effect
on the situation in Mali, which was in turn destabilized.
The French military’s Operation Serval served at the
time as a buffer and prevented Mali from disintegrating
and falling into the hands of terrorists. Starting from
that period, terrorist groups gradually established
themselves throughout the Sahel and from bases in the
Sahel as a result of the hotspot that Libya had become.
Shortly after Operation Serval’s intervention, the five
countries — Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger
and Chad — felt the urgency and necessity of creating
a regional mutualization framework for responding
to security threats, which had become cross-cutting
and hybrid.
The G-5 Sahel was therefore created in 2014 to
provide a concerted response to all the economic, social,
environmental and security problems that characterize
the region. The G-5 Sahel opted for a three-pronged
approach focused on governance, development and
security. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel is therefore a commendable tool for security
cooperation. On 20 November 2015, the Heads of State
of the G-5 Sahel announced the formation of a joint
anti-terrorist military force, which was established on
6 February 2017 as the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. Its concept
of operations was adopted by the African Union and by
the United Nations through resolution 2359 (2017). The
Security Council authorized the immediate deployment
of a force for a period of 12 months, subject to renewal,
with the goal of combating terrorism, drug trafficking
and human trafficking in order to create a secure
environment by eradicating terrorist and armed group
activity and restoring security and peace in accordance
with international law.
In that regard, the mission of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force is to conduct operations in accordance with the
mandate of the African Union Peace and Security
Council in order to contain the terrorist threat. As the
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Assistant Secretary-General explained, the Joint Force
extends across three zones from Mauritania to Chad:
the eastern zone includes the Niger and Chad, the
central zone includes Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger
and the western zone includes Mali and Mauritania.
With regard to the Joint Force’s track record eight
years after the establishment of the G-5 Sahel and five
years after its deployment, in my opinion, while the
Joint Force has had noble intentions, the results it has
achieved to date seem to be mixed, or indeed inadequate.
The States have been unable to put in place the means
for their goals. Of course, the situation has evolved
rapidly. Some requirements have been met, such as
the establishment of the unified command posts, the
definitive joint theatre command posts in Bamako, the
construction of satellite command posts in Wour, more
than 20 operations by the Joint Force, as well as the
strengthening of their capacity through training. We
are operating in a zone that is 5,500 kilometres by 1,000
kilometres. In my view, that result is certainly noble
but falls short of expectations and is not commensurate
with the terrorist challenge.
Let us look now at the limitations of the Joint
Force and the obstacles it faces. The Force has been
unable to obtain a robust Security Council mandate
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover, the ability of the soldiers of the Joint Force to
fulfil their mandate to fight terrorism and cross-border
crime is severely limited by the lack of, or obsolete
means of, transport for tactical air and ground logistics,
as well as the ineffectiveness of the intelligence of the
G-5 Sahel States. It is also worth noting that, even
before the emergence of terrorists, our armies were
not well equipped. The armies were established and
have evolved in a spirit of traditional security and were
surprised by the emergence of terrorists, who wage
asymmetric warfare. Our armies were not prepared
for that challenge — either in terms of equipment
or training.
Logistical support for the Joint Force therefore
remains a permanent challenge given its size — 5,000
to potentially 10,000 troops — and the range of its area
of operations. Member States are therefore obliged to
turn time and time again to technical and financial
partners for logistical support.
In addition, the annual budget for the Joint Force was
set at €423 million. From 2018 to date, the Joint Force
has received just over 50 per cent of what was supposed

S/PV.9194

to be its annual budget. A distinct impression emerges
that, despite the good intentions and promises made at
the donors conference in Brussels, the amount needed
to operationalize the Force has not been effectively
mobilized. The Joint Force suffers from permanent
budgetary uncertainty, especially because the continued
commitment of technical and financial partners itself
remains uncertain. We also fear donor fatigue for longterm operations. Moreover, the member States of the
G-5 Sahel, most of which are poor, are unable to ensure
their statutory contributions towards the operation of
the Force. Constantly turning to external funding, for
which the amount and especially the regularity are
beyond our control, for large-scale military operations
raises the question of the sustainability of efforts and
the capacity of States to ensure their own security.
I would like to underscore three areas of weakness.
The first weakness of the Joint Force is political,
as it does not have an extremely robust mandate from
the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter,
which would have provided guidance, more focus and
much more resonance.
The second weakness is capability. The Joint Force
is struggling to become operational due to a number of
challenges, including logistical, financial, strategic and
human. Since security is a matter of State sovereignty,
by always having recourse to partners, do the G-5
Sahel countries not run the risk of falling into the trap
of financial dependence? Indeed, in the context of the
hybridization of the threat and the resilience of armed
terrorist groups, relying on one’s own means to counter
terrorism is as unrealistic and unsustainable as not
having the means to implement one’s politics.
The third weakness is institutional. The weakness
of Sahel institutions and the partially dysfunctional role
of national security forces, the weakness of national
security strategies and the institutional weakness of
States, in all truth, do not allow us to contemplate
continuous sustainable efforts.
The official end of Operation Barkhane and the
shutdown of the operational mechanism in place,
which was based on the synergy of forces — national
forces, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, Operation Barkhane
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali — requires a review of
the operational mechanism of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
as well as its operational capabilities. We must have the
courage to undertake that review.

22-695857/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

What are the prospects and safe path forward in
the short and medium term? Einstein liked to say that
insanity is doing the same thing over and over and
expecting different results. We must absolutely change
the situation and our interpretation of it and understand
the grave danger posed by terrorism. Today it has
moved from the north to the centre of the continent and
poses a serious threat to coastal Africa, moving from
the west to the east.
In order to ensure the full operationalization of the
Joint Force, a number of organizational and operational
challenges will have to be overcome.
First, we must meet its operational needs, above all
its logistical ones, in line with the Force’s standards.
We must ensure its sustainability. We must also
maintain good relations with the population. It is both
unfortunate and regrettable that defence and security
forces are often accused of human rights abuses, which
often allows the armed terrorist groups to feed their
recruitment pipeline on the basis of rancour and revenge.
Winning hearts and minds is the first step in the war
against terrorism. We must rebuild and equip the joint
theatre command posts relocated to N’Djamena, ensure
the interoperability of procedures and means and pool
the air capabilities of the G-5 Sahel countries. The
withdrawal of Mali, a major player in the Joint Force,
calls into question the Force’s concept of operations
by creating a geographical discontinuity in the area
of operations through the isolation of Mauritania.
That makes it necessary to redefine a new concept of
operations that takes the new situation into account.
Finally, we must open up the G-5 Sahel to
other countries in the subregion that are plagued
by terrorism — an approach that involves sharing
experience and expertise as well as enhanced
cooperation. That link would connect coastal Africa
to the Sahel and the Sahel to the Lake Chad basin
and would allow everyone to benefit from synergy in
this long-lasting struggle that requires assiduous and
continuous efforts.
I have several recommendations. We must advance
the new concept of ownership and support by the
G-5 Sahel of bilateral and multilateral operations
conducted by the armies of the G-5 Sahel member
countries. We must promote bilateral operations. We
must freeze satellite command posts; establish a Force
command post, the content and relocation of which to
be determined; postpone the rotation of the personnel
8/21

16/11/2022

of the joint theatre command post and continue its
activities in their current format until the new concept
is adopted.
The security solution to the problems of the Sahel is
certainly necessary, but it is not enough It is insufficient
to establish a lasting culture of peace. The unstable
political situation in certain G-5 Sahel countries and
the insecurity in the region, the presence of refugees
in the intervention zone and the progressive economic
decline could lead to conflicts, thereby undermining
development efforts.
I note that, above all, motivation is the DNA of
terrorism. But it also depends on capabilities and
opportunities. It has been shown that, for people
to turn from radicalization to violent extremism, it
takes between six and 18 months. We must therefore
focus on prevention. We must shift our approach
to counterinsurgency by taking into account the
non-combatant aspect of a population-centric approach.
We must rebuild the Sahelian State and provide it with
the necessary capabilities. The State must be a leader,
a regulator, a partner, a protector, a fighter and a
strategist. It should not be there waiting.
The Sahelian States, individually, are small in
relation to the large task. They must work together to
make the most of their comparative advantage. There is
no alternative to better regional solidarity and broader
regional cooperation to realize that vision.
Today Africa’s ramparts are being breached on
all sides. The terrorist threat is real. The Sahel is rich
in resources, both in terms of soil and under the soil.
But the real value added of those resources is to ensure
security and stability.
Lastly, Sahelian youth are a driving force. They
are aware that their numbers — 65 per cent of the
population — represent their strength. The young
people are highly connected, in a world in which the
virtual world has become a reality.
Capacity-building efforts should be directed
towards women’s groups. Women account for 55 per
cent of the population. We cannot ignore them. Women
are peacemakers, as are civil society organizations in all
their dynamism. The role of civil society organizations
as a counterforce to the State must be promoted and
strengthened as a bearer of hope for change in the
countries of the subregion.
22-69585

Peace and security in Africa

16/11/2022

Finally, the private sector must be seen as an
essential partner to the State in its efforts to provide jobs
for young people. We must reform the private sector and
create the necessary environment for it to develop and
flourish. To this day, the private sector is essentially
informal in nature, since, in the formal sector, the State
always has a stranglehold on the goose that lays the
golden eggs. It is possible that solutions can be found
through the private sector and private initiatives. We
therefore must create the right conditions for that.
(spoke in English)
I am very grateful to the Security Council members
for taking the time to listen to my briefing on the
Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. I would like to express
my endless gratitude to the Permanent Representative
of Ghana, the President of the Security Council at
this meeting, for inviting me to this forum dedicated
to world peace and security. May God bless you and
make West Africa and the Sahel a better place in which
to live.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Ramadan

for

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General and the Executive
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
for their briefings.
As has been underscored, the G-5 Sahel is in crisis.
It is an institutional crisis caused by Mali’s decision
to leave the Group. It is a political crisis that requires
a return to constitutional order in Mali, Burkina Faso
and Chad, as requested by the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States. It
is a security crisis, as the terrorist threat is no longer
limited to the Sahel but is also spreading to the north of
some coastal States. Lastly, it is a humanitarian crisis
that is being exacerbated by the war being waged by
Russia in Ukraine. All of that is against the backdrop
of structural challenges in the areas of development and
climate change adaptation.
The international community must continue to
heavily mobilize in support of the Sahel. We must not
forget all that has been achieved. The Sahel Alliance
has more than 17 partners and 1,200 projects, notably in
the areas of rural development, energy and education,

S/PV.9194

totalling more than €26 billion, which is allocated to
the priorities of the G-5 Sahel and its member States.
Since 2017, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel has
conducted dozens of operations, led by thousands
of soldiers and officers who have learned to fight
together for a common cause. We must acknowledge
such progress and continue that support to prevent
backsliding. However, those efforts were not enough
to stabilize the region. We must therefore change
our approach.
France welcomes the decision of the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission to ask former President Issoufou for an
independent assessment of the international support for
the Sahel. That assessment is necessary for the purpose
of reviewing the efforts made to date and proposing
innovative solutions.
First, with regard to the issue of funding, France,
the European Union and other partners supported
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali continues to provide logistical support, but
the international community has been unable to
mobilize the required resources. France therefore
calls for sustainable and predictable funding for
African peace operations, including through United
Nations assessed contributions or in the context of an
innovative mechanism that would combine them with
bilateral contributions.
Secondly, the right format must be identified.
Given the evolving threat, we cannot limit ourselves to
the founding countries of the G-5 Sahel. We must also
consider other regional initiatives, such as the Accra
Initiative, and all possible means of strengthening
cooperation between Sahelian and coastal countries.
Regional solutions must go hand in hand with the
strengthening of national armies.
President Macron announced the end of Operation
Barkhane, but he also confirmed France’s ongoing
support for the States of the region. France will continue
to provide assistance to those that request it, through
a partnership approach and in support of the national
strategies of the States concerned.
Thirdly and finally, strengthening the rule of law
must be a priority. France welcomes the commitment
of the G-5 Sahel and the African Union to developing
human rights compliance frameworks, with the support

22-695859/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the European Union. We call
for those initiatives to be continued and strengthened.
However, we must oppose any initiative that would roll
back fundamental freedoms under the pretext of the
fight against terrorism. That is the approach proposed
by the private military company Wagner Group, whose
abuses and plunder of natural resources serve only to
fuel a dangerous spiral of violence.
Strengthening the rule of law also means giving
full rein to civil society and organizations working
for the full and effective participation of women and
young people and to defend human rights. That was the
message conveyed at the Montpellier summit organized
by President Macron a year ago.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Executive
Secretary Tiaré for their informative briefings.
The United States is growing increasingly
concerned about the security, humanitarian and political
crises unfolding in the Sahel. The region has witnessed
a dramatic increase in the strength and influence of
violent extremist groups. Threats to civilians, reports
of human rights abuses and violations and levels of
displacement and humanitarian need are all on the rise.
Yet another military takeover in Burkina Faso marks
the most recent indication of democratic backsliding in
the region. The situation in the Sahel remains an urgent
priority for the Security Council.
The United States is of the firm view that instability
in the Sahel is a security problem with a democratic
governance solution. Violent extremism thrives when
State authorities are absent, the delivery of services
is weak, democracy is fragile or fleeting, justice is
inaccessible and economic and political exclusion
prevail. Population growth, displacement and a
changing climate exacerbate those governance failures
by undermining traditional livelihoods and creating
new competition over vital resources. Women and
young people are disproportionately affected by those
challenges, fuelling greater inequality and injustice.
As a leading provider of bilateral humanitarian
and other forms of assistance, the United States urges
Sahelian Governments to focus on the structural
drivers of instability in order to build a new social
compact with their peoples and lay the groundwork
for lasting peace and security. Three of the five Sahel
Governments — Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali — are
10/21

16/11/2022

currently neither democratically elected nor civilianled. That increases tensions and dramatically inhibits
the ability of foreign partners to provide security and
other assistance. To allow foreign partners to resume
their currently restricted international support, we urge
Mali, Burkina Faso and Chad to continue on the path
to timely, durable and inclusive democratic transitions.
While we welcomed in July the agreement between
Mali and the Economic Community of West African
States for its return to democratic rule, we encourage
Mali to strictly adhere to the timetables agreed upon for
holding elections. The United States remains committed
and ready to support Malians in that effort.
In September, Burkina Faso experienced its second
military takeover in just nine months. We welcomed
assurances in October from Burkina Faso’s transition
President that he would adhere to the previous transition
authorities’ commitment to the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to hold democratic
elections in July 2024.
We are concerned about Chad’s decisions to
extend its transition, deviating from African Union
guidelines for democratic transitions, as well as its
violent crackdown on demonstrators. We urge Chad
to ensure accountability for those responsible for such
violence and ensure an inclusive process for drafting
a new constitution and organizing elections with
independent oversight. The authorities in Mali, Burkina
Faso and Chad must facilitate reforms that ultimately
result in free and fair elections that yield a return to
democratically elected civilian rule.
We remain disappointed with the Malian
authorities’ unfortunate decision to withdraw from
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which
significantly weakens an organization specifically
designed to address the scourge of terrorism within
Mali’s borders and throughout its neighbourhood. In
Mali and elsewhere in Africa, Council members and
Member States can contribute to peace and security
by supporting United Nations listings of affiliates of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and Al-Qaida
and supporters that remain undesignated and pose
serious threats to peace and stability in the region and
indeed globally.
The United States is further concerned about shortsighted security partnerships with the Kremlin-backed
Wagner Group, whose forces are exploiting natural
resources and actively undermining stability in Mali and
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

elsewhere in Africa. In Mali, allegations of human rights
abuses have skyrocketed as a result of Wagner Group
operations in the name of so-called counter-terrorism
that often target marginalized groups. Kremlin-linked
disinformation and propaganda campaigns are inciting
violence against United Nations forces’ personnel and
are undermining the local support that the United
Nations needs to do its work. Meanwhile, Wagner Group
forces are obstructing United Nations peacekeepers
in Mali, who are mandated by the Council to support
stabilization efforts, protect civilians, investigate and
monitor human rights abuses and violations, assist in
the delivery of humanitarian aid and put the country
on a path to peace and democratic rule. The Malian
transition Government’s efforts to impair the freedom
of movement of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali in order to
create space for the Wagner Group are putting the
Mission and its personnel in jeopardy.
The United States stands alongside institutions
working to build greater governance and security
force capacities, promote sustainable development and
prevent democratic backsliding. We look forward to the
joint strategic assessment on the Sahel being undertaken
by the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS and
the G-5 Sahel. We hope that effort results in an honest
assessment of the overlapping governance, security and
economic challenges undermining peace and security
in the region. The United States will use those findings
to consider how we can deepen and expand our support
for effective, well-coordinated solutions.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Executive
Secretary Tiaré for their briefings this morning.
Since we last met on the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) six months ago (see S/PV.9147), the situation
has continued to deteriorate rapidly. Ireland is gravely
concerned about the ongoing violence across the Sahel,
which is now expanding into coastal West Africa. By
July of this year, more civilians had been killed in the
region than in all of 2021. A solution that places the
protection of civilians at its centre is urgently needed.
Regional leadership and cooperation is a crucial part
of any solution. It is therefore of great concern that
political divergences between the G-5 Sahel member
States are negatively affecting the operationalization of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We urge further coordination
between the various initiatives in the region, including

S/PV.9194

the Accra Initiative, the Nouakchott process and the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
All security responses must comply with
international law, including international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. Compliance
is a prerequisite for the mobilization of international
support for regional initiatives. We commend the
continued work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to support the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in that regard.
We also encourage States to ensure that mitigation
measures, as recommended under the United Nations
Human Rights Due Diligence Policy, are implemented.
We are extremely concerned about the presence
of the Wagner Group in the region. The violations
and abuses of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law that States are
obliged to prevent, investigate and punish include
acts committed by mercenaries and private military
companies. Such violations and abuses serve only to
drive radicalization and contribute to the growth of
terrorism and violent extremism.
We know that militarized counter-terrorism
responses alone are not sufficient to tackle the
multidimensional crisis facing the Sahel. The fact
that terrorist groups continue to exploit existing
fragilities, political instability and the lack of social
and economic opportunities shows us that a holistic and
comprehensive response is required. Any successful
response is predicated on political stability in the region.
We urge the transitional authorities in Burkina Faso,
Mali and Chad to make rapid progress on their political
transitions. They must stick to the agreed timelines and
quickly organize credible, inclusive and transparent
elections that result in a peaceful handover of power.
Women, young people and civil society must be front
and centre in those processes. We continue to support
the leadership of the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union in their ongoing
efforts to advance a return to civilian-led constitutional
order in the region.
The dire humanitarian situation must also be
addressed. In 2022, the Sahel will experience its worst
food crisis in 10 years, with 34.5 million people currently
facing food insecurity. That number is set only to rise
as millions of people continue to be displaced because
of the deteriorating security situation and the climate

22-6958511/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

crisis. And the people of the Sahel are at the forefront
of the climate crisis. They are witnessing its effects
first-hand as it threatens their lives and livelihoods.
There is no doubt that the impact of climate change
is heightening risks and tensions and contributing to
conflict and fragility. It is abundantly clear that the
multiple crises facing the Sahel are interconnected, and
as such, our responses must also be interlinked.
Ireland looks forward to the outcomes of the joint
strategic assessment of the Independent High-Level
Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel and
the internal review of MINUSMA. Those important
assessments must provide a way forward to enable us
to make concrete progress on the many crises facing
the Sahel today.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee and the other briefers for their statements.
Unfortunately, the situation in the Sahel is not
improving — we completely agree with the Assistant
Secretary-General in that regard. The terrorist activity
in the region is not subsiding, while acute inter-ethnic
and intercommunal conflicts persist, which is having
an extremely negative impact on the security situation.
Dozens of troops and hundreds of civilians are dying at
the hands of militants. The grave challenges facing the
countries of the region are a legacy of many years of
unresolved problems on the security, counter-terrorism,
socioeconomic and humanitarian fronts.
A new destabilizing factor has been the sharp uptick
in attempts to turn the Sahel into another theatre for
geopolitical confrontation, which runs counter to the
national interests of the States and peoples of the region.
In that regard, it was internal disagreements within
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), to a great
extent externally provoked, that forced Mali to leave the
organization on 15 May, meaning that future activities
of the G-5 Sahel will require significant adjustments.
Russia is convinced of the importance of
coordinating the efforts of the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other regional organizations aimed
at combating terrorism in the Sahel. The tradition
of African mutual assistance, based on a deep
understanding of national needs, can help contribute to
the adoption of urgent measures to strengthen security
structures and State institutions, resolve socioeconomic
issues and protect human rights. It will be crucial to
12/21

16/11/2022

prevent the further radicalization of the population,
especially young people. In that context, we note the
extraordinary session held in the capital of Algeria on
13 October of the Joint Operational Committee of the
Chiefs of Staff of Algeria, Mauritania, Mali and the
Niger, where a general desire to continue coordination to
ensure peace and security in the region was expressed.
We support the message resulting from the high-level
meeting in New York on 26 September as part of the
initiative launched during the summer by the African
Union, the United Nations, ECOWAS and the G-5
Sahel on security, governance and development in the
Sahel on the importance of taking additional collective
measures to improve the situation in the region.
It is important to note that international assistance
provided to the States of the Sahel should be based on the
principle of non-interference in States’ internal affairs,
respect for their national sovereignty and the principle
of African solutions to African problems. The return of
a number of States in the region to constitutional order,
which we are convinced is necessary, must be effected
without attempts to impose foreign prescriptions and
must be based on careful and realistic assessments of
the situation.
That is what guides our country’s bilateral
assistance for those in need. Mali is a good example of
that. Like the transitional authorities of that country,
we are convinced that the liberation of Mali’s territories
from terrorists and fighters is a priority for ensuring
the successful completion of the transitional period and
the holding of general elections. In that regard, with the
support of Russian trainers, the Malian armed forces
have achieved impressive successes in the fight against
terrorism in 2022, by all accounts far exceeding what
had been done in previous years. Unlike its Western
counterparts, Russia provides military and technical
assistance to Bamako without any political conditions.
Our relations are based on the long-standing principle
of equitable bilateral cooperation and an understanding
of our common goal of combating the global evil
of terrorism.
Today we have heard, and will probably hear
more, attempts to slander my country’s assistance
to Mali and other countries in Africa. Stories about
Russian mercenaries are being spread by those who
have sent their own mercenaries to the continent for
many decades now to overthrow unwanted regimes
and control its natural wealth. The consistency with
which our American counterparts speak about the
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Wagner Group in their statements shows exactly what
Washington is concerned about.
In addition, Washington endlessly lectures others
about how to run their countries, who they should
cooperate with and how they should extract and use
their resources, including whom they should sell them
to. It acts as if it knows better than the countries of the
region how they should govern themselves and how they
should deal with their own wealth and resources. Russia
will never — and has never — done such a thing on the
continent. Our assistance has always had a legitimate
basis, in which the interests of the host countries and
their populations are an unconditional priority for us.
Russia will continue to participate constructively
in the collective efforts to ensure stability in the
Sahelo-Saharan region and will continue supporting
the Sahel on a bilateral basis in order to increase the
military preparedness of its armed forces, military
personnel in training and law enforcement agents. We
will also provide humanitarian assistance, including for
education and health care.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee, Executive Secretary Eric Tiaré and Mr. Ousman
Ramadan for their briefings.
The briefings that we just heard show us the difficult
security situation in the Sahel. The activities of terrorist
organizations, intercommunal violence and organized
crime particularly affect the border areas, the size and
porous nature of which complicate security tasks.
Given that reality, cooperation among the countries
of the region, especially along the borders, is an essential
tool for containing the spread of violence and illicit
trafficking, including arms trafficking. The principles
on which the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) was established to respond to the
security challenges in precisely those areas therefore
remain valid and relevant.
It is clear that the progress made in the
operationalization of the Joint Force is now being
called into question by Mali’s decision to withdraw
from the partnership. Without Mali, the Group
loses its geographical contiguity, is weakened
politically and faces greater difficulties in effectively
countering terrorism.
We welcome the diplomatic efforts of the countries
of the region, the Economic Community of West African

S/PV.9194

States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) to seek Mali’s
reintegration into the G-5 Sahel. We will closely follow
the summit scheduled to take place in Mauritania, and
we hope that the participants will reach agreement on
revitalizing regional cooperation.
Given the uncertainty over the future of the G-5
Sahel, we reiterate our call for enhanced bilateral
cooperation. That is key to enabling the countries of the
region to protect civilians, who are the main victims of
the wave of violence that is sweeping across the Sahel,
and which continues to move towards the countries
bordering the Gulf of Guinea.
Recent changes in the regional security architecture,
the end of Operation Barkhane and the recent
announcement by some countries of the withdrawal of
their troops from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
also represent a major challenge. But, at the same time,
they may provide an opportunity to develop a new
security strategy for the Sahel that better responds to
the interests of the countries of the region.
For its part, the international community must take
advantage of such adjustments to coordinate the work
of the remaining mechanisms more efficiently. I am
referring to the work of UNOWAS, the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and MINUSMA itself.
We hope that the Independent High-Level Panel on
Security and Development in the Sahel will produce
concrete proposals to render the organizations and
agencies working in the region more effective and
reflect the priorities identified by the Sahel States.
In that regard, priority should be given to restoring
constitutional order in countries that have experienced
coups d’état. Mexico urges the transitional authorities
in Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali to commit to restoring
civilian Governments through inclusive political
processes, with the full and equal participation of
women and young people. The role of subregional
organizations, in particular ECOWAS, is important
for a return to constitutional order. We emphasize that,
without political stability, counter-terrorism strategies
are unlikely to produce the desired results.
Finally, we stress the need to complement security
strategies with measures to address the root causes of
the conflict, such as poverty, inequality and corruption.
We also highlight the fact that the fight against terrorism

22-6958513/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

16/11/2022

should be conducted within the context of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.

Initiative. Together they will help us to identify how
best to work together to support regional security.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee, Executive Secretary Tiaré
and Mr. Ousman Ramadan for their briefings.

The United Kingdom remains committed to helping
address the Sahel’s challenges through a holistic
approach, with accountable governance and human
rights at its heart.

The regional picture in the Sahel is stark. Countries
are facing unprecedented challenges with escalating
violence, rising humanitarian needs and famine-like
conditions. As always, it is ordinary people who suffer
the most. The United Kingdom remains committed
to supporting the people of the Sahel. Last year, we
contributed approximately $355 million to the region.
However, if our collective response to those challenges
is to be sustainable, the right conditions need to be
in place.
First, political will is needed to deliver accountable
governance, the rule of law and justice. With three
countries in the region now in the midst of political
transitions, continued engagement with the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union is vital. We urge the Burkina Faso, Chadian
and Malian authorities to prepare for elections through
open dialogue with civil society, including women and
young people.
Secondly, effective counter-terrorism and respect
for human rights must go hand in hand. To do otherwise
risks aggravating grievances, undermining trust
with local communities and driving recruitment to
terrorist groups. The harmful impact of Wagner Group
operations on civilians in Mali and elsewhere on the
continent is by now well documented. That is why
the Wagner Group will not succeed in Mali and why
they are not the right answer for any other country in
the region.
We welcome the United Nations efforts to build
the capacities of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel for human rights compliance, but we
urge the Joint Force to implement the mitigation
measures identified under human rights due diligence
assessments, as a condition of support from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
Finally, like others, we look forward to the
outcome of the strategic assessment on the Sahel of
the Independent High-Level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel. We also look forward to
the forthcoming discussions in the region on the Accra
14/21

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and the
Executive Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), Mr. Tiaré, for their briefings. I have also
listened attentively to Mr. Ramadan’s statement.
Recently, in the face of many difficulties, countries
in the Sahel have stepped up their diplomatic efforts,
enhanced regional coordination and worked together
to combat terrorism, which has produced some results.
Meanwhile, regional countries are still facing a series
of severe challenges in the security, development and
humanitarian fields.
At a high-level meeting on the Sahel in September,
Secretary-General Guterres called for greater
measures to tackle the problems plaguing the Sahel.
The international community should take action
and actively respond to the Secretary-General’s call
to help the regional countries better cope with the
current situation.
In that context, I would like to make the following
three points.
First, dialogue and corporation must continue
and common security in the region must be firmly
safeguarded. The Sahel region is an inseparable security
community. Only through shared goodwill and uniting
as one can the countries there effectively deal with the
threats to their common security.
Admittedly, owing to the different national
conditions, the countries inevitably may have different
views on regional security cooperation. The right
approach is to seek common ground while putting
aside differences and, on the basis of respecting each
other’s interests and concerns, find the biggest common
denominator through dialogue and consultation.
China supports countries in the Sahel in
strengthening political solidarity, working hard to
remove the obstacles in the way of regional security
cooperation and restoring the normal operation of
the G-5 Sahel mechanism. Countries in the Sahel and
West Africa should pool their resources, increase
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

coordination and curb the spread of terrorist forces to
countries along the Gulf of Guinea.
China supports the United Nations-African Union
joint assessment of the Sahel and looks forward to
pragmatic and feasible recommendations emanating
from the relevant assessments to reactivate the overall
cooperation in counter-terrorism in the Sahel and in
West Africa.
Secondly, the counter-terrorism foundation must
continue to be strengthened and counter-terrorism
capacity-building must continue to be improved.
Terrorist forces are running amok in countries such as
Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger, showing a pattern
of cross-border linkages and multipoint outbreaks.
During the reporting period, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
carried out several counter-terrorism operations, which
are instrumental to maintaining regional security and
stability. The Joint Force remains an important force
to be reckoned with in the regional counter-terrorism
effort. We should support it in continuing its effective
role in view of the real difficulties faced by the Joint
Force in terms of arms and equipment, logistical
supplies and financial resources, among others. The
international community, and in particular traditional
partners, should continue to provide strong support.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali should continue to play
its role in logistical support.
The Security Council should attach importance
to the line of thinking set out by Secretary-General
Guterres and seriously study providing financial
support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force through the United
Nations regular budget or peacekeeping assessments.
Thirdly, development must continue to be
prioritized and commitment to addressing the root
causes of conflicts must be maintained. The myriad
security issues in the Sahel are, in the final analysis,
interconnected with development. China welcomes the
formal establishment of the Independent High-Level
Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel and
expects the Panel to base itself firmly on a proper
handling of the dialectical relationship between security
and development, with a view to contributing wisdom
to meet regional challenges and making pragmatic and
feasible policy recommendations.
The international community should, in the light of
the needs of regional countries, increase development
and humanitarian assistance. The European Union and

S/PV.9194

other major donors should continue to increase financial
assistance to jointly help countries in the region embark
on the path of sustainable development and eliminate
the breeding grounds of extremist forces and terrorism.
Some countries are concerned about the problem
of climate change in the Sahel. It is imperative to tailor
the medicine to the symptoms, by helping countries
in the region improve through development and their
capacity and resilience to cope with climate change and
blocking the chain of transmission from climate change
to security risks.
China is an active supporter of the cause of peace
and development in the Sahel. Under the framework
of the Forum on China–Africa Cooperation, the joint
construction of the Belt and Road Initiative projects and
the Global Development Initiative, China has provided,
to the best of its abilities, assistance to the countries
of the region. The most recent example is that, as of
1 December, China will grant zero-tariff treatment to
98 per cent of the products of least developed countries
such as Burkina Faso.
Looking to the future, China will continue to
work with the international community to provide
sustainable and predictable support and assistance to
countries in the Sahel and make greater contributions
to attaining lasting peace and sustainable development
in the region.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee, Executive
Secretary Eric Tiaré and Mr. Ramadan for their
informative briefings.
When the Council last met to discuss the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) (see S/PV.9035), we had
only recently learned about Mali’s decision to quit that
group and all its bodies, including the Joint Force. On
that occasion, we remarked how the political situation
in the region was hampering efforts to combat violence.
The violence and the security threats, in turn, made
political solutions to conflict harder to achieve.
Now, six months later, we observe that, thankfully,
the G-5 Sahel has proven to be a resilient mechanism.
Not only does the group continue to operate, but also
it has managed to hold its first meeting of the Defence
and Security Committee, at the level of ministers of
defence and chiefs of staff of the armies, since 2021.
Moreover, the Joint Force has been able to conduct
military operations in all three sectors of activities, in

22-6958515/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

spite of having had to deal with challenges, namely, first,
the transfer of its headquarters and other adjustments
owing to the exit of Mali and, secondly, the departure
of Operation Barkhane from that country.
Although we may take heart in the continuity
of activities of the G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force, it
cannot be denied that they could do more if the right
political circumstances were in place. The decision of
one of the five countries to leave the group presented
problems that require resources. It also limits the Joint
Force activities in some of the most critical terrains in
the fight against terrorism in Africa. Added to that,
the recent unconstitutional change of Government in
Burkina Faso, for the second time in eight months,
contrasts with the progress that had been achieved in
the negotiations in the return of constitutional order
by July 2024. Those changes in the political reality of
Burkina Faso also affect the activities of the Joint Force.
These difficulties are all the more regrettable
because the humanitarian situation in the Sahel
remains dire. Food insecurity, displacement of people
and increasing intercommunal and farmer-herder
conflicts are aggravated by the expansion of the areas
affected by terrorist and other illegal armed groups.
The response to these problems depends on continued
cooperation among the Sahel countries and with the
West African nations and regional organizations and
the wider international community.
Brazil was encouraged by the announcement in early
July that Mali and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) had come to an agreement
on a time frame for the return of the constitutional order
and the holding of elections. Brazil also welcomed the
fact that ECOWAS leaders have deemed conditions
to be in place for the lifting of sanctions against that
country. These are signs that regional diplomacy and
dialogue can achieve concrete results. We urge the
authorities of Mali and its neighbours to continue to
cooperate, be it in ECOWAS or in other forums.
We were also encouraged by the launch of the
Independent High-Level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel, in New York, during the highlevel week of the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly. We look forward to its recommendations to
be included in the independent strategic assessment
currently being prepared.
All the efforts to bring peace and security to the
region of the Sahel cannot succeed unless there are
16/21

16/11/2022

concrete results in the fight against malnutrition,
unemployment and social exclusion. Peace and
development are interlinked and cannot exist separately.
The crisis in the Sahel is multidimensional. The G-5
Sahel and its Joint Force are essential tools for tackling
the issues that afflict the region, but they must be
complemented by the work of regional and international
organizations, including in the humanitarian and
development dimensions. Brazil will continue to give
its full support for those efforts.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Martha Pobee, Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) Executive Secretary Eric Tiaré and Mr. Zakaria
Ousman Ramadan for their briefings and insights today.
This discussion comes at a critical time for the G-5
Sahel, as the region grapples with multidimensional
challenges, record insecurity and a lack of State
presence. A strong and effective Joint Force remains
critical to tackling security threats. Allow me to make
three brief points.
First, we remain deeply concerned at the growing
trend of unconstitutional changes of Government in
the region, which presents significant challenges to
preserving the democratic model of governance in
West Africa. In Burkina Faso, the second military
coup this year has yet to show an improvement in the
situation, and armed groups continue to gain ground
across the country. We urge the authorities to develop
a concrete vision for improving the situation and
filling the security vacuums. In Chad, the extension
of the transition period and the escalation of violence
are deeply concerning. We strongly condemn the use
of violence by security forces against civilians and
the arbitrary arrests of protesters. We urge all reports
of abuses and violations to be investigated. We regret
Mali’s decision to withdraw from the G-5 Sahel at a
time when regional cooperation to counter terrorism
is more necessary than ever. We call on Burkina Faso,
Chad and Mali to intensify their efforts to facilitate a
return to constitutional order and civilian rule.
Secondly, the Sahel is worrisomely becoming the
new epicentre of terrorism and violent extremism. This
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security, and we have also seen the threat gradually spill
into the littoral States along the Gulf of Guinea. We call
on States of the region to intensify their collaboration
under the Accra Initiative to prevent this spillover and
strengthen their cross-border cooperation.
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Civilians are bearing the highest cost of this growing
insecurity. Albania echoes the calls of the SecretaryGeneral for the Joint Force to remain an important
regionally led component to respond to the terrorism
and violent extremism in the Sahel and beyond. In
that regard, we urge that respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law obligations during
military operations remains of utmost importance. We
note that the recent reports of violations and executions
are deeply concerning and that the operations conducted
with the Wagner Group in Mali have failed to improve
the security situation, emboldening, instead, the
terrorist groups in the country.
Thirdly, we strongly believe that regional
cooperation remains essential for the stability of the
region. In that regard, a multidimensional approach is
critical to addressing the root causes of the security
challenges facing the countries of the Sahel. Resources
must also be channelled to such existing frameworks as
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel that
were created as instruments to foster coordination. We
welcome the United Nations-African Union High-Level
Panel under way and anticipate its recommendations
to strengthen the response to the Sahel crisis. We
must focus on prioritizing real political dialogue with
Sahel partners.
Finally, Albania believes that the G-5 Sahel is
an important initiative for tackling the insecurity
and terrorism in the Sahel. We call on all members
of the Group to play their part and strengthen their
collective action.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): A the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Martha
Pobee and Mr. Eric Tiaré for their comprehensive
briefings. We also listened to the briefing of
Mr. Zakaria Ramadan.
The United Arab Emirates attaches special
importance to achieving peace and security in the
Sahel region. Despite the many extremely complex
challenges in the region, we remain hopeful that the
countries can overcome those difficulties and achieve a
more stable and prosperous future for its peoples, 60 per
cent of whom, according to UNICEF, are under the age
of 24. That means we are talking about the future of
more than 300 million young men and women who
deserve a real opportunity to contribute to building
their communities.

S/PV.9194

Addressing those challenges in the region will not
be possible without continued and intensified regional
cooperation and strong support from the international
community. We note here the important role that the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and its Joint
Force continue to play with regard to identifying gaps
that undermine stability, presenting recommendations
on how to resolve them, as well as exchanging
information and unifying efforts to restore security in
the region.
In that context, we stress in the importance of
maintaining and building upon the current diplomatic
efforts among the countries of the region to serve their
interests and the aspirations of their peoples, including
preserving the political unity of the G-5 Sahel, as
highlighted by the Peacebuilding Commission. We
also emphasize the need to continue dialogue and
cooperation among the countries of the region,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union. The same applies to
the positive communication between ECOWAS and the
authorities in Mali, which we hope will contribute to
addressing regional challenges, including the scourge
of extremism and terrorism.
We are all aware of the magnitude of the security
threats in the Sahel region owing to the growing
activities of terrorist groups, which continue to
undermine development efforts, tear apart the social
fabric and pose a threat to the authority of States. While
several initiatives have been launched to confront those
challenges, whether through bilateral cooperation or
multilateral action, the road ahead remains long. We
must all maintain our focus on countering extremism
and terrorism. The United Arab Emirates therefore
supports the G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force and
commend the continued technical support provided to
the Joint Force by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We hope that the recommendations put forward
by the Independent High-Level Panel on Security
and Development in the Sahel, led by His Excellency
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, will provide us with a clearer
view of the region’s needs and help to find sustained
and effective solutions to its complex challenges.
Achieving stability in the long term requires an
integrated and multisectoral approach that addresses
the root causes of violence, protects communities from
extremism and terrorism and promotes investment

22-6958517/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

16/11/2022

in human wealth. It is also important to take into
consideration the specificities of countries, which
requires that we continue empowering them and
building their capacities to ensure the comprehensive
delivery of basic services to all segments of the
population. It is therefore crucial to continue efforts to
implement the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, whose goals include sustainable development,
security and capacity-building in States to foster
institution-building. In that regard, we reiterate the
need to ensure the participation of women and youth in
those efforts and their economic empowerment, while
providing them with opportunities to enable them to
play an active role in their communities.

with organized criminal and pirate networks remains a
worrisome development.

It is also important to address the impact of climate
change on the security and stability of the Sahel,
which, regrettably, is exposed to hazards — such as
desertification, drought and flooding — that exacerbate
humanitarian crises in the region and lead to tensions
between farmers and herders as a result of competition
over limited resources. There are also increased
concerns about the sharp decline in the Lake Chad
water level and the high level of desertification in
the Lake Chad basin. Consequently, the United Arab
Emirates believes there is a need to provide additional
support to promote resilience against climate change,
including through the pastoral system, which is a source
of income for more than 20 million people in the region.

With that in the background, let me make the
following five points, which are important submissions
for any significant difference in reversing the worsening
security trend in the Sahel.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the commitment of the
United Arab Emirates to support the States members
of the G-5 Sahel and the peoples of the wider region in
their quest for stability, security and prosperity.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee,
Executive Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) Eric Tiaré and civil society representative
Zakaria Ramadan for their briefings.
The security situation in many Sahelian countries
continued to worsen over the past six months. That
has further expanded the existing security vacuum in
large parts of the Sahel, which continues to be exploited
by terrorist groups, including those affiliated with
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Those groups are growing in strength and expanding
their presence further south towards the coast into
littoral States, with greater access to arms, equipment,
technology and financial resources. The increasing
entrenchment of those groups and their growing nexus
18/21

Terrorism in the Sahel and West Africa is no longer
a regional security threat but rather a global security
threat, which needs to be dealt with by effective counterterrorism measures at all levels — national, regional
and international. However, at present those efforts fall
short of effectively combating terrorism in the region.
As evident from the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/838), the operational tempo of the Joint Force
of the G-5 Sahel decreased significantly following
the unfortunate withdrawal of Mali from the Force in
May this year, as well as the departure of international
security forces from the Sahel.

First, as reported by the Secretary-General in
his report, terrorism remains the most serious threat
in the Sahel and West Africa. Only a zero-tolerance
approach can eliminate that threat from the region
and beyond. The report also refrains from making
any artificial linkage between climate change and the
insecurity facing the Sahelian countries, and we note
with appreciation that rational and objective approach.
Secondly, duly acknowledging the magnitude of
the terrorist threat to West Africa and the Sahel is a
prerequisite for achieving any meaningful peace in the
region. Equally important is recognizing the role of
regional security initiatives, such as the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel, in accomplishing those goals. Effective
collaboration and trust among G-5 Sahel countries
remain paramount to the success of counter-terrorism
operations. We also believe that the political unity of the
G-5 Sahel is important to sustaining the gains made so
far, in addition to addressing its logistical and financial
shortcomings. In that regard, we welcome ongoing
efforts to encourage Mali to rejoin the G-5 Sahel.
Thirdly, it is important that traditional peacekeeping
be complemented by regional operations to neutralize
terrorist groups and entities. As the guardian of
international peace and security, the Security Council
needs to improve its peacekeeping toolkit by developing
an effective model to support regional security
initiatives. As evident from the Secretary-General’s
report and remarks by the briefers, the G-5 Sahel Force
suffers from capacity constraints, such as the lack of
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

training, equipment, air assets, logistical support and
so on. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and other
international partners have been supporting the Joint
Force. However, that has not been enough to sustain
the Force. Therefore, fourthly, providing sustainable
and predictable support to the Joint Force, including
through United Nations assessed contributions, requires
our serious consideration.
Lastly, peace in Mali is a prerequisite for peace in the
Sahel. The key to peace in Mali lies in a Malian-owned
and Malian-led process that is seen by the people of
Mali as inclusive and representative. We appreciate the
understanding reached between Mali and the Economic
Community of West African States with respect to the
transition timeline and hope that the political, electoral
and administrative reforms undertaken by the Malian
transition authorities will pave the way for the return to
constitutional order. The Security Council, MINUSMA
and international partners should encourage all
stakeholders to work towards achieving that goal.
In conclusion, let me say that, as a country
that has faced the threat of terrorism for more than
three decades, India fully understands the pressing
security needs of Africa. India has a long history of
contributing to the defence and security needs of the
African continent, including those of the countries of
the Sahel. We remain committed to supporting them by
exchanging expertise and providing counter-insurgency
and counter-terrorism training for their defence and
security forces.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the briefers for
their insights.
In the Security Council, Norway has backed the
Secretary-General’s call for a United Nations support
office for the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
We have done so out of the conviction that regional
peace operations with African Union mandates can
supplement United Nations peace operations, such
as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, especially in crossborder counter-terrorism responses.
We regret that a lack of resources has hampered
the G-5 Sahel’s effectiveness and cooperation. We are
also not blind to the consequences of Mali’s withdrawal
and the presence of the Wagner Group. Yet, if provided
with sufficient political will and resources, the G-5
Sahel could, hopefully, still provide a model for future

S/PV.9194

regional cooperation. That also goes for the United
Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights-supported compliance framework for the G-5
Sahel, which should continue its commendable efforts
in promoting respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The security and humanitarian crises in the Sahel
have had a devastating impact on civilians, including
children. Their protection must be a priority.
We hope that experiences drawn from the G-5 Sahel
will be part of ideas brought forward by the Independent
High-Level Panel on Security and Development in the
Sahel — the Issoufou Panel. Norway actively supports
the Panel and will approach its recommendations with
an open mind. We realize that it cannot magically fix
all problems, but we hope that it will present innovative
yet practical and realistic proposals, which should also
have firm ownership in the region. The goal should not
be to reinvent the wheel or introduce another strategy
to the Sahel region. Instead, it could build on what is
already there — the G-5 Sahel, the Accra Initiative,
the Multinational Joint Task Force, the Nouakchott
process, the efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States and other building blocks — and
propose ways to improve them all holistically. In doing
so, the Panel could also draw from other contexts,
such as the close and functioning United Nations-AU
partnership in Somalia.
We must support good and legitimate governance
as an essential bulwark in combating violent extremism.
As Ms. Comfort Ero, the Director of the International
Crisis Group, mentioned last week (see S/PV.9188), the
tools proposed could also include dialogue with militant
leaders, which should not be excluded as a possibility
when trying to prevent terrorism. As Ms. Ero said, it is
sometimes worth exploring. We are following efforts in
the Niger with interest.
Let me conclude with some examples of how
Norway will continue to support the G-5 Sahel,
both during and after our term here on the Council.
First, we will continue our efforts in the region to
address food insecurity and the effects of climate
change, including through collaboration between the
Norwegian University of Life Sciences and the Niger’s
National Institute of Agricultural Research. Secondly,
Norway will continue to address humanitarian needs
in the region and work for humanitarian access. We
have taken an active role in that regard as a co-host

22-6958519/21

S/PV.9194

Peace and security in Africa

of the upcoming conference in January on the Lake
Chad region. Thirdly and finally, together with other
peacebuilding processes in the region, we will continue
to support the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali. We will focus on continuing to help women and
young people take their rightful places in the followup process. In short, Norway will remain a consistent
supporter of the G-5 Sahel now and in the years ahead.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council,
namely, Gabon, Kenya and Ghana (A3).
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/838) and thank Assistant Secretary-General
Pobee and Ambassador Eric Tiaré, Executive Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), for their
comprehensive briefings and useful insights on the
situation in the Sahel. We also welcome the participation
in this meeting of Mr. Zakaria Ousmane Ramadan.
There have been several developments in the Sahel
since the previous briefing to the Council six months
ago (see S/PV.9147). The unstable political and security
situation continues to affect the operations of the Joint
Force of the G-5 Sahel. The developments include the
withdrawal of the French force of Operation Barkhane
from Mali; Mali’s termination of its membership in
the G-5 Sahel; on 30 September, the second military
takeover in Burkina Faso in less than nine months;
and increasing numbers of attacks by terrorist groups,
leading to civilian and military casualties.
We express our condolences to all the victims of
terrorist attacks and their families in the Sahel region
and want to emphasize that the challenges faced by the
Sahel are further aggravated by funding and logistical
gaps that have undermined the effectiveness of the Joint
Force. Despite those challenges, the A3 believes that
the Joint Force can continue to be an important actor in
addressing the security concerns in the Sahel. We note
the determination of the member countries of the Joint
Force and anticipate its imminent reconfiguration,
while supporting continuing diplomatic efforts aimed
at encouraging Mali to rejoin it. Beyond that, we also
believe that funding and other logistical assistance
from the international community and donor partners
continues to be a necessary enabler.
20/21

16/11/2022

We share the view that the Council, together with
friendly countries and other stakeholders, should walk
the talk by sparing no effort to rally support for regional
mechanisms in a manner that ensures that the Force is
well resourced in all aspects to enable it to achieve its
mandate. Additionally, the creation of a United Nations
support office to assist the Force will be essential to the
realization of lasting peace in the Sahel. We recognize
the difference that the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) can make through its convening, bridging and
resource mobilization mandate to sustainably support
the countries of the Sahel in the implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and its Support Plan. The A3 welcomes the PBC’s
written advisory reflecting that effort, and we urge
due consideration of its recommendations in order to
address the broader challenges relating to national and
regional peacebuilding.
In the light of current dynamics in the Sahel and
the ongoing joint strategic assessment of the region,
as well as the ongoing review of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), it is important to consider how
MINUSMA’s support for the activities of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force can be recalibrated. The A3 would like
to highlight the following points, which we consider
to be critical to enhancing the responsiveness of the
Joint Force.
First, greater attention needs to be paid to addressing
the political differences among the member countries of
the Force. We underscore the need for convergence on
democratic norms among the Force’s member countries
in order to restore cohesiveness and effectiveness and
encourage their commitment to remaining engaged. We
encourage the relevant member countries in the region
to honour their respective transitional timelines aimed
at restoring constitutional order. We believe that support
from the international community for region-led efforts
in tackling the political crisis facing the Joint Force,
including Mali’s return to its ranks, is critical. The need
for enhancing cross-pillar coordination on governance,
resilience and security in the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel is also important.
Secondly, the challenges facing the Joint Force,
including technical and operational issues as well as
inadequate infrastructure along supply routes, require
greater attention. We encourage Member States in the
region to enhance their cooperation and make good on
their commitment to facilitating the timely issuance
22-69585

16/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9194

of tax exemption letters, as well as to intensifying
investment in infrastructure to address the storage
capacity gaps facing the Force.

It is equally important to consider a multidimensional
approach that combines security and development by
implementing quick-impact community projects.

Thirdly, MINUSMA’s continuing support to the six
battalions of the Joint Force outside Mali, in accordance
with the tripartite mechanism, is commendable.
However, we note with concern the logistical and
operational challenges facing MINUSMA, which
have increased following the withdrawal of the French
forces and other troop-contributing countries from the
Mission. We believe that the anticipated report on the
ongoing strategic review of MINUSMA, to be submitted
to the Council on 13 January 2023, will emerge with
realistic, robust and forward-looking recommendations
that can enhance the Mission’s responsiveness so as to
enable it to better support the Joint Force.

Addressing those challenges, including their
aggravating impact on climate and security in the
region, requires the creation of the right environment
for women and young people to acquire the requisite
skills to gain meaningful employment and participate
in critical decision-making and political processes.
The Peacebuilding Commission’s initiatives targeting
youth, women, agricultural self-employment and
climate-related peace and development interventions
are therefore essential. The involvement of the local
communities in tackling the root causes of instability
in the region is critical, since they suffer daily from the
assaults of armed groups, the jolts of climate change
and the pangs of poverty.

Fourthly, it is clear that the Joint Force cannot
adequately address the Sahelian crisis alone and without
coordination and cooperation among other regional
arrangements. It is our expectation that the ongoing
joint strategic assessment of the Sahel will emerge with
recommendations aimed at leveraging the best elements
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, the Accra Initiative, the
Nouakchott process and the Multinational Joint Task
Force, as well as considering recommendations for
a unified and restructured regional force. It is our
expectation that those recommendations will include an
element that addresses the dire funding and logistical
challenges facing the Force. Another concern is the
additional burden placed on the Force following the
spillover effect of the crisis in Libya on the Sahel and
the possible return of foreign terrorist fighters, as well
as the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
urge for coordinated action among the countries of the
region, including on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, in order to address this worrisome issue.
Fifthly, it is equally important for greater attention
to be given to pre-emptive measures aimed at addressing
the drivers of insecurity in the Sahel. The adoption of
a whole-of-society approach to addressing the dire
socioeconomic conditions in the region is paramount.

Lastly, we need to scale up humanitarian assistance,
considering the increasing level of displacements
emanating from the dire security situation. The over
34.6 million Sahelians in need of assistance in 2022,
which is about 6 million more than in 2021, underpins
the urgent need for donor partners to heed to the
Secretary-General’s call for an increase in funding
support towards the realization of the $3.8 billion
humanitarian response plan required for the region.
In conclusion, the A3 believes that a
multidimensional approach, including sustained
support for the Joint Force, is indispensable in tackling
the Sahelian crisis. While welcoming bilateral support
from friendly countries and donor partners to the
Force, the A3 believes that stronger political will by the
Council in addressing the issue of predictable funding
for the Force is equally critical if we want it to remain
responsive to the security challenges in the Sahel.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-6958521/21
