4. The Secretary-General is authorized:
( i) To administer as ·a unit the appropriations provided under section 3 (a) and section 20,
chapter III ;
(ii) To apply the reduction under section 28 to the various sections of the budget concerned ;
(iii) To apply the reduction under section 29 to the various sections of the budget concerned;
(iv) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to transfer credits between sections of the budget.
·
5. In addition to the appropriations granted by paragraph 1, an amount of $US14,000 is hereby
appropriated for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps and library equipment from the income of
the Library Endowment Fund, in accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment.
276th plenary meeting,
10 December 1949.

357 (IV). Unforeseen and extraordi•
nary expenses for the financial
year 1950
The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1950:
The Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, and subject to the
financial regulations of the United Nations, is
authorized to enter into commitments to meet
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; provided
that the concurrence of the Advisory Committee
shall not be necessary for :
(a) Such commitments not exceeding a total
of $2,000,000 if the Secretary-General certifies
that they relate to the maintenance of peace and
security or to urgent economic rehabilitati.on;
( b) Such commitments as may be necessary
to provide for reasonable expenses for the proposed Economic Commission for the Middle East
should the Economic and Social Council decide
that this Commission shall be created in 1950;
( c) Such commitments as may be necessary
to provide for expenses of meetings of the Economic and Social Council should the Council,
having reconsidered the question of its place of
meeting in the light of the debates in the General
Assembly, confirm its decision to hold its eleventh
session at Geneva;
(d) Such commitments, duly certified by the
President of the International Court of Justice,
relating to expenses occasioned :
(i) By the designation of ad hoe judges (Statute, Article 31),
(ii) By the appointment of assessors (Statute,
Article 30) or of witnesses and experts
( Statute, Article 50),
(iii) By the holding of sessions of the Court
away from The Hague ( Statute, Article
22),
and which do not exceed $24,000, $25,000 and
$75,000 respectively, under each of these three
headings;
The Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory Committee and to the next regular session
of the General Assemblv all commitments made
under the provisions of the present resolution,
together with the circumstances relating thereto,
and shall submit supplementary estimates to the
General Assembly in respect of such commitments.
276th plenary meeting,
10 December 1949.

358 (IV). Working Capital Fund
The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. The Working Capital Fund shall be maintained to 31 December 1950 at the amount of
$US20,000,000;
2. Members shall make advances to the Working Capital Fund in accordance with the scale 20
adopted by the General Assembly for contributions
of Members to the fifth annual budget;
3. There shall be set off against this new allocation of advances the amounts paid by Members to the Working Capital Fund for the financial
year 1949; provided that, should the advance paid
by any Member to the Working Capital Fund
for the financial year 1949 exceed the amount
of that Member's advance under the provision
of paragraph 2 hereof, the excess shall be set
off against the amount of contributions ,iayable
by that Member in respect of the fifth annual
budget, or any previous budget;
4. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance
budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions; sums so advanced shall be reimbursed
as soon as receipts from contributions are available for the purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance
commitments which may be duly authorized under
the provisions of the resolution21 relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses. The Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget
estimates for reimbursing the \Vorking Capital
Fund;
( c) Such smns as, together with net sums
outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed
$250,000 to continue the revolving fund to finance
miscellaneous self-liquidating purchases and activities. Advances in excess of the t()tal of $250,000
may be made with the prior concurrence of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall
submit, with the annual accounts, an explanation
of the outstanding balance of the revolving fund
at the end of each year;
( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory commissions of agencies to be established
by inter-governmental agreement under the auspices of the United Nations to finance their work,
pending receipt by the agencies concerned of
sufficient contributions under their own budgets.
20 See resolution 343 (IV), page 46.
21 See resolution 357 ( IV) on this page.

56
