S/2008/496

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 July 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 28 July 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I am writing in response to your letter dated 3 July 2008 in which you
transmitted to me identical letters dated 10 June 2008 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Meles Zenawi, and
the President of Eritrea, Isaias Afwerki, seeking their views on options for future
United Nations engagement in their countries. Together with those letters, you also
forwarded their responses dated 17 and 18 June 2008.
On the basis of the second paragraph of your letter of 3 July 2008, I asked the
Secretariat to consult with the parties in connection with the aforementioned
responses. I am pleased to report on the Secretariat’s consultations with the parties,
which were based on the following options: (a) a small military observer mission in
Ethiopia; (b) a small political and military liaison office in Ethiopia; and (c) a
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General based in New York.
All options were designed as conflict prevention measures aimed to
demonstrate the continued commitment of the international community to a peaceful
resolution of the border dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea, pending the
establishment of an environment conducive to the normalization of relations
between the two countries. The options also took into consideration the positions
expressed by the two Governments respectively in their letters to the Security
Council dated 17 and 18 June 2008.
On 22 July 2008, my Acting Special Representative for Ethiopia and Eritrea
and Head of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
consulted the Government of Ethiopia on these options. Following those
consultations, on 24 July 2008, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia
addressed a letter to me outlining the position of Ethiopia on the matter. A copy of
the letter is attached (annex I).
Also on 22 July 2008, the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations met with the Permanent Representative of Eritrea to the United Nations
to seek the views of his Government on the above-mentioned options. Following
that meeting, on 24 July 2008, the Permanent Representative of Eritrea addressed a
letter to me indicating the views of the Government of Eritrea on the matter. A copy
of the letter is also attached (annex II).
As indicated in their letters, both parties have rejected the options put before
them. I welcome their earlier declarations that they have no intention of restarting

08-44266 (E) 290708

*0844266*

S/2008/496

the war. Nevertheless, I believe that the risk of escalation of tension in the border
area and a resumption of hostilities, by accident or design, following the withdrawal
of UNMEE remains a reality. I also remain concerned over the destabilizing effect
for the Horn of Africa of the continuing crisis, as well as the negative impact it has
on prospects for economic development and the welfare of the people of the region.
I welcome the engagement of the Security Council with the two parties over
recent months. This has provided a fresh impetus to the process and, it is to be
hoped, could lead to the fulfilment of the Council’s responsibilities vis-à-vis the
Algiers Agreements. The Security Council should keep this issue on its agenda and
remain fully engaged with the two parties, with the view to addressing the
underlying legal, political and security issues at the core of the crisis, including the
implementation of the decisions of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, in
accordance with the Algiers Agreements.
For my part, I intend to continue working closely with both parties through my
good offices, which remain available, with the view to assisting them in normalizing
their relations, which is crucial to maintaining peace and security in the subregion.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

08-44266

S/2008/496

Annex I
Letter dated 24 July 2008 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ethiopia addressed to the Secretary-General
I wish to refer you to the meeting on 7 July 2008 that you had with my Prime
Minister at Yokohama, Japan. I wish also to refer to the subsequent communications
that we have had with the United Nations here in Addis as well as in New York
concerning the situation between Ethiopia and Eritrea, most particularly regarding
the possibility of a United Nations presence in our region in the post-UNMEE
period.
In this regard, we have had the opportunity to look at the United Nations
aide-memoire which was made available to us containing three proposals. You may
have already been informed about the difficulty we have to accept the first two
proposals for reasons that we have already explained both in New York and in Addis
Ababa. After further deliberation, we have also now come to the conclusion that the
idea of a Special Envoy may not also be practical, or desirable. The idea is not
practical because, as should have been clear to the United Nations already, the other
party, Eritrea, has never accepted the notion of a Special Envoy and is unlikely to
change its mind now. It is not desirable because, in our view, such a course of action
is bound to be an ineffective substitute for measures that should have been taken by
the Security Council to protect UNMEE, to defend the integrity of the Temporary
Security Zone and ensure respect for the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities.
Under these circumstances, it is with regret that we decided to inform you that,
given the unique nature of the challenge we face, the designation of a Special Envoy
at this juncture may not be an appropriate action to take. Ethiopia sees no reason for
endorsing the proposal.
I shall be most grateful to discuss the matter with you further during the
upcoming session of the General Assembly.
(Signed) Seyoum Mesfin
Minister

08-44266

3

S/2008/496

Annex II
Letter dated 24 July 2008 from the Permanent Representative of
Eritrea to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General*
I have taken note of the aide-memoire, dated 22 July 2008, presented by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat, detailing options on
“how the United Nations could most effectively support [Eritrea and Ethiopia] in
implementing fully the Algiers Agreements”.
From the outset, I wish to emphasize that the only effective support the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, could give is to lend its full support to
the impartial and independent arbitration body, the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary
Commission, and its demarcation decision of 27 November 2007. Indeed, in
accordance with the provisions of Articles 2 (3) and 2 (4) of the Charter of the
United Nations and article 4 (15) of the Algiers Agreement, it behoves the Security
Council to ensure the respect of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a United
Nations Member State.
Sadly, the different options presented previously and more or less repeated in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations’ aide-memoire of 22 July totally shun
this cardinal matter. The gist and entire focus of the options appear to be geared to
prevent a presumed resumption of hostilities through a permanent presence of a
United Nations observer force, in effect legitimizing Ethiopia’s illegal occupation of
sovereign Eritrean territories. The notion of a United Nations special envoy at this
late stage of the process further accommodates Ethiopia’s persistent request for an
alternative mechanism to tamper with and modify the delimitation and demarcation
determinations of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission. The Security Council
clearly cannot entertain or indulge in this grave breach of the Algiers Agreement.
Eritrea cannot accept this state of affairs for all the cogent reasons cited above.
Eritrea will have no problem in restoring good-neighbourly relations with Ethiopia.
We are neighbours destined to live together and in harmony with the people of
Ethiopia. We do not wish to live in permanent tension or under a tenuous peace that
is maintained and monitored by a third force.
For this to happen, Ethiopia must withdraw its troops from sovereign Eritrean
territories. Ethiopia’s illegal occupation of Eritrean territories in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Algiers Agreement is the real obstacle that
remains to be addressed. Eritrea expects and calls on the United Nations institutions
to channel their efforts towards addressing this cardinal obstacle.
I should be most grateful if this letter and the letter from the President of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission (see enclosure) could be circulated as a
document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Araya Desta
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

* Previously circulated under the symbol S/2008/487.

4

08-44266

S/2008/496

Enclosure
Letter dated 18 June 2008 from the President of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission to the Agent
for the Government of Eritrea
Winding up of the operations of the Commission
It is now over six months since the expiry of the period which the Commission
indicated in its Statement of 27 November 2006 and during which the Commission
had hoped that the Parties would either themselves proceed to the placing of pillars
on the ground or allow the Commission to do so. As there has been no
communication from the Parties, the Commission must now reach the conclusion
that the boundary stands demarcated in accordance with the coordinates annexed to
that Statement, that no further activity on its part is called for and that it should
therefore take the few final steps involved in winding up its operations. These
include the return of physical assets to the United Nations and the preparation of
final accounts.
If I do not hear from you to the contrary within the next two weeks I will take
it that you see no objection to this procedure.
(Signed) Eli Lauterpacht
President

08-44266

5
