A /69/PV.105

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

105th plenary meeting

Monday, 14 September 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that, at its 75th
plenary meeting, on 19 December 2014, the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 21. In order for the Assembly to consider
sub-item (b) of agenda item 21, it will be necessary to
reopen it for the Assembly’s consideration.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (b) of
agenda item 21 to the Second Committee. To enable
the General Assembly to take action expeditiously on
draft resolution A/69/L.81/Rev.1, may I take it that the
Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (b) of agenda
item 21 directly in plenary meeting and to proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 21 (continued)
Globalization and interdependence
(b) Culture and sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/69/L.81/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to
introduce draft resolution A/69/L.81/Rev.1, entitled
“Promoting inclusive and accountable public services
for sustainable development”.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege for me to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China to introduce
draft resolution A/69/L.81/Rev.1 for consideration by
the General Assembly. Before I begin, Mr. President, I
would like to congratulate you on your work as President
of the General Assembly at the current session and to
thank you for your service to the Organization.
We decided to present this draft resolution for
consideration by the Assembly because we believe that
this is the right time to submit a relevant draft resolution
on public services and sustainable development. This
draft resolution will be useful for Member States as
they seek to build inclusive and accountable institutions
to achieve sustainable development.
(spoke in English)
Before the adoption, we would like to take note of
the following agreed texts for three paragraphs that will
be reflected in the final text of the resolution.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-27947 (E)

*1527947*

A/69/PV.105

Paragraph 1 should read as follows:
“Reaffirms that the United Nations system has
a central role to play in promoting international
cooperation in strengthening public institutions
and public services for sustainable development”.
Paragraph 4 should read as follows:
“Encourages the international community
to develop good practices on asset return, while
supporting the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the World Bank and other international initiatives
that support the recovery of stolen assets, urges that
regional conventions against corruption be updated
and ratified, and reiterates the aim of eliminating
safe havens that create incentives for transfer
abroad of stolen assets and illicit financial flows,
while working to strengthen regulatory frameworks
at all levels to further increase transparency and
accountability of financial institutions and the
corporate sector, as well as public administrations”.
Paragraph 11 should read as follows:
“Recognizes, in their specific context, the
positive contribution of indigenous peoples and
local communities, including through some of their
traditional values and principles, to strengthening
individual and societal commitments in order
to improve the efficiency, effectiveness and
transparency of public administration and promote
inclusive and accountable public services for
sustainable development, including the Andean
principles of ama suwa (do not be a thief), ama llulla
(do not be a liar) and ama qhilla (do not be lazy),
the Inupiat values of pitqiksiġautaiññiq (honesty)
and qiksiksrautiqaġniq (respect for others) and
the Blackfoot value of tukuki (impartiality and
incorruptibility), while recognizing that it is a duty
of States, regardless of their political, economic
and cultural systems, to promote and protect all
human rights and fundamental freedoms.”
(spoke in Spanish)
Sustainable
development
emphasizes
a
holistic, equitable and forward-looking approach
to decision-making at all levels. It is based on
integration and a balanced consideration of the goals
and objects that we have in the social, economic and
environmental spheres, with respect to public and
private decision-making. It focuses on the intra- and

2/12

14/09/2015

intergenerational equity. As we make the transition from
the Millennium Development Goals to the emerging
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which are
universal and highly interdependent, Governments will
need to adopt innovative approaches to promote policy
change and integration, institutional coordination,
participatory decision-making processes, and inclusive
and accountable service delivery that effectively
responds to needs.
The adoption of this draft resolution would
send a strong signal to all Governments, the United
Nations system and the international community
about the importance of public administration.
The draft resolution categorically states that the
foundations for sustainable development at all levels
include transparent, participatory and accountable
governance and professional, ethical and accountable
public administration that is properly equipped with
information and communication technologies.
The international community will be encouraged
to continue to support capacity-building in public
administration and in building institutions at all levels
to accelerate progress towards sustainable development.
In particular, the draft resolution is key to achieving
SDG 16, namely, promoting peaceful and inclusive
sustainable development partnerships, facilitating
access to justice for all and building effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.
Likewise, it calls on the Secretary-General
to continue to provide assistance, specifically to
developing countries in their efforts to strengthen their
public institutions and public services for sustainable
development.
We are aware of the United Nations system’s
readiness to provide inter-agency coordination on
public administration and governance, as well as of
the upcoming meeting to discuss ways of working
together to implement the draft resolution in a coherent
and synergistic manner. We welcome and hope that
this type of initiative will be an encouragement to
funds, programmes and departments of the Secretariat
to strengthen their support for capacity-building in
developing countries.
We thank the Division for Public Administration
and Development Management of the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs for its assistance to
the Secretariat during the coordination of the draft
resolution. We also thank all members of the Group

15-27947

14/09/2015

of 77 and China, as chaired by the delegation of South
Africa, and of course all 193 States Members, which
took part in the negotiation of the draft resolution.
If I may add a few words in my national capacity,
I would like to reiterate that in this draft resolution
we recognize in this specific context the values ​​and
principles of the region I come from, the Andes,
namely, ama suwa, ama llulla and ama qhilla. As
Bolivian President Evo Morales has very rightly said,
we would like to share these principles with the General
Assembly in order to work towards a transparent and
honest administration at the service of all the peoples
of the world.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): I am
pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of the United
States and Israel, whose representative could not be
here today.
I would like to begin by thanking all the delegations
that participated in the negotiations on draft resolution
A/69/L.81/Rev.1. We appreciate the hard work and
cooperative spirit they demonstrated, which enabled
all of us to reach consensus on it. Promoting good
governance, combating corruption, upholding the rule
of law and developing inclusive, accountable public
service institutions are vital to achieving sustainable
development. We see the draft resolution as a tool to
help us achieve those ends and as part of the support for
Goal 16 of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda,
which will finally be adopted later this month.
We would like to take this opportunity, however,
to clarify the text on several points. In our view, it is
unhelpful to distinguish between Member and observer
States, as the resolution does, when referring simply
to “States” is an easier, more inclusive and preferable
solution.
The United States understands that the language
in the draft resolution regarding policy space must
be read as consistent with States’ obligations under
international human rights treaties to which they are
party; it does not affect potential constraints under
international law or agreements. Furthermore, while
the contributions of indigenous cultures can potentially

A/69/PV.105

improve the efficiency, effectiveness and transparency
of public administration and promote inclusive
and accountable public services for sustainable
development, the language in the draft resolution
should not be interpreted as our endorsement of any
traditional practices or values, such as honour killings
or discrimination against women or persons with
disabilities, that fail to respect the universal human
rights of individuals.
Finally, we do not believe that it is appropriate
to single out, as this draft resolution does, a handful
of cultures or principles from the wide-ranging and
diverse cultures that exist all over the world. We ask
that this explanation be included in the records of this
meeting.
On a personal note, I would like to note that this is
your last day in office, Mr. President, and that I have
enjoyed working with you throughout your tenure.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.81/Rev.1.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/69/L.81/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 69/327).
The President: I shall now give the floor to
delegations that wish to speak in explanation of position
following the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. At the outset, the Group of 77 and China would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership
and stewardship of the General Assembly as we move
closer to bringing down the curtain of its sixty-ninth
session.
The Group of 77 and China introduced resolution
69/327, entitled “Promoting inclusive and accountable
public services for sustainable development”, because
we believe it will be useful to Member States in building
inclusive and accountable institutions that will help
them achieve sustainable development. Sustainable
development emphasizes a holistic, equitable and farsighted approach in decision-making at all levels. It rests
on integration and a balanced consideration of social,
economic and environmental goals and objectives in
both public and private decision-making processes. It
also emphasizes intra- and inter-generational equity.

15-279473/12

A/69/PV.105

As we transition from the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) to the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), Governments will have to adopt approaches
that promote policy change and integration, institutional
coordination,
participation
in
decision-making
processes and the effective, responsive, inclusive
and accountable delivery of services. The adoption
of this resolution today sends a strong signal to all
Governments, the United Nations system and civil
society organizations about the importance of public
administration. The resolution states categorically
that the foundations of sustainable development
at all levels include transparent, participatory and
accountable governance in a professional, ethical,
responsive public administration that is enabled by
information and communications technology. It will
encourage the international community to continue to
support capacity development in public governance and
institution-building at all levels, in order to accelerate
progress towards sustainable development.
The Group of 77 and China believes firmly in the
importance of promoting inclusive and accountable
public services for sustainable development. That
becomes more pertinent as we move towards
the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Public services must be strengthened
at the appropriate levels in order to ensure that they
are provided to people speedily and in a transparent
manner. It is very important that bottlenecks affecting
the delivery of services at the local level be unblocked.
Functioning municipalities are critical to achieving
better results. In the main, it is the duty of Governments
to ensure that public services are functional and that
they benefit their populations. Each country thus has
the primary responsibility for its own economic and
social development. The role of national policies and
development strategies cannot be over-emphasized. At
the same time, there must be respect for each country’s
policy space and governance structures in implementing
policies for promoting inclusive and accountable public
services for sustainable development, while remaining
consistent with the relevant international rules and
commitments.
The Group would like to state that the United
Nations system has a central role to play in promoting
international cooperation in order to strengthen public
institutions and services for sustainable development.
We believe that the United Nations can also play a
role in creating an environment conducive to helping

4/12

14/09/2015

States fulfil their national plans and internationally
agreed-on development goals, including those MDGs
whose achievement is incomplete and the forthcoming
SDGs. We cannot over-emphasize the importance of
the role of North-South cooperation through the official
development assistance that many developing countries
receive, and that plays a vital role in, among other
things, ensuring that public services run smoothly at
the country level.
The Group of 77 and China values the importance
of freedom, human rights, national sovereignty, good
governance, the rule of law, peace and security and
the fight against corruption at all levels and in all its
forms, as well as effective, accountable and inclusive
democratic institutions at sub-national, national and
international levels, as central to enabling inclusive
and accountable public services for sustainable
development. The Group also recognizes that efficient,
accountable, effective, inclusive and transparent public
institutions and services at all levels have a key role to
play in the implementation of internationally agreed-on
development goals, including the unfinished business
of the MDGs and the soon-to-be adopted SDGs.
The Group also believes that Member States should
be encouraged to utilize information and communication
technologies in designing public policies and providing
public services in order to support national development
efforts and respond effectively to national and local
needs and priorities. Without that important technology,
such services will be hampered. There is a need for the
North to provide more support to developing countries
in that regard, with particular attention being paid to
the least-developed countries.
The Group of 77 and China recognizes, in their
specific context, the positive contributions that
indigenous peoples and local communities, through
some of their traditional values and principles,
can make to strengthen individual and societal
commitments in order to improve the efficiency,
effectiveness and transparency of public administration
and promote inclusive and accountable public services
for sustainable development. That will also speed up
services and foster inclusivity and collective memory in
public services and their administration. It is therefore
critical that no one be left behind as we work together
to improve public services.
The Group of 77 and China held enriching
informal consultations with partners on the resolution

15-27947

14/09/2015

adopted today. We worked tirelessly and in good
faith to achieve a common understanding that could
enable us to reach consensus. In that spirit, we are
asking for support for resolution 69/327 and its aim of
avoiding bottlenecks in public services and ensuring
that bureaucratic errors are dealt with. That can only
help to create an atmosphere more conducive to the
promotion of inclusive and accountable public services
for sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Beviglia Zampetti (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States.
The European Union and its member States
believe that inclusive and accountable public services
are a condition for successful policies, including
in the field of sustainable development. It is our
understanding that inclusive and accountable public
services require institutions that respect human rights
and fundamental freedoms, advance gender equality,
allow for the effective participation of all interested
stakeholders, condemn and actively fight corruption
and promote transparency and accountability. Those
are the hallmarks of good governance and the rule of
law, which the European Union and its member States
consider of the utmost importance and which have most
recently been reflected in the Addis Ababa Agenda and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, soon to
be formally adopted.
In that regard, we believe that States have the
primary responsibility for establishing inclusive and
accountable public services, and the United Nations
system plays an important, albeit supportive, role in
that. The EU and its member States participate actively
in related discussions, including in the Committee
of Experts on Public Administration and the Second
Committee, particularly with regard to the biennial
resolution on supreme audit institutions. However,
with respect to resolution 69/327, just adopted by the
Assembly, the EU wishes to underline that, since the
very beginning of the negotiation process, we stressed
the limited value added by the text and the overlap with
and duplication of the efforts I have just mentioned. We
have recalled that there is a pressing need to streamline
the work of the Assembly in order to make it more
effective and efficient and avoid duplication of already
existing United Nations work and resolutions.

A/69/PV.105

We have also pointed out the difficulty of dealing
with an important issue such as the one covered by this
resolution, in an inclusive and transparent fashion in
a very short period immediately after the conclusion
of two complex negotiation processes — those that
led to the Addis Ababa Agenda and the post-2015
intergovernmental negotiations. The time pressure
did not allow for effective coordination with all the
interested parties and did not help the negotiation
process itself. Despite all of that, the EU and its member
States engaged constructively in the negotiations. We
are disappointed that consensus could not be reached
on the whole text in the context of regular informal
consultations. We cannot endorse the use of politically
charged or factually incorrect formulations and
provisions.
With regard to paragraph 11, the European Union
and its member States would like to reiterate their
respect and appreciation for the positive contribution of
indigenous peoples to strengthening the effectiveness,
efficiency and transparency of public administration.
Nonetheless, we believe that the list of principles and
values set out in the paragraph is incomplete. Moreover,
we believe firmly that it is the duty of States, regardless
of their political, economic and cultural systems, to
promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, to cite paragraph 5 of the 1993 Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action. The European
Union and internationalts member States consider the
resolution adopted today to be a one-time initiative, but
we are of course willing to work with all partners to
incorporate the many useful and universally applicable
ideas that are indeed contained in it into existing
documents of the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly.
As the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly
is about to conclude, I would like to take this
opportunity to sincerely thank you, Mr. President, on
behalf of the European Union and its member States,
for your leadership, hard work and guidance during the
session. We would also like to express our gratitude
to your dedicated team. Under your leadership, the
Organization has been able to achieve a great deal
during this session. We look forward to collaborating
with your successor and his team, and we thank you
once again for your personal commitment to advancing
the agenda of the United Nations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.

15-279475/12

A/69/PV.105

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 21 and of agenda item 21 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Draft decision (A/69/L.93)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered this agenda item at its 54th
plenary meeting, on 17 November 2014.
I now call on the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Faye (Senegal): I deliver this statement on
behalf of the African Group.
I would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your successful and able leadership of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
The African Group has decided to withdraw its
draft decision A/69/L.93, out of the conviction that
the President of the General Assembly was mandated
to facilitate the process of consultation on Human
Rights Council resolution 24/24, on cooperation with
the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms
in the field of human rights, consistent with Assembly
resolution 68/144 and decision 68/668.
We would like to recall that resolution 60/251
determined the mandate of the Human Rights Council
in promoting universal respect for the protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without
distinction of any kind and in a fair and equal manner,
and in making recommendations thereon. Paragraph
1 of that resolution stipulates that the Human Rights
Council is a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly.
On that basis, the Group is supportive of the Human
Rights Council’s work. However, the designation of a
United Nations-wide senior focal point to promote the
prevention of, protection against and accountability for
reprisals and intimidation related to cooperation with
the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms,
as recommended in Human Rights Council resolution
24/24, will have a system-wide impact on the United
Nations. Out of that conviction, the African Group
emphasized, in December 2013, that the draft resolution
that became Human Rights Council resolution 24/24
had serious potential ramifications for the mandate

6/12

14/09/2015

of the Human Rights Council vis-à-vis the General
Assembly, the Third Committee and other United
Nations entities and bodies in addressing this critical
procedural issue with regard to the Council’s mandate
in relation to taking binding decisions on behalf of
other United Nations entities.
It is unfortunate that the ambiguity that Human
Rights Council resolution 5/1 said should be avoided
still persists in Council resolution 24/24. Paragraph 58
(g) of Council resolution 5/1 stipulates that the mandate
should be as clear and as specific as possible, which is
not the case with Council resolution 24/24.
The Group of African States tried to avoid that
ambiguity by seeking clarifications regarding the
following with reference to Council resolution 24/24:
the feasibility of the designation of a United Nationswide senior focal point to promote the prevention of,
protection against and accountability for reprisals
and intimidation relating to cooperation with the
United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms
in the field of human rights; the issue of the existence
of mechanisms in all of the United Nations bodies,
particularly the human rights treaty bodies, that deal
with matters of that nature within their respective
mandates, experience, challenges and group practices,
before the designation of the United Nations-wide senior
focal point; the mandate of the Human Rights Council’s
47 members to designate or to create a focal point
that binds all United Nations entities; and the serious
ramifications for the institution-building package
adopted by the General Assembly, particularly with
respect to a carefully crafted agenda and its mandate.
The Group of African States has engaged actively
since the adoption of resolution 68/144, on the report
of the Human Rights Council, which sought the
above-mentioned clarifications. My Group appointed
Mr. Sabri Boukadoum, Permanent Representative of
Algeria, as a co-facilitator for the consultations that
you, Mr. President, tried to initiate on Human Rights
Council resolution 24/24 in order to implement General
Assembly resolution 68/144. That appointment was
officially communicated to you, Mr. President, in
March 2015. In that regard, I greatly appreciate your
efforts to begin those consultations during the sixtyninth session. Unfortunately, however, no other
co-facilitator was appointed, which prevented Member
States from starting consultations on that issue. Since
no consultations have taken place to date, Human Rights
Council resolution 24/24 cannot be implemented.

15-27947

14/09/2015

At this stage, the African Group would like to
reiterate its willingness and readiness to engage
constructively in the consultations, and calls upon
all Member States to also engage actively during the
seventieth session, in line with paragraph 2 of Assembly
resolution 68/144. That consultation process should be
comprehensive, transparent and inclusive without the
exclusion of anyone.
The President: As members have just heard, the
sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.93 have withdrawn
their proposal.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 38
The situation in the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-ninth session. In connection with that item,
I have received a letter dated 10 August 2015 from
the representative of Azerbaijan. The representative
of Azerbaijan has requested that consideration of that
item be deferred to the seventieth session of the General
Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of the item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its seventieth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 38?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 39
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the General
Assembly decided to include this item in its agenda on
the understanding that there would be no consideration
of the item by the Assembly until further notice.

A/69/PV.105

In connection with the item, I have received a note
verbale dated 21 April 2015 from the Permanent Mission
of the Comoros to the United Nations requesting the
inclusion of this item in the provisional agenda of the
seventieth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include the item entitled “Question of the Comorian
island of Mayotte” in the draft agenda of the seventieth
session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 42 to 47
Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights in
Haiti
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and
international peace and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the Assembly
decided to include items 42 to 47 in the agenda of the
sixty-ninth session, in accordance with paragraph 4 (b)
of the annex to its resolution 58/316, of 1 July 2004.
In resolution 58/316 the General Assembly decided that
those items shall remain on the agenda for consideration
upon notification by a Member State. Accordingly,
these items have been included in the draft agenda of
the seventieth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
42 to 47?
It was so decided.

15-279477/12

A/69/PV.105

14/09/2015

Agenda item 125 (continued)

Agenda item 155

International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor

The President: Members will recall that, under
agenda item 125, the Assembly adopted decision 69/415
at its seventy-sixth plenary meeting, on 23 December
2014.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer the consideration of this item to the seventieth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish to the General Assembly to defer consideration
of agenda item 125 and to include it in the draft agenda
of its seventieth session.
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 125?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
The President: Members will recall that, under
agenda item 126, the Assembly adopted decision 69/416,
at its seventy-sixth plenary meeting, on 23 December
2014.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to include agenda item 126 in the draft agenda of the
seventieth session of the General Assembly. May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to include
agenda item 126 in the draft agenda of its seventieth
session.
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is also
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
8/12

The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the sixtyninth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the seventieth session
of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration of
agenda item 155 and to include it in the draft agenda of
its seventieth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 155?
It was so decided.
Agenda items remaining for consideration during
the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly
The President: I should like to remind delegations
that the following agenda items, which have been
considered at previous meetings, remain open for
consideration during the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly: items 9, 10, 13, 13 (a), 13 (b), 14, 16,
17, 17 (c), 18, 19, 19 (a) to (c), 19 (h), 20, 28, 29, 35, 36,
69, 69 (a) to (c), 74, 108, 109, 111, 111 (b), 112, 112 (a),
113, 113 (b), 113 (f), 113 (i), 115, 117, 123, 123 (a), 123
(b), 123 (j), 123 (1), 123 (r), 123 (s), 123 (x), 124, 130 to
154 and 156 to 167.
As members are aware, these items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the seventieth
session of the General Assembly, with the exception
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 13, entitled “Integrated
and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to
the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic, social and related fields”;
sub-item (b) of agenda item 13 entitled “Follow-up to the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development”, agenda item 141
entitled “Administrative and budgetary coordination of
the United Nations with the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency”; and agenda
item 163 entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan”.

15-27947

14/09/2015

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include agenda items 9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17,
17 (c), 18, 19, 19 (a) to (c), 19 (h), 20, 28, 29, 35, 36, 69,
69 (a) to (c), 74, 108, 109, 111, 111 (b), 112, 112 (a), 113,
113 (b), 113 (f), 113 (i), 115, 117, 124, 130 to 140, 142 to
154, 156 to 162 and 164 to 167 in the draft agenda of the
seventieth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda items 9, 10, 13, 13 (a), 13 (b), 14, 16, 17, 17 (c),
18, 19, 19 (a) to (c), 19 (h), 20, 28, 29, 35, 36, 69, 69 (a)
to (c), 74, 108, 109, 111, 111 (b), 112, 112 (a), 113, 113
(b), 113 (f), 113 (i), 115, 117, 123, 123 (a), 123 (b), 123
(j), 123 (1), 123 (r), 123 (s), 123 (x), 124, 130 to 154 and
156 to 167 at the present session?
It was so decided.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I congratulate the General
Assembly on the many achievements of the sixty-ninth
session. Over the past year, Mr. President, you have
guided the Member States through many complex and
important processes — resulting in a number of major
advances. We have worked very closely and effectively
together, and I am grateful for the strong commitment
you have showed at all times — across our agenda. I
thank you for your service and contributions.
The crowning accomplishment of the sixty-ninth
session is, of course, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The new agenda is the product of an
inspiring sense of solidarity. The design of the 17 goals
and 169 targets was not accomplished overnight. Several
rounds of intensive consultations closed the gaps and
reached common ground. I thank the President of the
General Assembly and the facilitators appointed by
him — the Permanent Representatives of Ireland and
Kenya — for their skilful guidance.
The articulation of the new agenda also saw
the Assembly open the policymaking process in
unprecedented ways to an unprecedented range of
voices. That established a new benchmark for global
dialogue and inclusiveness under the umbrella of the
United Nations. That, too, is a legacy of consequence,
and there can be no going back.
The 2030 Agenda is a sign of the Organization’s
commitment to ease suffering today, while getting it

A/69/PV.105

right for succeeding generations. I once more commend
Member States for seizing this historic opportunity
with such a constructive and committed attitude. We
now all look forward to welcoming Heads of State and
Government here in the Hall in less than two weeks.
The same sense of purpose pervaded the
deliberations on financing for development. Formally
adopted in Addis Ababa in July, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda provided momentum, complemented
the deliberations in New York and now points the
way forward toward a stronger global partnership for
development. I again commend the President of the
General Assembly, as well as the two co-facilitators,
the Permanent Representatives of Guyana and Norway.
Now I urge all Member States to show the same
vision, flexibility and solidarity in reaching a climate
agreement in December in Paris and in bringing the
new sustainable development goals to life in the years
ahead.
The rest of the Assembly’s work during the sixtyninth session was as varied and vital as ever. Last fall,
this session’s very first resolution, resolution 69/1,
paved the way for bold and effective action to combat
Ebola. In less than a year, our first-ever system-wide
health-oriented field operation, the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, accomplished
its unique mandate, and the international community
has worked together in an unprecedented coalition
to support Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone in their
efforts to respond to, and begin to recover from, the
wide-ranging impacts of that deadly disease. Cases
of Ebola have declined dramatically as a result of
the decisive leadership at all levels, and Liberia has
recently been declared free of Ebola. But the outbreak
in West Africa is not over. We must continue to exercise
heightened vigilance and cannot afford to let up on the
response. Looking forward, we must work together to
strengthen our collective global health security.
This past spring, the Assembly convened an
important high-level debate on promoting tolerance
and reconciliation and countering violent extremism. I
was pleased to work closely with the President of the
General Assembly to bring global faith leaders to United
Nations Headquarters. We continue to see shocking acts
of violence and the systematic enslavement of women
and girls. The cultural heritage has also been a victim,
with monuments that have stood for millenniums now
reduced to rubble. Such acts are being carried out
brazenly and with impunity. In November, I will present

15-279479/12

A/69/PV.105

to the Assembly a comprehensive plan for preventing
violent extremism.
Last Friday, Member States made progress on the
revitalization of the General Assembly itself, including
through agreement on a new framework of procedural
steps that will guide the selection and appointment
process of the next Secretary-General. I commend the
efforts of the Permanent Representatives of Croatia and
Namibia in bringing about a consensual outcome that
reflects the membership’s call for a more transparent
and participatory process.
The session also saw the Assembly commemorate
the seventieth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War and of the founding of our United Nations.
Throughout all of this activity, delegations have shown
great skill and welcome collegiality. I am sure we will
see more of the same as His Excellency Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft takes hold of the gavel. Let us now get off to
a good start on implementing the 2030 Agenda.
The President: When we gathered in this Hall
a little more than a year ago, we set out on a journey
seeking to put humankind on a path towards a more
prosperous and sustainable future. The issues we have
addressed at this session have covered a wide range
of challenges facing people around the globe. Our
journey and the work we have accomplished together
took us from the valleys of Lima to the architectural
embellishments of Vienna, and from the City of Trees
in Sendai to the hills of Addis Ababa.
As we have said all along, this session presented
us with a historic opportunity to change our world
for the better. Guided by the overarching principles
of cooperation, compromise and solidarity, we should
feel heartened by all that we have achieved thanks
to our collective efforts. Indeed, our shared vision of
putting people at the centre of everything we do has
yielded many important outcomes that will improve the
everyday lives of men, women and children around the
world.
After 105 plenary meetings and 327 resolutions
adopted during the session, we gather today to take
stock of the progress we have made during our journey
together and reflect on the important work that remains
on the road ahead.
The landmark agreement on the outcome document,
entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development” (resolution 69/315), was
without question one of the major highlights of the
10/12

14/09/2015

session. It was an unprecedented collective undertaking
with Member States and other stakeholders working
tirelessly to formulate a universal, inclusive and
transformative future development framework.
I thank and commend all those involved in the
negotiation process for their strong commitment to
creating an ambitious agenda. In particular, I would
like to extend my appreciation to Ambassador David
Donoghue, Permanent Representative of Ireland,
and Ambassador Macharia Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya, for their steadfast efforts in
shepherding the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
The new development agenda to be adopted by
world leaders next week will guide our development
efforts for the next 15 years. Taking into account the
needs of all people around the world, including the
youth, women, the disabled and the most vulnerable,
it will directly impact the livelihoods of people both
today and for generations to come.
Ensuring that the future development framework is
accompanied by adequate resources for implementation
was of critical importance from the very outset of the
session. In order to encourage dialogue among all
stakeholders on that critical issue, I convened a highlevel thematic debate on the means of implementation
in February.
The cornerstone of our renewed global partnership
for development is now the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, adopted at the third International Conference
on Financing for Development in July, following
months of intense negotiations. My thanks and
congratulations go to Ambassador George Talbot,
Permanent Representative of Guyana, and Ambassador
Geir Pedersen, Permanent Representative of Norway,
for their hard work as co-chairs of those negotiations.
I also wish to convey my sincere gratitude to the
Government and people of Ethiopia for hosting that
successful conference and for their warm hospitality.
Yet, our endeavour to set our world on a sustainable
course also requires that we urgently address one of
the defining challenges of our time — climate change.
Indeed, supporting efforts to reach a new, universally
binding, climate change agreement was another
important priority during the sixty-ninth session.
To keep the momentum moving forward, before
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Paris, I
convened a high-level event on climate change in June.

15-27947

14/09/2015

As was emphasized time and again, this generation
represents our last hope for preserving the well-being
of our planet for generations to come. In that context, it
will be critical to reach a bold and ambitious agreement
in Paris in December that promotes the achievement of
sustainable development, while protecting the planet.
Beyond those important accomplishments, the
Assembly also showed responsiveness in the face of
new challenges, including the Ebola outbreak. In its first
resolution of the session (resolution 69/1), the Assembly
endorsed the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, a first-of-itskind public health mission. Such timely action in the
face of a serious health emergency demonstrated that,
with adequate political will and commitment, decisions
by the Assembly could quickly translate into concrete
actions on the ground.
Over the course of the session we also witnessed
a disquieting increase in radicalization and violent
extremism around the world, fuelled by identity-based
conflicts and cultural and religious tensions. With
troubling frequency, violent attacks were carried out
against innocent civilians, claiming the lives of men,
women and children indiscriminately, as well as the
destruction of irreplaceable artefacts of humankind’s
shared cultural heritage. In response to this increasing
threat, in April we met for a high-level thematic debate
on the theme “Promoting tolerance and reconciliation:
fostering peaceful, inclusive societies and countering
violent extremism”. Together with the Secretary-General
and with religious leaders, we explored ways to foster
dialogue, inclusiveness and mutual understanding, as
many speakers stressed the importance of leaving no
one on the margins of society.
Indeed, ensuring that everybody is entitled to
a life of rights and dignity is the cornerstone of our
work within the United Nations. This session afforded
us several opportunities to renew our commitment to
fight discrimination and promote human rights for all.
In December, we launched the International Decade for
People of African Descent, and in March we unveiled the
Permanent Memorial to Honour the Victims of Slavery
and the Transatlantic Slave Trade on the grounds of the
United Nations. We marked the twentieth anniversary
of the Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women,
and for the first time the Office of the President of
the General Assembly hosted the global observance
of International Women’s Day. We were proud to do
so, jointly with UN-Women. The high-level thematic

A/69/PV.105

debate on that in March gave greater focus to advancing
gender equality and women’s empowerment in the post2015 development agenda.
During the session we also considered how young
people could fully utilize their talents and energy
to contribute to the achievement of sustainable
development. In doing so, we laid the foundation for a
more prosperous future not only for ourselves, but for
generations to come.
Furthermore, with the bestowing of the inaugural
Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize in July, the General
Assembly recognized the outstanding achievements of
two champions dedicated their lives to the service of
humankind.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, we should use this
occasion to consider how the Organization can transform
and evolve to improve its capacity to respond to current
and future challenges. Improving its efficiency and
effectiveness was one of the priorities I set out for this
session. As part of that reflection, we held a high-level
thematic debate in May on strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and with regional and
subregional organizations. Owing to their knowledge
of local dynamics and realities, regional organizations
are well placed to work hand-in-hand with the United
Nations to effectively address local, national, regional
and international challenges. I therefore welcome
the recommendation on the need for strong and more
operational cooperation in regional partnerships set out
in the report of the Secretary-General on the future of
United Nations peace operations (S/2015/682) — for
example, institutionalizing and expanding the United
Nations-African Union partnership. That was also one
of the key messages of the political declaration that was
the outcome of the high-level thematic debate held in
May in New York.
In the context of the revitalization of the General
Assembly, Member States agreed to give a greater role
to this body in the upcoming selection of the SecretaryGeneral. That is an important step towards openness
and transparency in the selection process.
Ten years ago, our leaders expressed support for
an early reform of the Security Council. During this
session, I made it one of my priorities in order to
move the process forward. I thank the Chair of the
intergovernmental negotiations, Ambassador Courtenay
Rattray, Permanent Representative of Jamaica, for

15-2794711/12

A/69/PV.105

his steadfast leadership throughout the negotiations.
Together we should muster the resolve to reform the
Council in a way that reflects the geopolitical realities
of our current world. We should build on the work done
during this session and ensure that there is continued
progress in the reform effort, and that we maintain a
constructive, flexible spirit moving forward. I thank
all Member States and groups for their commitment on
this vital issue and urge everyone here to keep up the
momentum.
I urge the Assembly to continue to reflect on
those important areas during the next session with
a view towards identifying ways to better align the
Organization with our modern-day geopolitical
realities.
At the beginning of this session, I likened our work
to a journey, one that has taken us around the world and
allowed us to consider the Organization’s important
role in promoting better lives for all peoples. Along the
way, it has been a great pleasure to meet and work with
so many people whose resolve and commitment to the
values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
is steadfast.

14/09/2015

who have worked behind the scenes, in particular the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management and the Department of Public Information,
for their professionalism and unwavering support over
the course of these last 12 months.
As we bring this session to a close, I am convinced
that President-elect Lykketoft will shepherd this body
in an efficient and inspirational manner during the
seventieth session. In conclusion, I leave everyone here
with the words of Mr. Mandela, who said,
“I have discovered the secret that after climbing
a great hill, one only finds that there are many more
hills to climb.”
These are indeed important words to recall as we
both celebrate our many accomplishments from the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, while
considering the important work that will take place
in this Hall throughout the upcoming session and for
many years to come.
Agenda item 2 (continued)
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

My appreciation goes to the Member States, which
have worked diligently throughout the session. I am
thankful for their hard work and partnership, as well
as their high-level of participation at events I organized
throughout the session. I am also grateful to the
co-facilitators and chairs of the many intergovernmental
processes that have been carried out during the session.
Their commitment has enabled us to make a lasting,
positive impact for many. I also thank the numerous
other stakeholders that participated in events during
the session, including our partners from civil society,
the business sector, youth, religious communities and
academia.

The President: As we come to the end of the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, I invite
representatives to stand and observe a minute of silent
prayer or meditation.

I am particularly grateful to the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his partnership
and friendship. I commend him for his commitment and
steadfast efforts on behalf of people around the world.
I also thank him and all his staff in the Secretariat

I declare closed the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly.

12/12

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the sixty-ninth session
The President: Before closing the session, I would
like to invite to the rostrum the President-elect of the
Assembly at its seventieth session, His Excellency
Mr. Mogens Lykketoft, to hand over the gavel to him.

The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

15-27947
