A/RES/77/223

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 January 2023

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 68 (b)
Promotion and protection of human rights: human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for improving
the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 15 December 2022
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/77/463/Add.2, para. 87)]

77/223.

Human rights and extreme poverty
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, 3 the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 4 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 6 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 7 and all other human rights
instruments adopted by the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 47/196 of 22 December 1992, by which it declared
17 October the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, as well as its
resolution 75/175 of 16 December 2020 and its previous resolutions on human rights
and extreme poverty, in which it reaffirmed that extreme poverty and exclusion from
society constituted a violation of human dignity and an obstacle to the fulfilment of

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Ibid.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
5
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
1
2

22-28989 (E)

110123

*2228989*

A/RES/77/223

Human rights and extreme poverty

all human rights and that urgent national and international action was therefore
required to eliminate them,
Recalling also its resolution 52/134 of 12 December 1997, in which it
recognized that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights was essential for the effective understanding, promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolutions 2/2 of 27 November 2006, 8
7/27 of 28 March 2008, 9 8/11 of 18 June 2008, 10 12/19 of 2 October 2009, 11 15/19 of
30 September 2010, 12 17/13 of 17 June 2011, 13 26/3 of 26 June 2014, 14 35/19 of
22 June 2017 15 and 44/13 of 16 July 2020 16 on human rights and extreme poverty, and
in this regard underlining the imperative need for their full and effective
implementation,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 21/11 of 27 September 2012, 17 by
which the Council adopted the guiding principles on extreme poverty and human
rights 18 as a useful tool for States in the formulation and implementation of poverty
reduction and eradication policies, as appropriate, and encouraging States to
implement the guiding principles,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, and
its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions –
economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner,
Recognizing that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is one of the
greatest global challenges in the history of the United Nations, and noting with deep
concern its impact on health and the loss of life, mental health and well-being, as well
as the negative impact on global humanitarian needs, the enjoyment of human rights
and across all spheres of society, including on livelihoods, food security and nutrition,
and education, the exacerbation of poverty and hunger, disruption to economies,
trade, societies and environments, and the exacerbation of economic and social
inequalities within and among countries, which is reversing hard-won development
gains and hampering progress towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for Susta inable
Development and all its Goals and targets,
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets seek to build on
the Millennium Development Goals and complete what they did not achieve, and that
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/62/53), chap. I, sect. A.
9
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II, sect. A.
10
Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
11
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and A/65/53/Corr.1),
chap. I, sect. A.
12
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II.
13
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. III, sect. A.
14
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. V, sect. A.
15
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. V, sect. A.
16
Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/75/53), chap. V, sect. A.
17
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
18
A/HRC/21/39.
8

2/8

22-28989

Human rights and extreme poverty

A/RES/77/223

they seek to realize the human rights of all and to achieve gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, which
is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, supports and
complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to
address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels
for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming also the objectives and goals of the Third United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027) to accelerate global actions for a world
without poverty and to support, in an efficient and coordinated manner, the
internationally agreed development goals related to poverty eradication, including the
Sustainable Development Goals and their objective of leaving no one behind and
reaching the furthest behind first,
Reaffirming further the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 19 which
states the right to development, as established in the Declaration on the Right to
Development, 20 as a universal and inalienable right and an integral part of
fundamental human rights,
Acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the world in
combating extreme poverty, however, deeply concerned that progress towards ending
extreme poverty has been reversed by three to four years at the global level and by
eight to nine years in low-income countries, because of the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic in all countries of the world, regardless of their economic, social and
cultural situation, and that extreme poverty is particularly severe in developing
countries and that it extends to and manifests itself in, among other things, social
exclusion, hunger, discrimination, vulnerability to trafficking in persons, and disease,
lack of adequate shelter, lack of access to basic services, including access to safe
drinking water and sanitation, and the prevalence of illiteracy and hopelessness,
Remaining deeply concerned that progress has been uneven, inequality has
increased, the total number of persons living in extreme poverty remains unacceptably
high, with a net increase of 89 million people in extreme poverty by the end of 2022
expected compared with pre-pandemic projections, and the non-income dimensions
of poverty and deprivation, such as access to inclusive and equitable quality education
or basic health services, and relative poverty remain major concerns,
Recognizing the need to tackle health inequities and inequalities within and
among countries through political commitment, policies and international cooperation,
including those that address social, economic and environmental determinants of
health,
Deeply concerned that gender inequality, gender-based violence and
discrimination exacerbate extreme poverty, disproportionally impacting women and
girls, and that the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the social
and economic situation of women and girls is deepening already existing inequalities
and risks slowing down the progress towards achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls made in recent decades, while recognizing the
important role and contribution of women and girls in eradicating poverty, and
acknowledging the mutually reinforcing links between the achievement of gender
__________________
19
20

22-28989

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution 41/128, annex.
3/8

A/RES/77/223

Human rights and extreme poverty

equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and the eradication of poverty
in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty,
Recognizing the importance of supporting countries in their efforts to eradicate
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, and to promote
the empowerment of the poor and of people in vulnerable situations, including
women, children, young people, Indigenous Peoples, local communities, older
persons, persons with disabilities, migrants, refugees, internally displaced persons,
persons belonging to national, ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and people
of African descent,
Concerned by the challenges faced today, including those derived from the
ongoing impact of the financial and economic crisis, food insecurity, volatile food
prices and other ongoing concerns over global food security, epidemics and large
movements of refugees and migrants, as well as the increasing challenges posed by
climate change and the loss of biodiversity, and by the resulting increase in the
number of people living in extreme poverty, and their negative effect on the capacity
of all States, especially developing countries, to fight extreme poverty,
Bearing in mind that, in order to break the cycle of intergenerational poverty and
vulnerability, promote the well-being of all persons of all ages, including persons with
disabilities, boost development efforts, contribute to better outcomes for children and
address the feminization of poverty, positive action needs to be taken, including in the
form of policies, at the national and international levels, that address existing inequalities
in the distribution of services, resources and infrastructure, as well as access to food,
health care, education and decent work in cities and other human settlements,
Recognizing that the eradication of extreme poverty is a major challenge within
the process of globalization that requires the coordination and continuation of
inclusive policies through decisive national action and international cooperation, and
recognizing also in this context the role of the private sector, including the corporate
sector, in the eradication of extreme poverty,
Recalling the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, 21 endorsed by
the Human Rights Council in its resolution 17/4 of 16 June 2011, 22 which established
a framework to prevent and address the adverse human rights impact of business
activities, based on the three pillars of the United Nations “Protect, Respect and
Remedy” Framework, and recognizing in this regard the efforts made to imple ment
the Guiding Principles by some States, business enterprises, international
organizations and members of civil society,
Recognizing that social protection systems make a critical contribution to the
realization of human rights for all, in particular for those who are in vulnerable or
marginalized situations and are trapped in poverty and subject to discrimination,
Recognizing also that persistent and growing inequalities within and among
countries are a major challenge to poverty eradication, particularly affecting those
who are living in extreme poverty and in vulnerable situations,
Stressing the necessity of better understanding and
multidimensional causes and consequences of extreme poverty,

addressing

the

Reaffirming that, since the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the
full and effective enjoyment of all human rights and may, in some situations,

__________________
21
22

4/8

A/HRC/17/31, annex.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
22-28989

Human rights and extreme poverty

A/RES/77/223

constitute a threat to the right to life, its immediate alleviation and eventual
eradication must remain a high priority for the international community,
Stressing that respect for all human rights, which are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, is of crucial importance for all policies and
programmes to fight extreme poverty,
Underlining the priority and urgency given by Heads of State and Government
to the eradication of extreme poverty, as expressed in the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and the full and effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing and that they contribute to the eradication of extreme poverty,
1.
Reaffirms that extreme poverty, deep inequality and exclusion constitute a
violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international action is
therefore required to eliminate them;
2.
Also reaffirms that it is essential for States to foster participation by the
poorest people in the decision-making process in the societies in which they live, in
the promotion of human rights and in efforts to combat extreme poverty and exclusion
and that it is essential for people living in and affected by poverty and in situations
of vulnerability to be empowered to organize themselves and to participate in all
aspects of political, economic, social, cultural and civic life, in particular the planning
and implementation of policies that affect them, thus enabling them to become
genuine partners in development;
3.
Emphasizes that extreme poverty is a major issue to be addressed by
Governments, the United Nations system and international financial institutions, the
private sector, including the corporate sector, civil society and community -based
social organizations, and in this context reaffirms that political commitment is a
prerequisite for the eradication of poverty;
4.
Also emphasizes that all business enterprises, both transnational
corporations and other business enterprises, have a responsibility to respect all human
rights, and recognizes that proper regulation, including through national legislation,
of transnational corporations and other business enterprises and their responsible
operation can contribute to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of and respect
for human rights and assist in channelling the benefits of business towards
contributing to the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5.
Further emphasizes the need to accord due consideration and priority to
poverty eradication within the United Nations development agenda, while stressing
the importance of addressing the causes and systemic challenges of poverty through
integrated, coordinated and coherent strategies at the national, intergovernmental and
inter-agency levels, consistent with the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields;
6.
Calls upon Member States to design recovery strategies based on riskinformed, sustainable financing policies, supported by integrated national financing
frameworks in accordance with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, 23 to enact the policies
necessary to address the economic crisis and depression resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic, begin economic recovery and minimize the negative effects of the
pandemic on livelihoods, including targeted measures for poverty eradication, social
protection for formal and informal sector workers, increased access to finance and
__________________
23

22-28989

Resolution 69/313, annex.
5/8

A/RES/77/223

Human rights and extreme poverty

capacity-building for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, financial inclusion
mechanisms, strong fiscal stimulus packages and supportive monetary policies, and
calls upon donors and other stakeholders to support countries that lack the capacity
to implement such measures, in particular least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States, as well as low- and middleincome countries;
7.
Reaffirms that the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the
full and effective enjoyment of human rights, renders democracy and popular
participation fragile and can also create barriers to full and effective participation in
political and public life, in particular for women and girls and persons with
disabilities;
8.
Recognizes the need to respect and to realize human rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to address the most pressing social needs of people
living in poverty, including through the design and development of appropriate
mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
9.
Reaffirms the commitments contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 24 in particular to leave no one behind, to reach the furthest behind and
the most vulnerable and to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 1, including by
sparing no effort to fight against and eradicate extreme poverty, which is currently
measured as people living on less than 2.15 United States dollars a day, for all people
everywhere by 2030;
10. Also reaffirms its full commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as the blueprint for building back better after the COVID-19 pandemic,
and calls upon Member States to ensure that efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda
for all, by reaching all its Goals and targets, are strengthened and accelerated in this
decade of action for building more sustainable, peaceful, just, equitable, inclusive and
resilient societies where no one is left behind and to make sustainable long-term
investments to eradicate poverty in all its forms, including extreme poverty, as well
as address inequalities and human rights abuses or violations, which have greatly
exacerbated vulnerabilities and increased the negative effects of the COVID-19
pandemic, and address climate change and the environmental crisis in order to build
a better future for all;
11. Further reaffirms the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to
eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development
and global prosperity for all, including women and girls; 25
12. Recalls that promoting universal access to social services and providing
social protection floors can make an important contribution to consolidating and
achieving further development gains and that social protection systems that address
and reduce inequality and social exclusion are essential for protecting the gains made
towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, and in this regard
takes note of the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), of the
International Labour Organization;
13. Encourages States, when designing, implementing, monitoring and
evaluating social protection programmes, to ensure gender mainstreaming and the
promotion and protection of all human rights in accordance with their obligations
under international human rights law, throughout this process;
14. Calls upon States to implement gender-responsive social protection
policies, as well as fiscal policies that contribute to promoting gender equality and
__________________
24
25

6/8

Resolution 70/1.
See resolution 60/1.
22-28989

Human rights and extreme poverty

A/RES/77/223

the empowerment of all women and girls by, inter alia, facilitating greater access to
and inclusion in social protection and financial and business services, including
credit, for women, in particular women heads of household;
15. Encourages States to take all measures necessary to eliminate
discrimination against all persons, in particular those living in poverty, to refrain from
adopting any laws, regulations or practices denying or limiting the enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including economic, social and cultural
rights, and to ensure that people, in particular those living in poverty, have equal
access to justice;
16. Calls upon Member States, in taking measures to eliminate discrimination,
to ensure that their legal frameworks, where relevant, are non-discriminatory on the
basis of socioeconomic status and to address the need to effectively remove the
obstacles that people in poverty face in areas such as housing, employment,
education, health and other social services;
17. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen and support South-South
cooperation and triangular cooperation, recognizing their contributions to the efforts
of developing countries to collaborate in the eradication of poverty, and stresses that
South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North South cooperation;
18. Encourages the international community to strengthen its efforts to
address challenges that are contributing to extreme poverty, including those derived
from the ongoing impact of the financial and economic crisis, food insecurity, volatile
food prices and other ongoing concerns over global food security, epidemics and the
increasing challenges posed by climate change and the loss of biodiversity in all parts
of the world, especially in developing countries, by enhancing cooperation to help to
build national capacities;
19. Reaffirms the critical role of quality education and lifelong learning for all
in achieving poverty eradication and other development goals, as envisaged in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular free, equitable and quality
primary and secondary education and training for eradicating illiteracy, efforts
towards expanded secondary and higher education as well as vocational education
and technical training, especially for girls and women, the creation of human resources
and infrastructure capabilities and the empowerment of those living in poverty, also
reaffirms in this context the Dakar Framework for Action, adopted at the World
Education Forum on 28 April 2000, 26 and the Incheon Declaration: Education 2030 –
towards inclusive and equitable quality education and lifelong learning for all,
adopted at the World Education Forum 2015, 27 and recognizes the importance of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization strategy for the
eradication of poverty, especially extreme poverty, in supporting the Education for
All programmes as tools for achieving Sustainable Development Goal 4 by 2030;
20. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to give high priority to the question of the relationship between extreme
poverty and human rights, and also invites his Office to pursue further work in this area;
21. Calls upon States, United Nations bodies, in particular the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Development Programme, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations, to continue to give appropriate attention to the links between human
__________________

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
27
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum 2015, Incheon, Republic of Korea, 19–22 May 2015 (Paris, 2015).
26

22-28989

7/8

A/RES/77/223

Human rights and extreme poverty

rights and extreme poverty, and encourages the private sector, including the corporate
sector, and international financial institutions to proceed likewise;
22. Takes note with appreciation of the guiding principles on extreme poverty
and human rights, adopted by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 21/11, as a
useful tool for States in the formulation and implementation of poverty reduction and
eradication policies, as appropriate;
23. Encourages Governments, relevant United Nations bodies, funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies, other intergovernmental organizations and
national human rights institutions, as well as non-governmental organizations and
non-State actors, and the private sector, including the corporate sector, to consider the
guiding principles in the formulation and implementation of their policies and
measures concerning persons affected by extreme poverty;
24. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to disseminate the guiding principles, as appropriate;
25. Welcomes the efforts of entities throughout the United Nations system to
incorporate the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals set out therein into their work;
26. Takes note of the work undertaken by the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on extreme poverty and human rights, including his reports submitted
to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth 28 and seventy-seventh sessions, 29 and
notes the work of the Secretary-General to address the issues referred to therein;
27. Decides to consider the question further at its seventy-ninth session, under
the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms” o f the
item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
54th plenary meeting
15 December 2022

__________________
28
29

8/8

A/76/177.
A/77/157.
22-28989
