UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26084
15 July 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council,
at its 3255th meeting, on 15 July 1993, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled "The situation prevailing in and adjacent to
the United Nations Protected Areas in Croatia":
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the information contained
in the letter of the Secretary-General of 14 July 1993 (S/26082) on the
situation in and around the United Nations Protected Areas (UNPAs) in the
Republic of Croatia. It recalls its resolutions 802 (1993) and 847 (1993)
and in particular the demand in the former that all parties and others
concerned comply strictly with the cease-fire arrangements already agreed
and the call on them in the latter to reach an agreement on
confidence-building measures.
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the latest report
on hostilities in the UNPAs, including in particular by the Krajina Serbs,
and demands that these hostilities cease immediately.
"The Security Council continues to attach the highest importance to
securing the reopening of the Maslenica crossing to civilian traffic. In
this context it reaffirms its support for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Croatia. It recognizes the real and
legitimate concern of the Government of the Republic of Croatia in such
reopening, as set out in the letter of 12 July 1993 from the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Croatia (S/26074). It also recalls the
demand in its resolution 802 (1993) that the Croatian armed forces withdraw
from the areas in question.
"The Security Council considers that the planned unilateral reopening
of the Maslenica bridge and of Zemunik airport on 18 July 1993, in the
absence of agreement between the parties and others concerned in
cooperation with the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), would
jeopardize the objectives of the Council’s resolutions and in particular
the call in its resolution 847 (1993) for agreement on confidence-building
measures and the efforts of the Co-Chairmen of the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia and UNPROFOR to achieve a negotiated settlement to
the problem. It urges the Government of the Republic of Croatia to refrain
from this action.
93-39997 (E)

150793

/...

S/26084
English
Page 2

"The Security Council expresses its support for the efforts of the
Co-Chairmen and UNPROFOR and calls on the parties and others concerned to
cooperate fully with them in this regard and to conclude rapidly the
agreement on confidence-building measures called for in its resolution
847 (1993). It joins the Secretary-General in his call to the parties and
others concerned to act in a manner conducive to the maintenance of peace
and to refrain from any action which would undermine these efforts, and
calls upon the parties to assure UNPROFOR’s freedom of access in particular
to the area surrounding the Maslenica crossing."

-----
