S/2014/696

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 September 2014
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
This seventh report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014) and paragraph 10 of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to report, every
30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The report covers the period from 19 August to 17 September 2014. The
information contained in the report and the attached annex is based on the data
available to the United Nations actors on the ground and reports from open sources
and sources of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Conflict and high levels of violence continued across the Syrian Arab Republic
during the reporting period, particularly in the governorates of Aleppo, Hama,
Homs, Deir ez-Zor, Rif Dimashq, Damascus, Hasakeh, Idlib, Dar`a, Quneitra and
Raqqa. Indiscriminate shelling and aerial attacks by government forces and
indiscriminate shelling and attacks by armed opposition, extremist and designated
terrorist groups 1 continued to result in deaths of, injuries to and displacement of
civilians. In its report of 22 August entitled “Updated statistical analysis of
documentation of killings in the Syrian Arab Republic”, 2 the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) enumerated a list of
191,369 individuals reported killed between March 2011 and the end of April 2014.

__________________
1 On 30 May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra Front were

designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council under resolution 1267 (1999). The two
groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2 The analysis for the report relied on five sources, including records provided by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic through March 2012. Of the documented killings, 85.1 per cent
(162,925) of those killed were male and 9.3 per cent (17,795) were female.

14-61427 (E)

250914

*1461427*

S/2014/696

However, the data did not allow for a differentiation between combatants and
non-combatants.
4.
Air strikes, shelling and indiscriminate barrel bomb attacks by government
forces continued on opposition-held areas, notably in Aleppo and Damascus
governorates, resulting in a high number of civilian casualties. In Aleppo,
government forces reportedly continued their campaign of barrel bomb attacks,
which has been ongoing since mid-December 2013. OHCHR received reports that at
least 55 civilians, including 17 children and 7 women, were killed as a result of such
attacks between 19 August and 3 September. In Damascus governorate, government
forces reportedly intensified attacks against the opposition -held areas of Joubar and
several locations in eastern Ghouta. Reports indicate that Joubar was subjected to
dozens of air raids and heavy shelling on 2 and 3 September, resulting in the death of
at least 10 civilians, while aerial bombardment by government forces reported ly
killed at least 120 people and injured hundreds of people in Douma (eastern Ghouta).
5.
Dar`a, Hama and Idlib governorates have also been severely affected by
indiscriminate attacks by government forces. For example, in Da r`a governorate, an
analysis by the Operational Satellite Applications Programme of satellite imagery
collected on 5 September indicated ongoing bombardment of the city of Dar`a, most
likely, in some instances, by barrel bombs. Possible damage is visible elsewhere in
the city and is likely the result of conventional artillery, light air-dropped munitions
or other causes. According to information gathered by OHCHR, on 30 August 2014,
missile attacks by government forces on the city of Saraqib (Idlib), reportedly led to
the death of at least 15 people, including 8 children and 4 women. Another reported
missile attack by government forces, on 3 September, in the town of Naqir (Idlib),
led to the death of five civilians. In Hama, 16 civilians were reportedly killed by
shelling in Tal Khaznah.
6.
Government forces also shelled and undertook airstrikes against ISIL positions
in the northern and eastern parts of the country in an attempt to stop ISIL
advancement towards government airbases in Rif Aleppo and Deir ez -Zor, Hasakeh
and Raqqa governorates, resulting in civilian casualties. In Deir ez-Zor, government
airstrikes reportedly hit a bus carrying civilians in the village of Shoula, killing at
least 13 people, including 10 children. On 15 September, government airstrikes
destroyed Siasyeh bridge in Deir ez-Zor city, cutting off access to an estimated
50,000 people.
7.
Government-controlled cities and towns continued to be subject to
indiscriminate mortar attacks, shelling and vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices by armed opposition, extremist and designated terrorist groups, notably in
Aleppo and Damascus governorates. For example, in Aleppo city, extensive shelling
in the Khalideah residential and commercial area at the beginning of September
resulted in the deaths of eight civilians, including women and children.
8.
On 5 September, armed opposition groups took control of the Dokhanya and
Ein Tarma suburbs of Damascus and engaged government forces in Midan and
Zahira al-Jadida, located less than 2 km from the Old City. A similar operation took
place in Teshrine district, north of Damascus. On 16 September, one of the main
Islamic Front factions (Ajnad al-Sham) announced the beginning of a second phase
of rocket attacks on the centre of Damascus.

2/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

9.
According to research by Human Rights Watch released on 1 September, there
is credible evidence that ISIL forces used ground -fired cluster munitions on 12 July
and again on 14 August during fighting around the Syrian town of Ain al-Arab
(Kobanî) in Aleppo governorate, near the northern border of the Syrian Arab
Republic with Turkey. Human Rights Watch also documented apparent recent use of
cluster munitions by Syrian government forces, including on 21 August, on the town
of Manbij in Aleppo governorate, which has been under the control of ISIL since the
beginning of 2014.
10. Civilians continue to be displaced as a result of ongoing fighting and conflict.
During the reporting period, displacement was recorded in areas of Hasakeh, Hama
and Quneitra governorates. In Hasakeh, between 20,000 and 30,000 people were
displaced as a result of the ongoing fighting in and around the Ya ’robiyah, Jasaa and
Gweiran neighbourhoods of Hasakeh city. The displaced have fled to other parts of
Hasakeh, as well as to Qamishli. In addition, reports indicate that so me 9,000 people
fled four villages in Tal Hamis towards Qamishli and other locations following
fighting between the People’s Protection Units (Yekîneyên Parastina Gel) and other
armed groups. In Hama, fighting between government forces and armed opposition
groups in southern and western rural areas led to about 22,500 people fleeing to
Hama city and Salamiyah and about 7,000 people to Atmeh and Karameh in Idlib
governorate. Reports indicate that up to 110,000 internally displaced persons were
registered for assistance in those areas during the reporting period. In Quneitra, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported
that more than 5,000 people were displaced towards areas in Rif Dimashq
governorate to escape the ongoing fighting.
11. Parties to the conflict continued to target vital services and infrastructure.
Reduced availability of water and electricity continued to be reported in various
contested areas in Dar`a, Idlib, Hama, Deir ez-Zor and Rif Dimashq governorates.
In Aleppo city, damage caused to the main water pumping station, Suleiman
al-Halabi, by armed opposition groups on 2 June continues to result in water
shortages for more than 700,000 people. While repairs to the pumping station in
Aleppo have continued since 19 July, the water station pumping capacity remains
low owing to electricity cuts and lack of fuel for generators. On 4 September, the
armed opposition groups controlling Suleiman al-Halabi cut water supply to Aleppo
for two days and are reported to have placed explosive devices in the immediate
vicinity of the second pumping station. On 8 September, barrel bombs were
reportedly dropped on Sakhour in Aleppo, resulting in extensive damage to the
electrical transmission substation.
12. ISIL continues to increase its influence in the Syrian Arab Republic,
predominantly along the main supply lines in rural central Homs, Hama, Rif
Dimashq, Hasakeh and Aleppo and in areas with border crossings, natural resources
and key infrastructure. During the reporting period, ISIL made advances in Deir
ez-Zor, Raqqa and Aleppo governorates following clashes with government forces
and armed opposition groups. In Deir ez-Zor, ISIL attacked and shelled oppositioncontrolled areas and government installations in the north, in cluding Deir ez-Zor
military airport and Kuweires airbase in eastern Aleppo. In Raqqa governorate, ISIL
took over the Government’s Tabaqa airbase on 24 August. In Hasakeh, ISIL
reportedly fought the People’s Protection Units in Jazeah town and surrounding
areas (60 km south-east of Qamishli city), resulting in hundreds of families
displaced. At the close of the reporting period, ISIL had made significant advances

14-61427

3/21

S/2014/696

in the Ain al-Arab area, which, as at 22 September, has forced 130,000 people to
flee to Turkey. This is the largest influx of Syrian refugees to Turkey in such a short
period of time since the beginning of the conflict in 2011.
13. About 84,000 of the 95,000 Yazidi people who were displaced to Hasakeh
governorate following attacks by ISIL on the Sinjar district of Ninewa governorate
in Iraq have since departed the area, using the Semalka border crossing in order to
move to the Kurdish region of Iraq. As at 11 September, an estimated 4,700 arrivals
from Iraq remain in the Newroz camp and approximately 3,000 are staying in the
surrounding villages.
14. In Idlib governorate, on 9 September, a bomb attack killed the leader of
Harakat Ahrar al-Sham al-Islamiyya, part of the Islamic Front, Hassan Abboud,
along with up to 45 people, including several other leaders of the group. No one has
claimed responsibility for the attack.
15. Although the United Nations does not have the means to independently verify
numbers and origins, non-Syrian fighters, including designated terrorist groups,
increasingly are participating in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic, on all
sides of the conflict. Many analysts report that the number of foreign fighters has
steadily increased since ISIL declared an Islamic caliphate and launched major
offensives in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq over the past three months.
Estimates range from about 200 to 300 new foreign fighters joining ISIL per month
to up to 6,000 fighters in July alone. The territory encompassing the ISIL -declared
Islamic caliphate is estimated to have a population of up to 9 million people.
16. There have been a number of local ceasefire agreements, as well as ongoing
negotiations, between the Government and armed opposition groups. In Damascus
governorate, a ceasefire agreement was reached in the Qadam and Asal areas of
Damascus city on 18 August. Following the agreement, essential services started to
be restored and some 4,000 civilians returned to their homes. In Yarmouk camp in
Damascus, the Government recently invited armed opposition groups to form a
delegation and resume direct negotiations on the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement that was reached on 21 June, which has to date seen no
progress towards its implementation.
17. Local ceasefire negotiations are also ongoing in Rif D imashq and Homs
governorates. In Rif Dimashq, a local agreement, including a ceasefire, has
reportedly been reached in Wadi Barda. Elsewhere, the Syrian armed forces and a
delegation from Daraya (western Ghouta) started direct negotiations in early August
on a comprehensive agreement to allow civilians to return to their homes. The
negotiations continue, particularly over the issue of detainees and the surrendering
of medium-sized weapons. Negotiations on a ceasefire in the Waer neighbourhood
of Homs city are ongoing, although hostilities have reportedly continued.
18. On 11 September, the 45 United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) peacekeepers who had been detained by the Nusra Front since 28 August
were released. All 45 peacekeepers were reportedly in good condition. The situation
in UNDOF on the Syrian side and the area of separation significantly deteriorated in
mid-September. Armed groups have made advances in the area of UNDOF
positions, posing a direct threat to the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers along the Bravo line and in Camp Faouar. As a result, all United
Nations personnel in those positions have been relocated to the Alpha side.

4/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

19. The Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, accompanied by his Deputy,
Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy, visited Damascus from 9 to 13 September for initial
discussions with government officials, opposition representatives in the Syrian Arab
Republic and representatives of civil society organizations and women ’s groups. It
was the first visit of the Special Envoy to the country since taking up his assignment
on 1 September 2014. This was followed by visits to a number of regional and
international capitals, including Beirut, Cairo, Paris and Ankara.
20. On 10 September, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
announced that the fact-finding mission to examine alleged uses of chlorine gas as a
weapon in the Syrian Arab Republic had found information constituting “compelling
confirmation” that a toxic chemical was used “systematically and repeatedly” as a
weapon in Talmanes, Tamanah and Kafr Zeta in the northern part of the country
earlier in 2014.

B.

Human rights
21. On 27 August 2014, the independent international commission of inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic released its eighth report (A/HRC/27/60), based on
480 interviews and evidence collected between 20 January and 15 July 2014. The
commission found that government forces had continued to conduct widespread
attacks on civilians, systematically committing murder, torture, rape and enforced
disappearance amounting to crimes against humanity. It reported that government
forces had further committed gross violations of human rights and the war crimes of
murder, hostage-taking, torture, rape and sexual violence, recruiting and using
children in hostilities and targeting civilians.
22. In the same report, the commission found that the armed groups named in the
report, including ISIL, had committed massacres and war crimes, in cluding murder,
execution without due process, torture, hostage-taking, violations of international
humanitarian law tantamount to enforced disappearance, rape and sexual violence,
recruitment and use of children in hostilities and attacks on protected obj ects.
Medical and religious personnel and journalists had been targeted. Armed groups had
besieged and indiscriminately shelled civilian neighbourhoods, in some instances
spreading terror among civilians through the use of car bombings in civilian areas.
Notably, the commission found that, in addition to war crimes, members of ISIL had
committed torture, murder, acts tantamount to enforced disappearance, and forcible
displacement as part of an attack on the civilian population in Aleppo and Raqqa
governorates, amounting to crimes against humanity.
23. During the reporting period, OHCHR continued to receive reports of arbitrary
arrests and detentions carried out by government forces in Hama and Aleppo
governorates, targeting activists. As at 11 August, the whereabouts of at least
25 activists, who were detained by government forces in July and August 2014 during
door-to-door search campaigns in various parts of Aleppo governorate, remained
unknown.
24. Women and children continued to be severely affected by the conflict during
the reporting period. As at 17 September, about 130 of the 153 students abducted by
ISIL on 29 May while travelling to Ain al-Arab, Aleppo, continued to be held by the
group. Meanwhile, OHCHR received reports that a female dentist had h er
identification document confiscated at an ISIL checkpoint in Deir ez -Zor. According

14-61427

5/21

S/2014/696

to activists, on 19 August 2014, nearly 10 days after her disappearance, ISIL said
that she had been executed, but the whereabouts of her body remain unknown.
While the reasons for her disappearance remain unclear, the media has reported that
she was targeted for treating male patients.
25. On 17 August 2014, ISIL took over the villages of Abu Hamam, Kashkiyeh
and Ghranij in Deir ez-Zor, which are inhabited by the Sheitat tribe, after almost one
month of encircling and fighting to gain control. Information gathered by OHCHR
indicates that, before and during the period of encirclement, the women and children
of the villages were able to leave. Reportedly, those remaining b ehind were mainly
elderly persons and Free Syrian Army elements and affiliates from the Sheitat tribe
who were defending their villages. Upon seizing the villages, ISIL reportedly
executed and detained hundreds of people.
26. In addition, according to various sources, ISIL executed dozens of individuals
in Deir ez-Zor, Aleppo and Raqqa governorates on charges that varied from apostasy
to aiding government forces. The victims reportedly included civilians, Nusra Front
fighters, and government operatives who had reportedly infiltrated the armed group.
On 28 August 2014, a video was released showing that, following the takeover of
Tabaqa airbase in Raqqa, ISIL executed at least 226 soldiers at the entrance of the
airbase. The names and ranks were later published by ISIL.
27. ISIL targeting of media personnel continued. On 19 August, an American
journalist was executed by ISIL, and an American-Israeli journalist was executed on
2 September. At least seven other media professionals are believed to be held
captive by ISIL.
28. During the reporting period, ISIL reportedly issued a statement to all education
and teaching institutions in Raqqa governorate, including references to abolishing
the current Ministry of Education and implementing a series of structural cu rricular
changes, such as the abolition of subjects such as history, musical and artistic
education and sport.
29. The Government has indicated that between 21 August and 9 September 2014,
1,669 individuals were pardoned after surrendering themselves and their weapons
and pledging not to participate in the hostilities. The Government did not provide
further details on the pardons. OHCHR is not in a position to verify this information.
30. A lack of accountability continues to lead to impunity for perpetra tors of
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law in the Syrian Arab
Republic. During the reporting period, the commission of inquiry had yet to receive
any response from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to its most recent
request for access to the country for the purpose of fulfilling its Human Rights
Council mandate. The latest letter from the commission, dated 30 July, asking for
access to the Syrian Arab Republic, was its third such request in 2014. Members of
the commission of inquiry, OHCHR and United Nations human rights monitors
continue to be denied access to the country.

C.

Humanitarian access
31. About 10.8 million people continue to be in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance within the Syrian Arab Republic, including more than 6.4 million people
who are internally displaced. Some 4.7 million people reside in areas categorized as

6/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

hard to reach, including at least 241,000 people who remain besieged by either
government or opposition forces.
32. United Nations agencies and partners continued to make some gains in
humanitarian access during the reporting period. A record number of people were
reached with food assistance in August. Deliveries across borders and across lines
continued, with access across borders following the adoption of resolution 2165
(2014) resulting in broader reach to areas in Aleppo, Dar`a, Hama, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah
and Quneitra governorates. There have also been openings in access across conf lict
lines, with some cross-line deliveries of food, health and water and sanitation
supplies in Aleppo (eastern and western rural), Idlib and Rif Dimashq.
33. Despite the recent gains in humanitarian access, the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to hard-to-reach areas remains challenging, primarily due to insecurity
and administrative hurdles. Overall, assistance reached 77 (approximately 26.8 per
cent) of the 287 locations identified as besieged or hard to reach. Food assistance by
the World Food Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) reached 251,808 people in 33 hardto-reach areas compared with 469,510 people in 23 hard-to-reach locations during
the previous reporting period. UNHCR, UNRWA, the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) and the International Organization for Migration delivered non -food
items to 104,837 people in 39 hard-to-reach areas compared with 81,151 people in
23 hard-to-reach locations during the previous reporting period. The World Health
Organization (WHO) delivered medicines for approximately 183,000 people and
provided water and sanitation support for approximately 88,300 people. The United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) provided water and sanitation support for
140,000 people and nutritional support for 30,000 children in hard -to-reach areas.
34. The monitoring mechanism of the United Nations is currently operational,
with one monitoring team in Turkey and one monitoring team in Jordan. The rapid
establishment of the monitoring teams was possible due to the support afforded to
the United Nations by the Governments of Jordan and Turkey. A second monitoring
team in Turkey is being established. The deployment of the monitoring team in Iraq
remains pending due to the ongoing fighting and insecurity in the north-western part
of the country.
35. The United Nations and its partners have sent 14 shipments — 10 from Turkey
and 4 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of Security Council
resolution 2165 (2014), using three border crossings: Bab al-Salam, Bab al-Hawa
and Ramtha. This has included food assistance for more than 94,500 people;
non-food items for more than 182,400 people; water and sanit ation supplies for
about 66,760 people; and medical supplies for more than 151,100 people, including
surgical supplies for 100 people, as well as other items for 47,900 people in Aleppo,
Dar`a, Hama, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Quneitra governorates.
36. In line with resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations notified the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in advance of each shipment, including
details about content, destination district and number of beneficiaries. Monitoring
mechanism teams monitored the loading of the shipments and accompanied the
loaded vehicles to the respective border crossing. In addition, for each shipment, the
monitoring mechanism sent a notification to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic confirming the humanitarian nature of the shipment in accordance with
resolution 2165 (2014).

14-61427

7/21

S/2014/696

37. In the light of the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Hasakeh governorate,
relief items continue to be urgently needed. The items are transported through the
Nusaybin/Qamishli border crossing, which is the most direct and least costly route
into the governorate. The Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs assured the United
Nations on 17 September that the Nusaybin/Qamihli border crossing was open. The
United Nations is negotiating with the authorities on further convoys. During the
reporting period, UNHCR and WFP continued to organize airlifts from Damascus
into Hasakeh governorate. WFP transported assistance for up to 63,000 people in
August; UNHCR transported non-food items for up to 15,000 people. In addition,
WHO was also able to deliver diarrhoea kits for more than 1,400 people and
UNICEF airlifted supplies for more than 4,000 people in Qa mishli. UNHCR has
provided transportation for more than 6,000 refugees returning to Iraq.
38. During the reporting period, access to the eastern governorates of the Syrian
Arab Republic continued to be severely constrained by designated terrorist groups
and armed opposition groups. For example, during the August food distribution
cycle, none of the planned allocation reached the 295,000 people targeted in Deir
ez-Zor governorate or the 285,000 people targeted in Raqqa governorate, as a result
of insecurity. While Raqqa received some assistance during the previous distribution
cycle, the reporting period marks the third consecutive month that WFP has not been
able to gain access to Deir ez-Zor. Furthermore, armed opposition groups, including
the Islamic Front, and designated terrorist groups, including ISIL, continued to
block humanitarian access to each other ’s areas of control. In Aleppo and northern
Hasakeh, for example, ISIL continued to block humanitarian access, particularly to
Kurdish areas and to villages in Deir ez-Zor not under their control.
39. Despite the difficult operating environment, agencies of the United Nations
system and partners continued their efforts to deliver assistance to those in need. In
August, WFP dispatched food for 4.16 million people across 12 Syrian
governorates, or 98 per cent of the planned target of 4.25 million, representing a
13 per cent increase from the 3.66 million (86 per cent of the target) reached in July
and the highest level achieved since the beginning of the crisis. UNICEF deliveries
of chlorine benefited 16.55 million people with clean water. WHO distributed
medicines and supplies for about 369,000 medical treatments. 3 Between 19 August
and 15 September, UNHCR dispatched core relief items benefiting more than
352,460 people in 10 governorates.
Besieged areas
40. Approximately 241,000 people remain besieged, 196,000 in areas besieged by
government forces in Madamiyet Elsham, eastern Ghouta, Darayya and Yarmouk,
and 45,000 in areas besieged by opposition forces in Nubul and Zahra.
41. During the reporting period, assistance, including medical assistance, reached
two besieged communities: Douma (eastern Ghouta) and Yarmouk. Food was
distributed to 17,508 people (7.3 per cent of people in besieged areas) and n on-food
items to 5,872 people (2.4 per cent); medicines were delivered sufficient for up to
76,364 people (31.7 per cent).
__________________
3 One standard treatment course (for example, a course of antibiotics for eight days) is considered

as treatment for one person. Treatment courses are determined for each distribution of medicine
based on international WHO standards.

8/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

42. In eastern Ghouta, 150,000 people remain besieged. On 9 September, WHO,
together with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC), delivered antibiotics,
communicable disease medicines equivalent to 71,000 treatments and water and
sanitation items, including chlorine disinfection sachets, to respond to the increasing
number of typhoid cases in Douma.
43. In Madamiyet Elsham, about 24,000 people, including some 9,000 children,
face a shortage of basic needs and movement constraints. No assistance reached
Madamiyet Elsham during the reporting period. Humanitarian assistance last
reached the area on 28 July, when WHO and SARC delivered 5 tons of medical
assistance, sufficient to support the 24,000 people for two months.
44. In Darayya (Rif Dimashq), about 4,000 people remain besieged. No assistance
reached Darayya during the reporting period; the area was last assisted in October
2012.
45. In Yarmouk, about 18,000 people remain besieged. UNRWA gained access to
Yarmouk on 19 days during the reporting period, reaching 17,508 people with food
parcels, 5,872 people with non-food items and, along with a WHO delivery, reached
5,364 people with health supplies and medicine. The distribution to Yarmouk of
medical supplies, including antibiotics and a range of medicines for chronic and
non-communicable diseases, as well as standard infant and early childhood
vaccines, was permitted for the second consecutive month. WHO also provided
water and sanitation support for 8,000 people. On 25 August, gunfire and mortars
struck the vicinity of the UNRWA distribution point in Yarmouk, halting the
distribution of food and health services for the day.
46. In Nubul and Zahra, about 45,000 people remain besieged by opposition
forces. No humanitarian assistance has reached the two villages since 8 May.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
47. WHO delivered medicines and medical equipment to hard-to-reach areas in
Dar`a, Rif Dimashq, Damascus and Hasakeh governorates. WHO and partners
distributed medicines and supplies for approximately 183,000 medical treatments,
including antibiotics and medicines for non-communicable diseases and diarrhoea
kits for more than 108,000 people in Busra, Hrak and Jasem in Dar`a governorate;
distributed to the besieged town of Douma in eastern Ghouta antibiotics and
medicines for communicable diseases sufficient for more than 71,000 treatments,
and pre-positioned Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All items for 80,000,
including chlorine disinfection sachets, to respond to the increasing number of
typhoid cases in the town; distributed antibiotics, medicines for chronic diseases and
one diarrhoea kit for 2,650 in Yarmouk camp in Damascus; and delivered diarrhoea
kits for the treatment of up to 1,400 Iraqi refugees in Qamishli.
48. A subnational level polio vaccination campaign took place from 31 August to
4 September. Preliminary results indicate that over 1 million c hildren were reached,
including in hard-to-reach areas. Three additional response campaigns are planned
by the Ministry of Health, WHO and UNICEF before the end of 2014.
49. Attacks on medical facilities and personnel continued over the reporting
period. During August, Physicians for Human Rights documented nine attacks on
medical facilities. Three were in Aleppo governorate, two in Dar`a, two in Idlib, one
in Raqqa and one in Rif Dimashq. Four were attacks by missiles and rockets, three

14-61427

9/21

S/2014/696

by barrel bombs and two by aerial bombardment with unknown weapons. Two of the
seven medical facilities had previously been attacked. The deaths of 21 medical
personnel were also documented. Physicians for Human Rights report that
17 personnel died from shelling or bombing, 2 died from torture and 2 were executed.
Administrative procedures
50. The implementation of the truck-sealing procedures intended to facilitate and
speed up passage at checkpoints continued to slow the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. In particular, delays were noted in the approval of weekly loading plans.
On 26 August, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the United Nations that
agencies could send the loading plans on a biweekly or monthly basis in order to
simplify procedures, since weekly loading plans were creating constraints. The
movement of supplies to hard-to-reach areas continued to be negotiated on a caseby-case basis through meetings of the joint committee established following the
adoption of Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, the Ministry of Social Affairs and security personnel centrally. This process
also continued to be applicable for authorization for hard -to-reach areas from United
Nations hubs at the governorate level, which previously did not require
authorization at the central/national levels. In Aleppo, Hama, Homs and Idlib, the
governors are implementing the new directive issued on 29 May. This has led to
significant delays in the approval of some convoys.
51. On 11 September, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs notified the United Nations
that regular importation of goods through the official border crossings, namely,
Jdaidet Yacoub, Tartus port, Ladhiqiyah port, Naseeb and Nusaybi n, could proceed
to warehouses of the United Nations or of international non -governmental
organizations (NGOs) directly from the crossing upon authorization of the official in
charge of the crossing, rather than requiring an additional facilitation letter from the
Governor. Other administrative procedures continue to apply.
52. As at 17 September, 33 United Nations visas or visa renewal requests
remained pending: 17 within the 15-working-day limit and 16 exceeding the
15-working-day limit. As at the same date, the number of pending visas for
international NGOs stood at 17.
53. Six national NGOs were authorized to partner with agencies of the United
Nations system in Damascus, Ladhiqiyah and Homs governorates during the
reporting period. There are 91 national NGOs operating through 148 branches
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
54. International NGOs continue to be unable to conduct independent (or joint)
needs assessments; most cannot open sub-offices; and they are not authorized to
partner with national NGOs or participate in inter-agency cross-line convoys or
United Nations field missions.
Safety and security of staff and premises
55. On 13 September, ISIL executed a British aid worker. ISIL also reportedly
holds a number of other aid workers.
56. On 9 September, a SARC ambulance was reportedly targeted by a sniper
during a transfer of a patient along the road near Khan Eshieh from Quneitra to
Damascus. No casualties were reported, although the patient was injured.

10/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

57. On 7 September, a rocket hit one of the hotels in Damascus where many
agencies of the United Nations system are located and its international personnel
reside, causing structural damage to the rooms but no casualties. One staff member
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs was badly injured.
58. On 31 August, a missile hit another hotel in Damascus, host to a number of
United Nations offices, causing material damage. No one claimed responsibility for
the incident.
59. On 27 August, shells fell on a SARC-Dar`a convoy that was offloading in
northern Dar`a. Four SARC staff and volunteers were injured and two trucks
damaged.
60. On 25 August, gunfire and mortars struck the vicinity of the UNRWA
distribution point in Yarmouk camp in Damascus, halting the distribution of food
and health services.
61. On 21 August, an UNRWA staff member was killed while attempting to escape
worsening insecurity in the Palestine refugee camp in Dar`a.
62. Twenty-nine United Nations national staff members, of whom 26 are UNRWA
staff, continue to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian workers
killed in the conflict since March 2011 is 63. This includes 15 United Nations staff
members, 38 SARC staff members and volunteers, 7 Palestine Red Crescent Society
volunteers and staff members, and 3 international NGO staff members.

III. Observations
63. I welcome the current discussions on how the international community can
come together, within the context of international law, particularly international
humanitarian law, to confront the scourge of terrorism and foreign terrorist fighter
networks. ISIL, Jabhat al-Nusra and other groups pose a real threat to international
peace and security. The past few months have seen a worrying increase in the
violence and brutality civilians have had to endure in the Syrian Arab Republic,
fuelled by acts of violence by ISIL and other armed groups and the continued
actions of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is worth remembering
that ISIL is a consequence, not a cause, of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Syrian conflict has deep political roots and needs to be resolved through
negotiations. Absent a comprehensive political solution, humanitarian needs will
spiral and the impact of terrorism and violence will continue unabated and will spill
over to the region and beyond. To this end, I call upon all Member States and Syrian
parties to extend full cooperation to the Special Envoy.
64. The lack of progress in finding a political solution and the continued
deterioration of the security situation continues to drive increasing numbers of
Syrians to take matters into their own hands by negotiating local agreements to stop
the fighting. Some local ceasefires are agreed as a result of coercion and deliberate
starvation; such ceasefires are not credible and should not be supported. Where local
agreements have been negotiated on those terms they indicate a desperate desire to
end the suffering. People want an opportunity to return to a normal life. Owing to
the lack of trust between parties, many opposition interlocutors have contacted the
United Nations to seek our involvement in negotiations and to act as a guarantor. I
urge all sides, especially the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to consider

14-61427

11/21

S/2014/696

cooperating with the United Nations in identifying ways to build lasting local
agreements. Ensuring that local agreements meet international standards, and
including relief and recovery elements in them, would help to curtail the levels of
violence at a community level and contribute to a process leading to a
comprehensive ceasefire and could also help to create the conditions necessary for a
political settlement of the conflict.
65. The parties to the conflict have neglected, ignored and abused their
international legal obligations. The selected testimonies from victims of the Syrian
conflict published by the independent international commission of inquiry are a stark
and gruesome reminder that violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights, including those that may amount to crimes against humanity, continue to be
perpetrated by government forces, anti-government armed groups and designated
terrorists against the people of the Syrian Arab Republic. Civilians and those hors de
combat continued to be targeted in blatant violation of international humanitarian
law. The use of chemical weapons such as chlorine gas is also prohibited.
66. Security Council resolution 2165 (2014) allowed a greater opening and
coherence for operations in the Syrian Arab Republic and enabled the United
Nations and its partners to reach more people in need. The success of cross -border
operations under the aegis of resolution 2165 (2014) has been made possible by the
excellent cooperation the monitoring team of the United Nations has had with the
Governments of Turkey and Jordan. I thank both Governments for their support.
Access to besieged and hard-to-reach areas, however, remains limited. Violence,
shifting front lines, insecurity and lack of regular, sustained and unhindered access,
including administrative hurdles, mean that people in desperate need of help are not
receiving adequate and regular, or — in some cases — any, assistance. Some
241,000 people still live under siege. They must have protection, food, health care
and clean water. These are not luxuries to be granted but basics that the parties must
allow to be delivered. The parties need to urgently lift the sieges. Humanitarian
actors must also be respected, protected and allowed to reach those in need by all
routes available, both across lines and across borders. And they must be able to do
so safely. I remind the parties that targeting aid workers can constitute a war crime.
67. Despite the valiant efforts of humanitarian workers delivering aid at great
personal risk, the Syrian Arab Republic remains the world ’s largest and most
pressing humanitarian crisis, with regional and global implications. Needs, driven
by violence, continue to outpace the response. And neighbouring countries continue
to host large numbers of refugees.
68. The solution to the crisis can be found only through a political resolution, and
I appeal to the parties and the international community to do much mo re to take the
courageous — and long overdue — steps needed to resolve the crisis.

12/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

Annex
Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014): available data
1.

Protection of civilians a
Examples of attacks on civilian facilities (schools, hospitals, camps, places
of worship)
• As at 17 September, approximately 130 of the 153 students kidnapped by ISIL
on 29 May while on the road to Ain al-Arab continue to be held.
• On 11 September, air strikes reportedly hit a sheep market in Bab, Aleppo,
killing 11 people.
• On 7 September, air strikes reportedly hit a bakery in Raqqa city, killing some
25 people.
• On 31 August, barrel bombs reportedly fell on Nabd Horan hospital in Dar`a
governorate.
• On 27 August, barrel bombs reportedly fell on Rafas hospital in Dar`a
governorate.
• On 21 August, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) issued a statement
following an attack on a school in the Waer neighbourhood of Homs, in which
one prefabricated classroom was destroyed and two others damaged in a
mortar attack on 15 August.
Large-scale impact of conflict on public services
• The conflict continued to disrupt health-care services. Hospitals have been
damaged in 12 of the country’s 14 governorates. Out of 97 Ministry of Health
hospitals:
– 41 per cent are reported as fully functioning; 35 per cent are reported as
partially functioning; and 24 per cent are reported as not functioning at all.
– 71 per cent are reported as accessible to patients seeking treatment, while
29 per cent are not accessible owing to insecurity.
• People in Aleppo city still reportedly face difficulties in gaining regular access
to safe water supplies following damage caused to water, sewage and electrical
networks by an explosion on 2 June. Water supplies were restored to Aleppo
city on 6 September after two days of complete water cut, with water now
reportedly rationed.
• The electricity supply was reportedly restored to Waer in early September after
months of blackout.
• An attack on 18 August reportedly damaged the water plant in Raqqa city,
resulting in cuts to the water supply.

__________________
a The United Nations has a distinct and regular mechanism of reporting on the six grave violations

against children in armed conflict that has set verification standards and periodicity of reporting
to identify trends.

14-61427

13/21

S/2014/696

2.

Safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need
Hard-to-reach areas
• Latest estimates indicate that 4.7 million people are located in “hard -to-reach”
areas and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
• Food assistance was provided to 251,808 people during the reporting per iod in
hard-to-reach areas (207,300 by the World Food Programme (WFP) and
44,508 by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA)).
• Non-food items were provided to 104,837 people in hard-to-reach areas
(86,161 by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), 5,872 by UNRWA, 2,000 by the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) and 10,804 by the International Organization for Migration).
• UNICEF reached 140,142 people with water, sanitation and hygiene items.
The World Health Organization (WHO) dispatched water, sanitation and
hygiene support for up to 80,000 people in Douma, eastern Ghouta area and
8,000 people in Yarmouk.
• UNICEF provided 14,390 children with educational support in hard-to-reach
areas.
• UNICEF and partners provided high-energy biscuits for up to 10,000 children
in Idlib governorate and for 20,000 children in Qamishli governorate.
• WHO provided supplies for 71,000 medical treatments to Douma, eastern
Ghouta, and 108,000 medical supplies and treatments in Busra, Hrak and
Jasem in Dar`a governorate. It also provided support for medical treatments
for 2,650 people in Yarmouk camp. UNICEF supplied three health kits to
cover primary health-care needs of 30,000 internally displaced persons and
host communities for three months in Harim (rural Idlib).
Inter-agency cross-line convoys
• Two inter-agency convoys took place during the reporting period:
– On 25 August, a joint United Nations convoy reached Harim district of
Idlib governorate with supplies for up to 12,500 people for distribution in
the Qah camp.
– On 15 September, the first of two convoys to Houla targeted 30,000 people
in Taldo and Qabo villages. The second part of the convoy is scheduled
for 22 September, targeting 16,000 people.
• On 9 September, in a meeting of the joint committee established following the
adoption of Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), the Government
requested the United Nations, in writing, to dispatch a convoy to Adra al -Badad
and Adra Umaliya. Planning is under way for the convoy. On 16 September
approval was received for a convoy to Harasta in rural Damascus.
• Five inter-agency convoys were requested but did not take place during the
reporting period:

14/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

– An inter-agency convoy to Douma scheduled for 18-21 August and
targeting 5,000 families did not take place, as there was no response by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the request.
– An inter-agency convoy to Douma scheduled for 25-28 August and
targeting 5,000 families did not take place, as there was no response by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the request.
– An inter-agency convoy to eastern Ghouta scheduled for 4 September
and targeting 1,000 families did not take place, as there was no response
by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the request.
– Despite Government approval, an inter-agency convoy to Adra al-Badad
and Adra Umaliya, Rif Dimashq scheduled for 19-22 August did not take
place, as there was no agreement on the route.
– On 15 September, a planned convoy to Ehsem (Idlib governorate)
targeting 8,750 people did not proceed owing to the intensification of
fighting in the area and the lack of final approval by authorities.
Discussions with government authorities are ongoing.
Besieged areas
• In total, 241,000 people remain besieged.
• During the reporting period, food assistance was distributed to 17,508 people, or
7.3 per cent of those besieged; non-food items were distributed to 5,872 people,
or 2.4 per cent; and medical assistance was distributed to 76,364 people, or
31.7 per cent of people in besieged areas.
• UNRWA delivered food assistance to 17,508 people in Yarmouk camp, non-food
items to 5,872 people and medical assistance to 2,714 people. In addition,
WHO dispatched medicines and supplies to Yarmouk for 2,650 treatments.
Water purification supplies were also sent to Yarmouk for 8,000 treatments.
• WHO undertook a delivery to Douma, eastern Ghouta, on 9 Septembe r, with
71,000 treatments and pre-positioned Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All
items for 80,000.
Cross-border assistance
According to the Turkish Red Crescent Society, humanitarian actors have
channelled about $23 million worth of humanitarian a ssistance on average monthly
from Turkey into the Syrian Arab Republic through the zero -point delivery system
administered by the Society. This monthly average does not include assistance
delivered by commercial or other channels.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2165 (2014)
The United Nations and its partners have sent 14 shipments — 10 from Turkey
and 4 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of Security Council
resolution 2165 (2014), using three border crossings: Bab al-Hawa, Bab al-Salam
and Ramtha. This has included food assistance for more than 94,500 people;
non-food items for more than 182,400 people; water and sanitation supplies for
about 66,760 people; and medical supplies for more than 151,100 people, including

14-61427

15/21

S/2014/696

surgical supplies for 100 people, as well as other items for 47,900 people in Aleppo,
Dar`a, Hama, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Quneitra governorates.
Safety of humanitarian workers
• The number of humanitarian workers killed in the conflict since March 2011
stands at 63, including 15 United Nations staff, 38 Syrian Arab Red Crescent
staff and volunteers, 7 Palestine Red Crescent Society volunteers and staff, and
3 international non-governmental organization (NGO) staff.
• 29 United Nations national staff members, of whom 26 are UNRWA staff,
continue to be detained or missing.
Declaration of commitment
A total of 28 armed opposition groups have signed the declaration of
commitment, affirming their core responsibilities under international humanitarian
law and their commitment to facilitate action to meet the needs of civilians on the
basis of need alone. Of the 28 signatories, four groups signed duri ng the reporting
period:
– Jabhat Thuwar Saraqeb Wa Reefha, on 1 September
– Harakat Tahreer Homs, on 3 September
– Faylaq Homs, on 4 September
– Hayat Duru’ al-Thawra, on 5 September
3.

Safe passage of medical personnel and supplies
Attacks on medical facilities during the reporting period
• Physicians for Human Rights documented nine attacks on medical facilities in
August. Three were in Aleppo governorate, two in Dar`a, two in Idlib, one in
Raqqa, and one in Rif Dimashq. Four were reportedly attacks by missiles and
rockets, three by barrel bombs and two by aerial bombardment with unknown
weapons. Two attacks were on facilities that have previously been attacked.
• In total, Physicians for Human Rights has documented 195 attacks on
155 separate medical facilities since the start of the conflict.
• Physicians for Human Rights documented that 21 medical personnel were killed
in August. Seventeen personnel reportedly died from shelling or bombing, two
died from torture and two were executed. Overall, the organization has
recorded the deaths of 561 medical personnel since the start of the conflict.
Removal of medicines and medical supplies from convoys
Access continues to be hampered by the deterioration of the security context,
the fluidity of the population and constraints imposed on humanitarian operations by
the Syrian Government.
Polio vaccination campaign
The preliminary report from the most recent campaign conducted at the
subnational level between 31 August and 4 September reveals that more than 1 million

16/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

children have been reached, including in hard-to-reach areas. However, access was
not permitted to Ain al-Arab in Aleppo governorate or Waer in Homs governorate.
4.

Administrative hurdles
• On 9 June, the Ministry of Social Affairs communicated to governors that all
convoys or missions to “hot spot areas” b required the approval of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, the High Relief Committee and the National Security
Office. Previously, the governors were delegated to coordinate and authorize
delivery of assistance within their respective governorates, including across
lines of conflict. Delivery of assistance to cross-line locations continues to be
hampered as a result of the directive.
• On 7 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated a time frame for
submitting the weekly loading plans in accordance with the truck -sealing
procedures rolled out for the movement of trucks for regular programmes:
loading plans are to be submitted by agencies of the United Nation s system
each Monday during working hours. The Government has committed to clear
the weekly loading plans on Thursdays for distributions to start on Saturdays.
• An exemption was obtained with respect to the distribution of medicines,
medical equipment and water, sanitation and hygiene items for regular
programmes. The distribution of such items will be exempted from some of the
new procedures rolled out by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in April and May.
The distribution of medical aid for cross-line deliveries will be coordinated by
the Ministry of Health on a case-by-case basis.
• On 26 August, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the United Nations that
agencies could send the loading plans on a biweekly or monthly basis in order
to simplify procedures, since weekly loading plans were creating constraints.
• On 11 September, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs notified the United Nations
that regular importation of goods through the official border crossings, namely
Jdaidet Yacoub, Tartus port, Ladhiqiyah port, Naseeb and Nusaybin, could
proceed to United Nations or international-NGO warehouses directly from the
crossing upon authorization of the official in charge of the crossing, rather
than requiring an additional facilitation letter from the Gov ernor. Other
administrative procedures continue to apply.
Clearance procedures for telecommunications equipment
Government approvals to import and operate information and communications
technology equipment remain a lengthy process. In the reporting period, UNHCR
staff on a pre-approved list received licences to use Thuraya handheld devices in
public. The equipment approved during the previous reporting period has been
distributed and installed. The VSAT for Qamishli was approved and is pending
customs clearance.

__________________
b The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic refers to “hot spots”. Clarification was requested

by the United Nations on 16 July for the definition and criteria of “hot spots” but has not been
received. For the purpose of the present report, these are referred to as hard -to-reach areas until
clarified because of the difficulty in reaching these locations.

14-61427

17/21

S/2014/696

Empowered interlocutors
• Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. The joint United Nations and
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic committee established following the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) includes a security focal point. Regular
meetings are held between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the
Humanitarian Coordinator on an almost daily basis.
• The opposition is still unable to designate empowered interlocutors. The
fragmented nature of the opposition makes it difficult to clearly identify an
interlocutor for armed opposition groups. Ad hoc local engagement is ongoing
to negotiate access. Interlocutors vary depending on the localities where access
is being negotiated.
Visas
• The revised visa policy established by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic on 4 March continued to be implemented. As at 17 September,
33 United Nations visas or renewal requests remained pending, 17 within the
15-working-day limit and 16 exceeding the 15-working-day limit.
• As at 17 September, the number of pending visas for international NGOs stood
at 17. During the reporting period three new visa requests were granted, five
new visa requests made, and two requests cancelled as the individuals’
contracts with the NGOs had expired while awaiting the issuance of visas.
Humanitarian hubs and presence
• UNHCR continues to work on security enhancements in newly established
offices in Damascus (a third building in Damascus), Sweida and Qamishli.
• UNICEF has strengthened its presence in Aleppo and Qamishli in response to
the increasing needs in these areas.
International non-governmental organization partners
• The number of international NGOs approved to work in the Syr ian Arab
Republic stands at 16.
• International NGOs are still not authorized to work directly with national
NGOs and are not allowed to accompany United Nations convoys.
• There was no progress in the revision of the standard memorandum of
understanding for international NGOs with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
line ministries.
National non-governmental organization partners
• The number of national NGOs authorized to partner with the United Nations
stands at 91, operating through 148 branches.
• Six new national NGOs were authorized during the reporting period: three in
Damascus governorate, two in Homs governorate and one in Ladhiqiyah
governorate.

18/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

5.

Funding
• A total of $530 million of funding for the Syrian crisis was registered du ring
the reporting period. Of that amount, $199.6 million was for activities inside
the Syrian Arab Republic and $330.4 million was for support to Syrian
refugees in neighbouring countries.
• Of the total amount reported for the Syrian Arab Republic duri ng the reporting
period, 23.5 per cent ($46.8 million) was for activities included in the Syria
Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan. For neighbouring countries, 81.7 per
cent ($269.9 million) of the amount reported was for activities included in the
Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan.
• As at 17 September, the total funding for the Syria Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan and the Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan stood at 46 per
cent ($6.02 billion requested, $2.76 billion received). The Syria H umanitarian
Assistance Response Plan is 33 per cent funded and the Syria Regional
Refugee Response Plan is 53 per cent funded.

6.

Overview of United Nations humanitarian response
Food assistance
• In August, food for a record 4.16 million people — 98 per cent of the monthly
target — was dispatched by WFP to partners inside the Syrian Arab Republic,
marking a 13 per cent increase since the July cycle and the highest level
achieved since the beginning of the crisis.
• Of the total assistance dispatched in August, 87.5 per cent was delivered through
regular programme operations and 11 per cent through cross -line missions,
while a further 1.5 per cent was included in four cross-border trans-shipments.
• Access to the north-eastern governorates continues to be restricted by ongoing
violence and the presence of armed groups blocking main access routes.
Supplies that were not able to reach their planned destinations were redirected
to support areas where escalating needs were reported by partners on th e
ground or to hard-to-reach areas where windows of opportunity opened up.
• Between 1 and 14 September, WFP reached over 2 million people with food
assistance.
Core relief items and shelter
• UNHCR dispatched core relief items for more than 352,460 people in
10 governorates between 19 August and 15 September. In total, more than
3.25 million people have received core relief items in 13 of the 14 governorates
since the beginning of the year. UNHCR has reached 620,749 individuals in
95 hard-to-reach and besieged areas since the beginning of the year.
• The International Organization for Migration reached another 47,500 people
with non-food items during the reporting period.
• So far in 2014, UNHCR has completed the rehabilitation of collective sh elters
in six governorates, benefiting 11,103 people. In addition, private shelters have
been upgraded for 24,176 people in Homs, Rif Dimashq and Aleppo
governorates.

14-61427

19/21

S/2014/696

Health
• Through its regular programme, WHO distributed medicines and supplies for
approximately 97,733 medical treatments c during the present reporting period
in Aleppo, Idlib, Rif Dimashq, Ladhiqiyah and Damascus governorates.
• UNICEF and partners supported nearly 60,000 women and children in
accessing basic health-care services.
• UNFPA continued to support its implementing partners to deliver life -saving
reproductive health services through 28 mobile clinics, 27 static clinics and
13 medical points in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Aleppo, Deir ez -Zor,
Raqqa, Hama, Dar`a, Tartus and Ladhiqiyah governorates. Approximately
23,000 women received reproductive health services during the reporting period,
including 5,500 who benefited from family planning services; and 540 pregnant
women were referred for delivery services using reproductive health vouchers.
• UNHCR continues to provide medical equipment, medicines and support to
13 primary health-care clinics in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Tartus,
Aleppo and Hasakeh governorates.
Nutrition
• UNICEF and partners provided high-energy biscuits sufficient for 30,000
children in Newroz camp and Idlib.
Water, sanitation and hygiene
• During the reporting period, UNICEF reached an estimated 16.55 million
people with access to safe water through the supply of sodium hypochlorite;
42 per cent of people assisted are in non-government-controlled areas.
• Approximately 44,000 women and children benefited from hygiene supplies
and promotion.
Education
• During the reporting period, UNICEF reached 14,390 boys and girls with
remedial education in Deir ez-Zor and Homs.
• In collaboration with the Ministry of Education, UNICEF has launched the
“Back to learning” campaign for the 2014/15 school year, targeting 1 million
children, of whom 45 per cent are in hard-to-reach areas.
Palestine refugees
• Through regular programming, UNRWA provided food assistance to 223,920
people; health consultations to 77,357 people; cash assistance to 45,456
people; 422 new microfinance loans; and water, sanitation and hygiene/shelter
support to 13,743 people.

__________________
c One standard treatment course (for example, a course of antibiotics for eight days) is considered

as treatment for one person. Treatment courses are determined for each medicine distrib ution
based on international WHO standards.

20/21

14-61427

S/2014/696

Agriculture
• The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations provided
agricultural support to 1,757 people in Idlib governorate, including 266 in
hard-to-reach areas. The delivery of seeds has begun in Raqqa governorate.
Protection and community services
• UNHCR continued its protection monitoring activities through staff on the
ground in seven key locations; 17 community centres; partnerships with
organizations; and outreach volunteers.
• UNFPA and partners provided 10,304 women with psychosocial support and
psychological first aid services in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Aleppo,
Deir ez-Zor, Raqqa, Hama, Dar`a, Tartus and Ladhiqiyah governorates. In
addition, 1,762 women and girls were screened for gender-based violence; of
those, 568 survivors of gender-based violence received specialized services,
including medical counselling.
• UNICEF, in cooperation with local NGOs, provided psychosocial support for
13,871 children in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Dar`a, Quneitra, Tartus, Ladhiqiyah,
Sweida, Idlib, Deir ez-Zor, Hama and Homs governorates. Educational sessions
on mine-risk awareness were prepared for over 200,000 people.
Response to the Iraqi refugee crisis in Hasakeh governorate
• The large-scale arrival of an estimated 95,000 Yazidi people from Iraq has
stabilized. The large majority (an estimated 84,000 persons) of those who
entered the Syrian Arab Republic through the Yarubiyah border crossing from
Iraq have since departed, using the Semalka border crossing that allows them
to move to the Kurdish region of Iraq. An estimated 4,700 new arrivals from
Iraq remain in the Newroz camp and approximately 3,000 stay in the
surrounding villages. On 1 September, with the influx stabilized, UNHCR
started its identification exercise, which is aimed at ascertaining the camp
population for planning and assistance delivery. The vast majority of the camp
population have received non-food items and other support.
• UNICEF is supporting water and sanitation services for 7,000 peop le and
providing psychosocial support to children in the camp. WHO provided two
diarrhoea kits for treatment of up to 1,400 Iraqi refugees. WFP has distributed
a total of 2,400 ready-to-eat meals to Iraqi refugees hosted in Newroz camp.

14-61427

21/21
