United Nations

S/PV.4092 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4092nd Meeting
Monday, 24 January 2000, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holbrooke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Axworthy
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Josselin
Miss Durrant
Mr. Mohammad Kamal
Mr. Sokona
Mr. Gurirab
Mr. Hamer
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Mr. Hain

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

00-25720 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the
Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: The first speaker on my list is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa,
Her Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma. I invite her
to take a seat at the Council table and to make her
statement.
I welcome the Minister as the representative of the
great nation of South Africa and thank her for participating
in today’s important meeting. I know that Secretary of State
Albright deeply regrets that we were unable to hear Ms.
Dlamini-Zuma’s statement before lunch.
Ms. Dlamini-Zuma (South Africa): It is an honour for
me to address this important meeting of the Security
Council on the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would like to thank the presidency of the United
States for devoting this month to African issues. I am
particularly glad to be here, representing President Mbeki,
in the presence of many heads of State from our region.
The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a most complex problem, involving six States and
various rebel movements in our region. It is indeed a tribute
to the leaders of our region, under the leadership of
President Chiluba, that the Lusaka Agreement was reached,
providing the best opportunity for a lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We still believe that there is no option for resolving of
the conflict other than working within the framework which
the parties, the United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the leaders of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) decided upon when they
signed the Lusaka Agreement.
The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement must be successfully
implemented by all concerned. It is a tribute to the
signatories that, although the Ceasefire Agreement has not
been fully implemented in terms of all the provisions, and
there have been some breaches of it, total war has not
continued in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This
demonstrates the commitment to the ceasefire and to peace
in the region of the Great Lakes.
South Africa would like to reaffirm its neutral role in
the search for lasting peace in the Congo and in the Great
Lakes area. We believe that it is important for our country
to communicate equally with all parties involved in the
Congo conflict. Furthermore, my Government is committed
to assisting the Joint Military Commission (JMC) by

2

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
providing whatever support is needed, including logistical
support.
We strongly urge an immediate and complete
deployment of the JMC to enable it to undertake the tasks
prescribed by the Agreement as soon as possible. We
would like to take this opportunity to request the
international community to give its full support to the
JMC in the implementation of its tasks in accordance with
the Ceasefire Agreement. We appreciate the assistance
given by many countries so far, but more needs to be
done.
Further, my delegation would like to reiterate the
call, made by the SADC heads of State and Government
in Maputo, that the Security Council should without delay
authorize the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the context of the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. South Africa believes that the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force is
critical to a successful implementation of the Agreement
and needs the support of the international community. In
this connection, States members of the Security Council
need not be reminded of the provisions contained in
Article 24 of the United Nations Charter, which states that
the United Nations Member States confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. A delay by the Security
Council in carrying out its fundamental duty may lead to
the worsening of the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
South Africa finds unacceptable the delay in the
involvement of the United Nations in bringing about
security, lasting peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Let us recall that, on 10 July
1999, all parties to the conflict demonstrated their desire
for peace by signing the Agreement. Therefore, the
Security Council must, on its part, fulfil its historic
mandate, as set out in the United Nations Charter, by
assisting the parties to the Agreement to enforce the
ceasefire.
We do hope that the United Nations will be able to
play the role envisaged in chapter 8 of the Agreement,
which includes all peacekeeping and peace enforcement.
In this regard, we welcome the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but we must state that
we see the deployment recommended in that report as
only the beginning.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
We believe it is important to implement the ceasefire
as it is envisaged in the Agreement, including disarming
and resettling the armed groups that further compromise the
security of the countries in the region. It is for this reason
that we believe that, as a minimum requirement, the
Security Council should conclude this week devoted to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by adopting a resolution
in support of the peace process in that country, as detailed
in the Lusaka Agreement.
My Government also welcomes the appointment by
the Congolese parties of the former President of Botswana,
Sir Ketumile Masire, as the Facilitator for the internal
political national dialogue between the political forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in accordance with
chapter 5 of the Agreement.

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
owe it to the people of the Congo and we dare not fail
them.
The President: I thank the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of South Africa for coming here and representing
President Mbeki. I thank her for her kind words addressed
to the American presidency and I thank her for her
country’s contribution to peace.
I have been asked to read out a message addressed
to me from the President of Nigeria:

In this regard, we call on all the Congolese political
and other interest groups to give their full support to Sir
Ketumile Masire in his endeavour to assist in the creation
of a more democratic political system in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In the long run, it is only the
Congolese themselves who can determine their future, while
the international community can assist in creating a
conducive atmosphere to underpin the Congolese
commitment. We also join the heads of State in appealing
to the international community to support the Congolese
dialogue both financially and politically.

“On behalf of the Government and the people
of Nigeria, I congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council during the
first month of the new millennium and for the high
profile and attention which you have given to
African issues in our Organization. To this end, I am
delighted to send this message of goodwill to
members of the Council and participants in this
historic open meeting on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including my brother heads of State who
have travelled all the way from our continent, for a
very successful deliberation. Their presence
demonstrates the commitment which the
Organization of African Unity and all African
leaders have towards the peaceful resolution of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In this regard, we wish to reaffirm the importance of
the collective involvement of the United Nations, the OAU,
SADC and the international community in the search for a
lasting solution in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the Great Lakes region. We strongly believe that the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, a product of the African
countries, will make a meaningful contribution towards
resolving the conflict and place the Great Lakes region on
the road to recovery.

“It is gratifying that the United Nations
Security Council, under the presidency of the United
States, at the very beginning of the new millennium
is devoting a substantial portion of its work and time
to the issues of peace and security in Africa. It is
appropriate and fitting that the United Nations is
taking an early lead in the new millennium in
focusing on issues of peace and security on the
African continent.

We would like to appeal to the international
community for urgent humanitarian support to alleviate the
suffering of hundreds of thousands of Congolese. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo will also need extensive
resources for its process of reconstruction and development.
Planning in this regard should commence as soon as
possible.

“The impressive turnout of a large number of
African leaders in the Council today to participate in
the efforts at resolving the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a solid show of the
commitment of African leaders to truly turn 2000
into a year of peace, security and solidarity.
Certainly, their presence should convince the
international community that we are committed to
ending conflicts afflicting some States on our
continent.

The people of the Congo have suffered for over a
century. This process provides them with a glimmer of
hope towards a democratic, peaceful and prosperous Congo.
Should this process fail, we shall all stand indicted. We

“The early resolution of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will certainly

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
have a positive effect on the security of the entire
subregion and give substance to the decision of
African leaders at their 1999 Algiers summit to make
2000 truly the year of peace, security and solidarity.
It is important, therefore, that all efforts be made at
this meeting to reaffirm the collective commitment of
all parties to the Lusaka Agreement. The United
Nations should also give concrete support to
complement the regional and continental arrangement
aimed at peacemaking and peacekeeping in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
regional stability requires the re-establishment of respect
for the fundamental principles that were clearly reaffirmed
by the signatories to the Lusaka peace Agreement. First
and foremost among those is the territorial unity and
integrity of Congo and the inviolability of its borders. For
Belgium, this is the first prerequisite for the country’s
recovery.
At the same time, Congo’s neighbours have the right
to live in peace within secure borders, without
destabilizing action being undertaken from Congolese
territory.

“With best wishes for a successful deliberation,
“Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria.”
I would like to invite the Vice Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Mr. Louis Michel,
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement. We thank him for making the trip to join us
today.
Mr. Michel (Belgium) (spoke in French): I am very
happy to see you, Sir, presiding over this meeting, and I
would like to thank you for your efforts to lend new
momentum to the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to make the international community
more aware of the gravity of this crisis. I encourage your
initiative and assure you of my country’s support.
Belgium’s position lies within the framework of the
efforts made by the European Union, and I associate myself
fully with the statement to be made by the Portuguese
presidency of the Union. My Government believes that
European involvement in the peace process and in the
stabilization of the region is an essential factor in ensuring
the success of our efforts.
During the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, on 25 September 1999, I announced that
Belgium wished to devote special attention to central Africa
and to solving the crisis in the Congo. We wish to
contribute to pulling the region out of the quagmire of war
and insecurity, and thereby out of underdevelopment. My
presence here today is further confirmation of that
commitment.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a country
the size of a continent, and its stability influences that of
the entire African continent and impacts directly on the
stability of its nine neighbours. The return to peace and

4

The other essential factor to the stabilization of
Congo is of a domestic character, namely, national
reconciliation. The Lusaka Agreement explicitly sets out
the commitment of the Congolese signatories to undertake
an internal dialogue leading to national reconciliation
within the framework of freely accepted institutions,
including a national army truly at the service of the
Congolese people.
We have not gathered here today at such a high
level of political representation to negotiate a new treaty;
rather, we are gathered to create an unstoppable
momentum that will lead to full implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement. Although it entered into force almost
six months ago, today we are seeing a slow pace of
implementation and the risk that the peace process may
become more fragile. We cannot remain passive.
All parties involved — signatories to the Agreement
and the international community, both collectively and
individually — must shoulder their responsibilities. The
gravity of the situation and its catastrophic humanitarian
consequences require more than ever that everything be
done to relaunch the peace process by setting into motion
the mechanisms already envisaged in the Agreement.
Indeed, this is the only instrument that exists to end the
conflict.
Now, what do we think are the conditions for
resuming the peace process and ensuring its success?
First, of course, is the political will of the
signatories. The primary responsibility for implementing
the Lusaka Agreement lies with those who signed it. It is
up to them to respect their own signatures and to carry
out what they agreed to: respect for the ceasefire, the
withdrawal of troops and a halt to rearmament. A clear
demonstration of political will by the parties to implement
the peace Agreement in good faith and without creating

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
impediments is absolutely essential to enable the
international community to uphold and encourage their
actions.
This naturally brings me to my second point, namely,
the support of the international community. That support is
absolutely necessary to make the Agreement’s mechanisms
work. Immediate financial and logistical assistance for the
Joint Military Commission (JMC) so that it may function
on a permanent basis is indispensable to its executing its
mission. In this respect, the financial contributions pledged
should be paid into the trust fund without delay. So far,
Belgium has contributed BF10 million and has actively
encouraged the European Union to pledge 1.2 million euros
without delay.
Better coordination between the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC), the JMC and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) is also needed. Here I welcome the
initiatives taken by the Secretary-General, particularly his
appointment of an especially experienced Special
Representative, Ambassador Morjane, who should be able
to count on the political and logistical support of the
international community, as well as the full cooperation of
the parties.
The third prerequisite is a peacekeeping operation to
help the signatories put the Agreement into practice and
allow it to achieve one of its principal objectives, namely,
the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Congo. In order
to succeed, such a mission will have to be adequately
equipped with a clear mandate and the necessary logistical
and financial resources. I urge the Security Council to seize
the opportunity offered by the Lusaka Agreement and
shoulder its responsibilities in this respect. Belgium will
contribute financially and logistically in its national capacity
and in conjunction with its partners in the European Union.
I would also urge the Security Council to provide
sufficient protection and means of transportation and
communications so that the observers to be deployed under
phase II can carry out their mission objectively and under
full security.
The issue of the disarmament and reintegration of
combatants of irregular armed groups is clearly of the
utmost importance, and it is also extremely difficult. This
will require political mechanisms and economic incentives,
rather than military solutions.

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
A fourth prerequisite is the inter-Congolese dialogue.
Its implementation is essential and urgent. President
Masire has now been appointed as facilitator and will
bring his prestige as a great statesman, as well as his long
political experience, to this indispensable dialogue.
Belgium welcomes his appointment and will support him
fully. I call on all Congolese parties to build a political
system involving all dynamic elements of the nation. The
international community should not remain on the
sidelines while the Congolese attempt to achieve this
objective.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the concept
of African ownership, which may recently have been a
reason for withdrawing from Africa and which has
now — through the Lusaka Agreement — demonstrated
its relevancy. The Agreement is an African response to an
African crisis. Insofar as the signatory countries truly
commit themselves, the international community is ready
to contribute to its implementation. African ownership can
be neither rejection nor withdrawal. The concept must
involve collaboration and partnership.
Our efforts should be seen in the framework of
partnership with countries in central Africa. That
partnership involves, first of all, the countries of the
region itself. It is only through regional stabilization and
cooperation beyond one’s own borders that peace, ensured
by the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement, will be
truly consolidated. On that basis, we are ready to rally our
partners — both within the European Union and
beyond — to a North-South partnership pact focusing on
reconstruction, democracy and development. That pact
would fall within the scope of a conference on stability
and cooperation in the Great Lakes region, which could
be organized once peace returns to the region.
Finally, I would hope that we would consider the
lessons of the Carlsson report. Not only should we help
Rwanda heal the wounds of the past, but we must also
ensure that the errors committed in Rwanda are not
repeated.
We want to break from the logic of war, a war
which cannot be won by anyone. We must show those
who think they can improve their lot only by taking up
arms that there exists a peaceful alternative based on
economic cooperation and development. My country
possesses the will and the means to participate in this
endeavour.

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium for his participation today. I would just
note in passing that with the exception of the presidency,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium is the thirteenth
speaker and the first to speak from the European continent.
I hope that is indicative of his last point, that this is the rest
of world in support of an African solution, to use SecretaryGeneral Salim Salim’s phrase, an African solution to an
African problem.
We now return to the continent of Africa. It is my
honour to call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Burundi, who was with us last week and is still available
under the previous rule. We welcome him back for another
meeting of the Security Council.
Mr. Ntahomvukiye (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to commend the Security Council
and the presidency of the United States for having included
on the Council’s agenda security issues of the countries of
the Great Lakes subregion. The problem of security in this
part of Africa is at the centre of Burundi’s concerns, given
the tension and the internal, cross-border and interrelated
wars that develop there to the point of imperiling entire
nations now for many years.
The Government of Burundi welcomes the opportunity
offered to express its great hope that the implementation of
the Lusaka Agreement will create a favourable climate for
the process of peace and reconciliation undertaken in my
country over the past three years. One of the causes of the
resurgence of violence in recent months is rooted in the
coalition of armed rebel groups that come and go in the
subregion where militias and other armies have taken to the
bush and continue their guerrilla activities.
I will not revert to the explanations already given here
at the United Nations and elsewhere on Burundi’s position
in the war that is ravaging the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, I would like to recall that Burundi stands
ready to make its contribution and to play its full role in
implementing the Lusaka Agreement, which explicitly
acknowledges its security concerns along its border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo due to the activity of
part of the Burundi rebellion in that country.
More than in the various meetings in Kampala, Lusaka
and Harare, Burundi requests to be particularly associated
with the settlement of the following items identified in the
Agreement: first, disarmament of armed groups, including
the Forces for the Defence of Democracy of Burundi, as
stipulated in chapter 8, article 8.2.2 and chapter 9 of the

6

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
Agreement; secondly, the voluntary repatriation of
Burundian and Congolese refugees, as stipulated in
chapter 8, article 8.2.2; thirdly, reintegration into society
of members of armed groups, as stipulated in chapter 8,
article 8.2.2 of the Agreement; and fourthly,
normalization of the situation along the common border
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi, as stipulated in chapter 12 of the Agreement.
In keeping with our traditional policy of goodneighbourliness, Burundi entirely endorses the measures
recommended in chapter 12 of the Agreement. In this
connection, it reaffirms its desire to cooperate with all
signatories to the Agreement and other involved parties.
Peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are indispensable to lasting peace in the subregion
and in Burundi in particular.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burundi for his contribution to this week’s and
to last week’s debate.
The next speaker is Ambassador Abdellatif Rahal of
Algeria, personal representative of the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity.
Mr. Rahal (Algeria) (spoke in French): I am
addressing the Security Council on behalf of Mr.
Abdelaziz Bouteflika, President of the People’s
Democratic Republic of Algeria and the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
I avail myself of this opportunity to welcome your
initiative, Mr. President, under the presidency of your
country, to focus the Security Council debates for the
month of January on issues that are matters of great
concern to the African continent. Moreover, the year 2000
was declared by the OAU summit at Algiers a year of
peace, security and stability in Africa.
Your recent trip, Mr. President, to several countries
in Africa, has enabled you to accurately assess the gravity
of the situation. You were able to gather the opinions of
the various parties in situ on ways and means of
contributing to an effective implementation of the Lusaka
peace Agreement.
At this meeting, I welcome the heads of State and
high-ranking African political authorities who have been
good enough to travel to demonstrate their interest in a
satisfactory settlement of the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Our countries, and the OAU, understood full well the
seriousness and complexity of this crisis. The countries of
the region, which are naturally more sensitive than others
to the threats it poses, have done a great deal to try to
create the conditions for a peaceful settlement of this
fratricidal crisis. Since the beginning of the crisis, Algeria
has called for restraint and wisdom.
Encouraging results have come about with the signing
of the Lusaka peace Agreement, which through dialogue
and cooperation has created the heartening prospect of a
final settlement of the conflict. All States members of the
OAU, and the international community at large, have
welcomed that significant progress towards the restoration
of peace and harmony in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which enjoys unanimous moral support.
The thirty-fifth OAU summit, which was held at
Algiers in July 1999, welcomed that progress and called
upon the parties to the conflict to work harder to implement
the Lusaka Agreement fully and genuinely. In our view, the
Agreement constitutes an important achievement and
remains the proper framework for settling the conflict and
restoring peace and stability throughout the Great Lakes
region.
As current Chairman of the OAU, Algeria has worked
since the Algiers summit to implement the decisions
adopted by African heads of State or Government. President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika has appointed a special envoy to
follow the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and throughout the region. The efforts of the current
Chairman of the OAU have three focuses. First, he is
striving to encourage the initiatives of the countries of the
subregion, and to urge the parties concerned to respect
commitments undertaken in the framework of the Lusaka
Agreement and to engage in frank and honest cooperation
in its implementation. He has also worked with the
countries of the region to overcome difficulties with respect
to representation for rebel movements in the mechanisms
envisioned in the peace Agreement.
Secondly, in coordination with the Secretary-General
of the OAU, President Bouteflika has turned to all the
countries of Africa with the purpose of strengthening their
unanimous support for this endeavour and of creating
support for implementation efforts. This made it possible to
convene the OAU Central Organ of its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, which
agreed to OAU financial support for the Joint Military
Commission and to the deployment in the field of African
monitors.

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
Thirdly, the Chairman of the OAU has endeavoured
to make the international community more aware of this
African peace effort. He has called upon all members of
the international community to make a meaningful
contribution to implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
Unfortunately, that appeal has met with meagre response,
and we hope that this meeting of the Security Council, by
highlighting the threat posed to all by the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, will give rise to a
more tangible commitment to an endeavour which lacks
the means for its achievement.
Moreover, also in coordination with the SecretaryGeneral of the OAU, President Bouteflika has been
ceaselessly working with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations with a view to creating the conditions for
prompt and effective United Nations involvement in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. Thus far it has
not been possible to obtain United Nations involvement
commensurate with African expectations or with the
challenge posed by the crisis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. But this is an urgent situation that
genuinely threatens to spill over. Delay or hesitation in
deploying a United Nations peacekeeping operation is of
concern to the peoples of Africa, which need support
from the international community to make the Lusaka
peace process a success.
The presence at today’s meeting of the signatories of
the Lusaka Agreement is a sign of their readiness, of
which we must take due note. Their presence attests to
their desire to promote dialogue as the means towards a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
While it is true that progress to date has not met our
expectations, the Lusaka Agreement still constitutes a
valuable achievement that should be protected from any
sudden challenges. It is the irreplaceable framework
within which we must strive to solve the problems before
us. The Agreement is intended to make yesterday’s
adversaries into partners determined to implement a
peaceful solution, as shown by their cooperation with the
Joint Military Commission, which was established
following the signing of the Lusaka Agreement. All are
aware of the important progress made by this
Commission, which, however, continues to face enormous
material and financial difficulties. We hope that the
Commission, which has proven its effectiveness on the
ground, will be encouraged to continue its work.
Some countries responded positively to the appeal of
the current Chairman of the (OAU) and have given

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
equipment or financial support to the Joint Military
Commission. The Chairman of the OAU thanks them and
urgently appeals to other countries who have not as yet not
done so to also demonstrate their support for the
Commission.
We deeply deplore the recent confrontations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which have once again
claimed civilian victims. These regrettable events fly in the
face of the legitimate hopes of the Congolese people and of
other people of the region who hope to regain peace in
trust, harmony and as good neighbours.
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika has exhorted the parties
in conflict to abstain from resorting to arms and to work
resolutely with the Joint Military Commission to create
conditions for implementing the Lusaka Agreement. The
Agreement is a structure built on a balance of interests and
on a fair sharing of sacrifices. If it does not satisfy all,
neither does it privilege any of the parties. All new recourse
to arms will irreparably destroy the efforts for peace
undertaken up to now.
The current Chairman of the OAU welcomes the
designation of Sir Ketumile Masire, former President of
Botswana, as facilitator for the inter-Congolese dialogue.
His great qualities as a statesman, his extensive experience
and his personal engagement will help the Congolese
parties come together and find the elements of national
reconciliation.
This is not the first time that the Security Council is
considering the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Since the first warning signs of the crisis, the
Council understood the magnitude of the danger threatening
all countries of the region. In several successive and
repetitive resolutions, the Council called upon the parties to
the conflict to settle their disputes by peaceful means and
committed itself to provide them with military aid,
equipment and financial support. Despite delays and
hesitations in their progress, the African parties nonetheless
responded to the appeal of the Security Council and, not
without tremendous difficulties, arrived at the Lusaka
Agreement.
Implementing this Agreement, as we said previously,
requires ways and means that go beyond their own
capabilities. For its part, the Security Council has only
partially met its commitments by sending 79 liaison officers
to the field. At other times and in other places, the Council
has become involved far more energetically in the
settlement of crises that threatened peace in other regions

8

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
of the world. On those occasions, it made available
considerable resources, even going to the extent of
military action not without inevitable risks.
The African continent wishes to benefit from similar
concern on the part of the international community. You
wished to impart to this meeting of the Council an
exceptional and solemn nature; it would be difficult to
understand if the meeting did not lead to very firm
commitments and if the actions and calendar for
implementing them were not clearly defined. This is what
we Africans expect of the United Nations, that is to say
of the States of which it is made up, and particularly of
those which have the equipment and the financial and
military power.
The President: I would like to mention now that I
will forego our space in the speakers order and not
deliver a national statement today in the interests of time
and to allow more people to speak. I would also like to
note the return to the Chamber of President Mugabe of
Zimbabwe — we welcome you back — and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
His Excellency Salim Salim. We are delighted that you
were able to return.
I now call on the Minister of the Armed Forces of
Mali, Mohamed Salia Sokona.
Mr. Sokona (Mali) (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to speak here today in the Security Council
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On behalf of His Excellency Alpha Oumar Konaré,
President of the Republic of Mali and current Chairman
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and also on my own behalf, it is also my
pleasure to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
organizing this important meeting, and I would like to tell
you what great importance we attach to results of our
work here.
The presence at this meeting of many heads of State,
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
ministers and many eminent persons gives testimony, if
testimony is needed, to the importance that the
international community attaches to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This situation is a critical one. It is characterized by,
inter alia, a deterioration of the military situation, of

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000

security conditions and of the humanitarian situation as well
as by human rights violations.

Organization of African Unity is a welcome proposal,
which Mali fully supports.

What is to be done? The Security Council and the
international community must take swift and concrete
action. In this connection, I should like to touch on several
points that my delegation believes could contribute to a
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In conclusion, I should like to welcome the
initiatives taken at the regional level by, inter alia,
President Chiluba, President Bouteflika and President
Mbeki in support of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would also like to congratulate
the American delegation for having taken the initiative of
convening this meeting today.

First, Mali believes that stopping the fighting must be
the top priority, for no military solution to the conflict can
truly resolve the crisis. We call on all parties to the conflict
to implement the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. They must
be determined to respect the Agreement that they
themselves signed. In the same context, we believe that the
United Nations should support the implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement by swiftly deploying a peacekeeping
operation with the appropriate mandate and resources.
Secondly, Mali believes that the establishment of a
lasting peace and of stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo requires the implementation of a genuine process
of national reconciliation among all of the Congolese
people. In this connection, we welcome the appointment of
Sir Ketumile Masire as the neutral facilitator for the interCongolese dialogue, and we assure him of our full support.
With the help of the Organization of African Unity and of
the United Nations, we will thus have grounds for hope that
significant progress can be made in this matter.
Thirdly, it is Mali’s view that a lasting settlement of
the conflict requires the parties to make the necessary
arrangements to guarantee the future security, stability and
development of the region. The principles underlying such
arrangements were set out in the statement by the President
of the Security Council of 11 December 1998. They are:
respect for the territorial integrity, political independence
and national sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other States in the region; the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign forces; the taking of the
necessary steps to ensure security along the international
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the
re-establishment of the authority of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the whole territory
of the country; respect for human rights and humanitarian
law; and, lastly, dealing with the question of refugees.
Fourthly, we believe that to help attain these
objectives, the convening of an international conference on
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes region
under the auspices of the United Nations and the

The President: Mr. Minister, thank you for your
participation, in fulfilment of a pledge your President
made when I visited him last month in Bamako. We are
delighted that you have joined us today. I thank you also
for your very important remarks and for your leadership
role in these problems.
It is now my very great honour to welcome and call
on the Foreign Minister of Canada, The Honourable
Lloyd Axworthy. We are delighted that he has made the
long, difficult trip from Canada to New York.
Mr. Axworthy (Canada): I am very glad that we
have been able to bring such warm weather from the
Canadian North — Canadian weather.
I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your very fine initiative in convening this meeting.
Canada welcomes this special Security Council meeting
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we have
been very encouraged by the very effective, strong and
powerful presentations made by the United States
Secretary of State, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the leaders of the African States, the members
and the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), and the facilitator. It has really been one of
the very important consensus-building exercises that this
Organization has been involved in.
We are glad to be here because this is an issue that
involves us all. The conflict in the Congo jeopardizes
regional peace. It certainly undermines the fragile
prospects for stability in an African country that is very
central to the continent’s interests. But most importantly,
it is senselessly taking many innocent lives and ending
the hopes of countless others, and for that reason we must
all shoulder our responsibilities.
(spoke in French)

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
A solution that creates lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is therefore imperative. Canada is
hopeful that this gathering will bring progress.
As we focus on building a more promising future for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region, we
also need to be mindful of the sometimes disheartening
past. Last month, the Independent Inquiry into the actions
of the United Nations during the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda
published its findings.
(spoke in English)
As the President of Rwanda has reminded us, this
report is a stinging portrait of failure in Africa by Members
of this Organization, members of the Council and the
United Nations Secretariat. It documents a failure to
participate, anticipate and prepare; a failure to
communicate; a failure to exert leadership and to commit
resources — in short, an abysmal failure by the global
community to act when the people of Rwanda most
desperately needed our help.
I commend the Secretary-General for establishing this
unprecedented inquiry and for acknowledging the role he
and the United Nations Secretariat played in the tragedy.
But the burden of responsibility is spread wide. We —
as the Security Council, as Member States and as
individuals — would do well to take the
Secretary-General’s example and clearly acknowledge our
own shortcomings in Rwanda.
However, retroactive mea culpas alone serve little
purpose. We cannot undo the past, but we can learn from
it and apply its lessons to the present.
The Inquiry highlights how terribly wrong things went
in Rwanda, yet it also provides specific guidelines on how
to prevent tragedies in the future. The Inquiry underlines
how human security — the safety and protection of
civilians — has become a central concern in modern armed
conflict. In so doing, it underlines the need to integrate the
human dimension into action on matters of war and peace.
The Inquiry reinforces the importance of African
issues to the Security Council’s activities and to Council
credibility. It underlines how the Council neglects the
continent at its peril and the appalling price Africans pay
when the Council fails to act. It lays all of this out clearly,
methodically and indelibly, making it difficult, if not
impossible, for the Security Council henceforth to shrink

10

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
from or ignore its obligation to support peace and security
in Africa.
There are encouraging signs that the Council is
learning from experience. I believe the deliberations on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that we have heard
today are evidence that we are taking those obligations to
heart.
It is true that there has been no lack of Council
consideration of the armed conflicts that continue to beset
parts of Africa, as well as a search for solutions. To this
end, the Council’s recent open debates on Africa have
helped focus attention. But it is also true that thematic
discussions on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, on the abuse of small arms and light military
weapons and on war-affected children are helping broaden
the Council’s awareness and inform its responses to the
security challenges of the new century. They have served
to highlight the specific impact in African war zones.
Beyond words and awareness there are also deeds.
There is an increasing sense that, in Africa as elsewhere,
the Council must lend its weight to ongoing peace efforts
being made by others. In the Sudan, for example, the
ongoing armed conflict is a serious concern that, beyond
the glare of the media spotlight, continues to take a
devastating toll. The Security Council should consider
how it can support the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development in its mediation efforts.
In Sierra Leone, the Security Council established a
new Mission that is helping implement a fragile Peace
Agreement and bring a measure of peace and security for
the people of that country. For the first time, a United
Nations peacekeeping operation’s mandate specifically
includes the protection of civilians. The Council is
currently considering the expansion of this operation; the
Secretary-General is making recommendations. It is now
up to the Council members to demonstrate their
willingness to match our professed concern with resources
and resolutely endorse his plan.
In Angola, Canada has been working on practical
ways to make the sanctions regime relating to the illicit
trade in diamonds, weapons and petroleum more effective.
These measures are aimed at bringing an end to the
senseless civil conflict that has claimed so many lives. If
accepted and successful, these new measures on Angola
might be applied to other conflicts, and we hope they will
provide a model for constraining the market place of
conflict.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
All of this is progress: progress in concrete Council
action in Africa and progress in making the advancement of
human security an important focus of this activity. But it is
tenuous progress. The Council’s engagement needs to be
reinforced and sustained. We must not shrink from doing
what is needed. Too often, the Council is motivated by
avoiding cost and evading risk. This cannot be the case in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The conflict and
turbulence in the Democratic Republic reflect many of the
realities of modern war. It is clearly a significant human
security challenge, and it is one of the most complex
conflicts facing the global community. The Council’s active
involvement is therefore indispensable.
The territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is contested by foreign military forces occupying
vast swathes of its eastern provinces. Some domestic
opposition forces have chosen military conflict over
political means to contest national leadership. Dialogue on
the country’s future institutions and on the path to
democracy is thwarted by both internal and external forces.
An array of military groups and militias — armed,
dangerous and acting with impunity — use Congolese
territory to contest the Governments of many of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s neighbours.
The influence of the new war economies is significant.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo’s economic
development languishes, with some of its rich endowment
of resources shamelessly pilfered to support war-making.
Most important, ordinary people are suffering at an
appalling and unacceptable level. Civilians are the principal
victims of this violence. Tens of thousands have been
uprooted from their homes. Thousands have been killed or
maimed. Women and children suffer hugely.
(spoke in French)
There are, however, other equally important realities.
The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are a
nation, united in their commitment to maintaining the
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
territory and the security of its borders. The people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo desire peace, with open
dialogue. They want a chance to establish democratic
institutions and to have a representative Government in
order to realize their aspirations for stability and economic
and social development.
Today we have heard many of the leaders of African
countries neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
Congo express the same desire for peace, stability and a
return to normality. They too want closure on these
problems.
(spoke in English)
The elements of a solution, as we have heard today,
are there. The Lusaka Agreement, signed last summer, is
central to resolving the conflicts. It addresses the principal
issues that need to be resolved: a ceasefire and
disengagement of troops, a national political dialogue, the
orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces, the disarmament
of armed groups, the re-establishment of State
administration and the creation of a framework for
implementation of the accord that involves the United
Nations.
The tools are there, but the momentum has stalled.
Therefore, we strongly welcome the initiative of the
United States in convening this meeting, its willingness to
engage fully in efforts to resolve the conflict and its
leadership in bringing the parties together here in New
York.
The prospects for peace are tied primarily to the
actions and decisions of those directly involved. The onus
is clearly on them. As President Mandela said last week
in the context of Burundi, no one can reach agreement
but the parties themselves. His wise counsel rings equally
true for those involved in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, the global community can and should
now play an active role in reviving the peace process and
in achieving the goals set by the Lusaka Agreement. The
time has come for the international community to assume
its share of the burden — not just African countries, but
all of us. This should not be a responsibility to be
contracted out to an ad hoc coalition; instead, it must be
met by truly collective efforts, funded not as a charity
case but by assessed contributions — in other words,
through the United Nations Security Council and through
a United Nations operation.
In the first instance, this means the early deployment
of 500 United Nations observers, already agreed to by the
Security Council last November. They will need to be
supported with a clear mandate and adequate resources.
To that end, Canada supports the immediate creation of
a robust United Nations mission along the lines proposed
by the Secretary-General to assist in the implementation
of the Lusaka Agreement, and whose mandate should
include clear and unequivocal provision for the protection
of civilians under Chapter VII of the Charter.

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The Joint Military Commission (JMC) plays a central
part in ensuring that the Lusaka Agreement is respected.
Canada will contribute $500,000 to the operation of the
JMC. We expect that the JMC and the United Nations
peacekeeping presence will work hand in hand in the full
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. I can say to the
Secretary-General that our contribution will be delivered
immediately.
Canada has been and will continue to help in other
ways. We believe our most useful contribution, in addition
to support for United Nations efforts, is in supporting the
inter-Congolese dialogue, as well as the institutional
development of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Indeed, we have already been actively involved in efforts
to promote reconciliation and peace. Canada has in the past
supported projects emphasizing conflict prevention through
the promotion of human rights, increasing popular
participation in decision-making and encouraging good
economic management.
Canada will reinforce these efforts. In the coming
months, we will provide $2 million to support the peace
and reconciliation process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the region. One million dollars will be
earmarked for the inter-Congolese dialogue, led by Sir
Ketumile Masire at the request of Secretary-General Salim
Salim of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
The serious, indeed tragic, problem of child soldiers
demands particular attention. Last year, Canada contributed
to the organization of the Kinshasa Forum on the
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Further concrete actions
aimed at helping war-affected children are important in
order to consolidate peace efforts. To that end, Canada will
contribute $1 million to help with disarmament,
rehabilitation and reintegration, including to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo National Commission on Child
Soldiers.
The regional conference on war-affected children to be
held this April in Accra, hosted by Ghana and Canada, will
consider other concrete measures with relevance to West
Africa, and undoubtedly to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes situation. It is our aim that the
lessons learned from these initiatives will be shared and
built upon at a global conference to be hosted by Canada
next September on the broad question of war and children.
Since its nadir, so vividly recalled in the Rwanda
Inquiry report, the Security Council has been making

12

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
headway in being more actively involved in Africa. There
is hope that in this instance the past is not prologue.
(spoke in French)
More resolute engagement in promoting peace and
security in Africa; increased understanding of the need to
relaunch an approach that links Council action with other
efforts; recognition that a more human-centred approach
to security challenges is needed in Africa — these are all
positive trends.
(spoke in English)
This week’s meetings on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are further and welcome evidence of Security
Council commitment to these ends, to which Canadians
are fully dedicated in their support.
The President: The next two speakers will be the
representatives of the United Kingdom and France, at the
ministerial level. As I said earlier, the United States will
forgo its national statement, and we will then have
completed the ministerial statements at this meeting. I
will call on the permanent representatives who wish to
take the floor. Because of the tremendous time limits, the
very large number of representatives who wish to speak
and the absolute need, because of the pressing obligations
of all the heads of Government here, to suspend the
meeting today at 5 p.m. or, perhaps, a few minutes
afterwards, I urge everyone to speak very briefly.
It is now my great pleasure to welcome back to the
Council one of the two men — the other is Sir Jeremy
Greenstock — who presided over the Council last month
in our seminal discussions of African issues during the
presidency of the United Kingdom: the Minster of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom, Mr. Peter Hain.
Mr. Hain (United Kingdom): I am delighted to be
here. I should like to thank Secretary of State Albright,
and you, Mr. President, both for convening this debate
and for your energetic pursuit of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I also welcome the historic
statements made by the all the heads of State gathered
here today.
Bringing peace to the Great Lakes region matters to
Britain. It matters to the United Nations, and most of all
it matters to Africa. We must end this war. We must
bring peace to a region too often torn apart by strife. We,

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
the United Nations — all of us — have failed Africa in the
past. Let us not fail now.
The Lusaka Agreement is a good one. It provides the
right formula for peace. It is Africa’s agreement, an African
success that we should back. It is the only solution. So I
welcome what we have heard today from the African heads
of State. Every one of them has reaffirmed his support for
Lusaka and its principles and his commitment to its
implementation. This is a strong foundation on which we
can now build.
There has been some progress in implementing
Lusaka. President Chiluba was right to remind us just how
much has already been achieved. I should like to say to
President Chiluba that I normally have to apologize for the
British weather; now I find that I also have to apologize for
the British flu. The mechanisms to oversee implementation
are being put in place. Some observers have been deployed.
But I agree with President Chissano of Mozambique
that progress has been too slow. Fighting is continuing and
the national dialogue has yet to get under way. There has
been no planning for demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration (DDR). The Lusaka timetable has slipped. We
need an updated and realistic timetable, with targets and
benchmarks against which progress can be measured that
can form the basis of a partnership between the African
parties and the international community. I welcome the
work done in Harare to take this forward.
The national dialogue is crucial to the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its people. We are
delighted that former President Masire has agreed to
facilitate the talks, and I hope that a date will be set now
for the start of the dialogue. I welcome President Kabila’s
affirmation today of his readiness to begin that dialogue
immediately. I also welcome his commitment to see this
process lead to free and fair elections and lasting national
reconciliation. I call on all Congolese to engage
constructively, wholeheartedly and without preconditions.
Former President Masire underlined the need for resources
to assist the dialogue. Britain is providing funding. We are
prepared to consider further support.
We must move forward on the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the militia groups.
Without a credible DDR plan, Lusaka will fail. We should
now agree on a set of political principles to underpin
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. These
should include ending support for all non-state militias; the
peaceful reintegration of those fighters from neighbouring

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
States into their countries of origin — except for those
accused of genocide, who should face justice — and
arrangements to achieve this which are as far as possible
cooperative and voluntary; the provision for collective
action by the parties — if this ultimately proves
necessary — to compel militia members who refuse
voluntarily to disarm and disband to do so; and
international monitoring to give all sides the reassurance
they need to make the process work.
I hope that this week — in the next few days — we
can agree on a way forward on DDR based on these
principles. If so, we should invite the Joint Military
Commission (JMC), the Organization of African Unity,
the United Nations and the World Bank to take these
principles forward and, in discussion with the parties,
produce a viable and fully worked out DDR plan.
Next, we need to ensure that the mechanisms
established by Lusaka to monitor and implement the
ceasefire and eventual troop withdrawal work better.
Those charged with overseeing this — the JMC, the
Political Committee, the OAU and the United Nations —
have a crucial part to play. We welcome what they have
done so far. We encourage them to work still more
closely together to drive the peace process forward. They
need to exercise leadership and to hold the parties
accountable for their actions.
As President Chiluba has reminded us, Lusaka’s
implementation mechanisms will work properly only if
they are properly resourced. Britain has already provided
funding to the JMC. We welcome the announcement of
further support made by Canada today. Britain has
provided personnel to the United Nations, who are now
working closely with the JMC. More resources will be
needed. We are looking at what more we may be able to
do. We encourage others to do so, not least those in
Europe.
I agree with President Chissano of Mozambique that
we must address the humanitarian situation urgently. It is
deteriorating, and there is growing hardship. We are
willing to help, but we cannot get to all of those most in
need. There must be access for non-governmental
organizations and United Nations agencies to make the
assessments that we all need to be able to provide
assistance. I call on those concerned to make those
pledges here today and over the coming few days of
negotiations.

13

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
It is absolutely crucial for us to agree on the next
phase of a United Nations mission — what it should do and
what support it should have. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the next stage of the United Nations
mission should be to deploy a force to monitor the ceasefire
and the redeployment of troops to defensive positions. It
needs adequate protection and the right logistical support.
And it needs to be on the ground as soon as possible.
We should also reaffirm now our readiness to support,
as soon as conditions allow, a full United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is time to bury the ghosts of the past and to
ensure an effective United Nations peacekeeping operation.
As President Museveni said, the cost of action is high, but
the cost of inaction is higher still.
But let us be clear on the mandate. I understand why
President Mugabe of Zimbabwe and President Museveni of
Uganda insist that there will need to be Chapter VII
authority. I also agree with President Bizimungu of Rwanda
that a new Security Council resolution is urgently required.
We need a force that will help the parties themselves to
implement the Lusaka Agreement, a force that can do so
provided that all the parties continue to show the same
political commitment to the Agreement that their leaders
have shown today — a force which will have guarantees of
security and cooperation from all concerned. I welcome
President Kabila’s important commitments today in this
regard, and those from all the other African heads of State
directly involved.
The heads of State have all called for urgent United
Nations deployment. President Chiluba rightly said this
morning that there is no peacekeeping that does not have
some element of risk. I agree with him. But those risks
must be minimized, not just to protect individual United
Nations personnel, of whom we have lost too many in
recent years, but also to sustain the international momentum
behind the implementation of Lusaka. The factors which
maximize the prospects for success — political
determination and effective organization — also serve to
minimize risk. Energetic commitment to Lusaka and a
speedy, well-executed United Nations peacekeeping
operation therefore go hand in hand.
Last, we must keep the Democratic Republic of the
Congo high on the international agenda. As President
Mugabe so correctly underlined, there must be no
marginalization or segregation of this and Africa’s other
challenges.

14

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
President Dos Santos’s important contribution to the
debate reminds us of the terrible neglect of another
African conflict. We must make United Nations sanctions
against UNITA bite and bite now and we support
Ambassador Fowler’s excellent work to achieve this.
But the Congo crisis is now the major challenge
facing Africa and one of the biggest challenges facing the
United Nations and the international community. Britain
will back all those determined to make the Lusaka
Agreement work: with finance, practical help, people on
the ground and political support.
The Secretary-General told the heads of State this
morning that this is their opportunity to serve the African
people and to enlist international support here today.
What all speakers have said today has done both. Britain
will stand with those leaders of Africa who are the
peacemakers of Africa. Let us go forward together in
partnership.
The President: I hope the Minister of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom will be with us for the rest of the week as we
continue our deliberations.
I am delighted that the Minister Delegate for
Cooperation and Francophonie of France is with us. I
know he has just returned from a trip to Africa of great
importance.
Mr. Josselin (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the presidency of the Security
Council for having taken the initiative of convening this
open meeting of the Council on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. While the international community is well
aware of the gravity of the crisis and of its important
implications for the peace, stability and development of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region, it must now fully assume its responsibilities
and strongly support the process begun with the signing
of the Lusaka Agreement. For its part, France stands
ready.
The Lusaka Agreement, the basis of a negotiated
solution agreed by all the parties, is today the sole
complete consensual instrument that can lead to the
restoration of peace. Although it has encountered certain
problems and is not running according to the very
ambitious timetable set by the signatories, the
implementation of the Agreement has begun. The Political
Committee and the Joint Military Commission, the

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
keystones of the Agreement, have been established. They
are meeting regularly and have taken important decisions on
both their own internal organization and on how to monitor
the implementation of the Agreement.
Although unacceptable ceasefire violations —
particularly those occurring in recent weeks — are to be
deplored, the overall military situation has stabilized. The
international community — particularly the United Nations,
through the creation of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
announcement of an imminent peacekeeping operation —
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the European
Union have all rapidly committed themselves to supporting
the process, thus lending it additional credibility and
legitimacy.
We must recognize that the implementation of this
Agreement has been too slow — as many speakers this
morning emphasized — due certainly to a lack of trust and
cooperation among the signatories and because a certain
number of elements remain to be clarified or investigated
further before all the belligerents are fully convinced that
this is the right approach, inter alia, to ensuring their own
security.
The absence at this point of an international system to
monitor implementation of the Agreement — due to a lack
of resources for the Joint Military Commission and to the
delay in deploying United Nations personnel — regrettably
encourages further ceasefire violations that threaten at any
moment to reignite the conflict.
The host of unacceptable realities includes the
significant ongoing presence of foreign troops on Congolese
territory — in some cases against the will of that country’s
authorities — numerous human rights violations and the
growing traffic in and illegal exploitation of the resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The national dialogue, which is to produce a new
consensus essential to a lasting solution to the crisis, has
yet to begin following the recent felicitous nomination of its
Facilitator, former President of Botswana Masire.
I would stress that the failure to respect the timetable
attests to the distrust among the parties and compromises its
implementation. But how are we to overcome this obstacle
if we ourselves remain hesitant? France appeals yet again
to the sense of responsibility and spirit of compromise of
the parties to the conflict, many of whom I met during my
recent travels in Central Africa. France solemnly recalls that

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
the international community can consider offering
concrete support for the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, particularly through a peacekeeping operation,
only if its signatories clearly demonstrate their will to
abide by their commitments and to reconcile their
differences. That is what I heard from the African leaders
this morning.
But these leaders also expect the States members of
the Security Council to commit ourselves to them, first
and foremost, by sustained and credible action of the
United Nations speedily to strengthen respect for the
ceasefire. Without that, no progress can be made on the
other aspects of the Agreement. In this respect, we
welcome the recommendations made this morning by the
Secretary-General, the security aspects of which remain
to be fully determined but which will facilitate the actual
and verified implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
They also open the door to subsequent United Nations
involvement on a larger scale, which we ardently desire
and which will help complete and consolidate the peace
process once conditions permit, inter alia, in terms of
security and the fidelity of the parties to their
commitments.
President Jacques Chirac has often said that we are
ready to support deployment of the operation, be it by
despatching Blue Helmets or by equipping certain African
contingents participating in it. The deployment of the
peacekeeping operation should enable the parties to abide
by their commitments to demobilize and reintegrate the
former combatants of armed groups. That will occur,
however, only if the countries from which the groups
originate came undertake to make the necessary reciprocal
arrangements to ease their return.
Measures must quickly be taken to end the illegal
exploitation of the country’s resources. To that end, a
panel of experts could be established forthwith under the
auspices of the Secretary-General to analyse the situation
and propose solutions.
Secondly, we will undertake to help organize the
national dialogue. This is not a preliminary to deploying
the peacekeeping operation, which clearly cannot wait; we
feel, rather, that it is essential to achieving political
agreement among the Congolese, re-establishing state
authority throughout the territory and assembling the
elements of genuine national consensus, without which
the sovereignty, national integrity and democracy of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will remain fragile, if
not hypothetical. To be credible, the dialogue must

15

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000

proceed along the lines set forth in the Lusaka Agreement
and without foreign interference. France welcomes the
appointment of President Masire as Facilitator of the
national dialogue and assures him of our full support.

thus, for improved social well-being; in favour of trade
and, for regional economic integration; and, let us not
forget, for the restoration of the basic functions of States
in administration, justice and security.

Lastly, I would stress the prospects that would be
opened up by an international conference on peace,
security, democracy and development in the Great Lakes
region. It is clearly up to the countries concerned whether
or not to hold such a conference. However, we truly believe
that if the Ceasefire Agreement were to open the way for
such an initiative, such a conference would have a lasting
impact. This is simply because such an approach would go
to the root of the problems that underlie and have long fed
the current conflict.

The conference, organized by the OAU with the
support of the United Nations, could lead to the adoption
of a declaration of principles, to be followed by a series
of bilateral and multilateral agreements and partnerships
to define the modalities of its implementation.

As the Council knows, France has for a long time
suggested the holding of such a conference. The United
Nations often talks about it, and I myself have noted that
our conviction is now shared by a growing number of
leaders who not only want to end this crisis, but who above
all want to tackle its root causes. While we all want a
return to peace, we must agree that such a peace will not be
real or lasting unless there is a comprehensive study of the
phenomena that have for so long hampered peace and have
led to chain reactions in the region.
It is quite clear to us that the peace processes under
way — the Arusha process for Burundi and the Lusaka
process for the Democratic Republic of the Congo — are
fundamental prerequisites for the holding of such a
conference. In other words, the conference cannot be held
unless tangible progress is first made in those processes.
Such a conference would be the basis for a new
commitment by the international community to
reconstruction, development and democracy in the countries
of the region.

France is resolutely committed to the Lusaka
Agreement, both through the liaison officers it has made
available to the United Nations and through the assistance
it provides to the Joint Military Commission. We are
resolved to support all activities along the lines I have
mentioned. We have only one desire: a peace in the
region that is solid and lasting, which will require
exemplary determination and solidarity. As I said, France
stands at the ready.
The President: This completes the ministerial
portion of today’s important meeting.
The next speaker was supposed to be the United
States. I am waiving our turn.
We now begin the rotation of the Security Council
members.
Several speakers have already said that they would
like to remove themselves from the list of speakers.
Anyone who does so is welcome to send us a copy of the
text and, as President, I will distribute it immediately to
all other members of the Security Council. So I hope that
speakers’ remarks will be as short as possible.

There are three sets of issues that could be addressed.
These include the questions of peace and security, which
necessarily and obviously touch upon the issue of border
control and involve all the parties and the principle of
territorial integrity. No less important would be the
implementation of measures to restore democracy, the rule
of law and respect for fundamental freedoms — first and
foremost those of minorities and refugees — as well as
doing away with any ideology of exclusion.

Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): About five weeks
ago, when the Council held an open debate on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, there appeared to
exist different perceptions of the situation and, hence,
differing approaches as to the future course of action. It
is reassuring for us, listening to the important statements
of African leaders before the Security Council today, to
note that there now exists a greater potential for
convergence. This opportunity has to be nurtured, pursued
in full earnest and given a concrete shape.

Finally, the Great Lakes region of Africa needs to be
supported in a major effort of reconstruction and
development. The region awaits a manifestation of
international solidarity in the struggle against poverty and,

The commitment of the leadership to peace and
security for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region has been demonstrated
today by the representation at the highest level of Lusaka

16

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
signatories, including the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Secretary-General, Mr. Salim Salim. SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan’s close involvement deserves our deep
appreciation.
In this context, let me say how much we owe to the
leadership of the United States, to the personal intervention
of Secretary of State Albright and to Ambassador
Holbrooke for his tireless endeavour in making this historic
meeting happen. His initiative has made our collective
intervention for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo a realistic proposition.
The last six months have proved that the Lusaka
Agreement remains the most pragmatic and practical basis
for the resolution of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and for peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. The deviation from the peace process and the
manoeuvres aimed at a military solution are bound to fail.
Such a path has instead established an illegal war market,
helped a business bonanza flourish and drained valuable
resources. It has exacerbated the dire humanitarian and
socio-economic condition of hundreds of thousands of
innocent people.
The message of this gathering of the African
leadership at the United Nations appropriately underlines
that the next crucial step will require greater understanding,
larger cooperation and bolder decisions to seize the
opportunity that exists here and now.
President Masire brings statesmanship and influence to
the process as the neutral facilitator for the inter-Congolese
dialogue. His role is of critical importance. He will have
our full support in his efforts for national reconciliation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We believe he will
receive the same support and cooperation from all the
parties concerned.
Turning to the future course of action in concrete
terms, Bangladesh takes the following position on the five
areas of major concern.
The first area of concern is the question of the
framework for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We join others in affirming that the Lusaka
Agreement remains the most viable basis for peace and
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the subregion. The Agreement is comprehensive. It is
supported by the Security Council resolutions that recognize
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
all States in the region. Its implementation will require
unwavering political will, sincere commitment and the
effective cooperation of all the signatories. The Lusaka
mechanisms, notably the Joint Military Commission, have
already received commitments of financial support from
several countries, which we hope will realize their pledges
urgently. Resources for the facilitator’s mission are also
needed immediately.
Second is the concept of operation and the mandate
of the proposed United Nations peacekeeping mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Ambassador
Kamel Morjane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, has been in the field. Ambassador
Holbrooke has also been on a tour of the region recently
and has come back with a first-hand assessment of the
situation. We believe that in the given context, the
outlines provided in the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2000/30, of 17 January,
represent a realistic proposition. The Security Council
needs to act quickly on this proposal so that the United
Nations military presence is established without delay. We
regard this as an interim mission in preparation for a
larger and more robust peacekeeping mission. As and
when necessary, Bangladesh remains ready to contribute
to the expanded peacekeeping mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Third is the need for progress towards the third
phase. A more robust mission with a Chapter VII
mandate needs to be considered in due course for the
implementation of the remaining provisions of the Lusaka
Agreement, including the disarmament and demobilization
of armed groups,monitoring and verifying the withdrawal
of foreign troops and securing the frontiers.
It is underlined that real progress through these
phases would be possible only with concomitant national
dialogue and reconciliation. We call upon all parties to
cooperate fully with President Masire in this regard.
National reconciliation will of course require
re-establishment of State authority over the entire territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and end to the
pillaging of the country’s natural resources.
Fourth is the full implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and moving beyond. This would involve the
implementation of chapter 12 of annex A of the
Agreement, providing for normalization of the security
situation along common borders between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours. An extended
mandate of an expanded United Nations Organization

17

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo should be
envisaged in that perspective.
Finally, as the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been the theatre of several external conflicts involving the
Congolese people and their neighbours, a comprehensive
political settlement will be essential. In this respect, we
support the idea of an international conference to deal with
issues relating to peace and security, post-conflict peacebuilding and democracy and development in the Great
Lakes region.
This morning the World Food Programme appealed
for safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian
organizations to all people in need of food aid and other
relief supplies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Given the grave food security situation, we urge the
Council and all parties concerned to support this appeal.
We hope the next couple of days will be seized in
order to narrow the differences and to commence the muchawaited national dialogue. It would be a significant
achievement if the Lusaka signatories could approve here
in New York the new calendar agreed by the Political
Committee at Harare last week, setting a practical schedule
for implementation. This will be critically important for the
momentum that is much needed by the international
community, including United Nations agencies, to carry
forward the initiative for peace. It is essential that a culture
of peace should be fostered to replace the culture of war
and violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the embattled Great Lakes region, to the benefit of all.
Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia)(spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to welcome on behalf of Tunisia
the heads of State of the African countries and the
Ministers participating in this very important meeting. Their
presence here expresses the special importance they attach
to the issue we are discussing today: the situation in the
Great Lakes region, and particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My country, Tunisia, which has
made our continent, Africa, one its foreign policy priorities,
shares the sense of importance that has been clearly
manifested today and that is apparent in the statements of
the African leaders this morning and of the heads of
delegation before the Council.
I wish to express to you, Mr. President, our
appreciation for your friendly country and for your personal
efforts in taking the positive initiative of including this
issue in this month’s series of meetings dealing with
African issues.

18

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
The issue of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is truly a central issue that has broad dimensions and is
related to the situation in the Great Lakes region. The
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues, as do tragedies, strife and the exploitation of
the resources of the Congolese people, who continue to
suffer and also at the expense of the entire region and its
security, peace and stability. In this context, we are very
concerned at the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
has become tragic with the increase in the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, the lack of food
security and the deterioration in health conditions. This
situation threatens any attempt to bring about an end to
the conflict. We call primarily for more support to be
given to the efforts made by United Nations specialized
agencies in providing the necessary assistance to alleviate
the suffering of the Congolese people.
In this meeting we have heard many valuable
statements, in which many African leaders have shown
what is being done — within the Organization of African
Unity, within the Southern African Development
Community or at the personal or individual level, as well
as the tireless efforts being made to deal with the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region and to smooth relations between the various
parties concerned. These efforts resulted in the signing of
the Lusaka Agreement, which has enjoyed great support
from the international community, especially from the
Security Council, and is aimed at ending tragedy and war
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Agreement
supports the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and provides for the
security and stability of neighbouring countries, as well as
good relations with them. We hope that all parties will
sincerely and seriously implement this Agreement.
However, six months following the signing of the
Agreement, when the Lusaka mechanism began to
operate, with close cooperation between the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations, we note that the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the region generally is still precarious and difficult. There
have been repeated violations of the Agreement, which
represent a real threat to the future of the Agreement and
a return to large-scale war. This is a source of serious
concern for us.
We reiterate our position that there is no alternative
to a negotiated peaceful settlement between the parties.
We call on them to respect the Ceasefire Agreement and

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
to fulfil their commitments. The international community
must help them achieve this objective. We must support the
Joint Military Commission to enhance its efficiency. Within
this framework, the international community must reaffirm
the importance of respecting the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and unity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as its natural resources.
The United Nations is still focusing on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Secretary-General has prepared a new
report (S/2000/30) in which he has proposed gradual
measures to be taken by the United Nations to deploy
military observers and to send a large-scale peacekeeping
mission. However, due to the complexity of the conflict and
the vast area of the country, this mission is considered one
of the most difficult in United Nations history. Therefore,
we must have the necessary political will and must plan
carefully for this mission and its mandate, and we must
provide the requisite financial and logistical resources.
Tunisia supports these proposals and reaffirms its
readiness to participate with its available resources. It calls
upon the international community and the donor States to
assume responsibility and calls upon all parties to the
conflict to cooperate with the mission, to provide
unhindered access to its personnel and to accelerate its
implementation and success. This is their first
responsibility.
We wish to commend the cooperation between the
OAU and the United Nations in the implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement, particularly through the Joint Military
Commission. We commend the support given by some
States to provide it with resources. We register great
satisfaction over the work of the Political Committee, and
we call upon the parties to continue their efforts.
The Security Council has recently been asked to
shoulder its responsibility with respect to African issues and
to accelerate its pace on those issues. Some have said that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will constitute a test
of the Council’s commitment; that test is taking place
today. The Council must prove its commitment to follow up
its previous resolutions on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to implement them, and to work quickly to
protect the Lusaka Agreement.
As a new member of the Security Council, Tunisia
assumes its own role by calling upon the Congolese
leadership to make every effort to engage in national
dialogue and to achieve national reconciliation. In that

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
context, we welcome the agreement by the Congolese
parties on the appointment of the former President of
Botswana as neutral facilitator of the political negotiations
among those parties. We encourage him in his work, and
wish him and our Congolese brothers every success.
Again, we believe that there is no alternative to
dialogue, mutual understanding and national
reconciliation; were these to exist, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would make great headway
towards peace. We call for the provision of assistance to
the Congolese parties so that they may begin their
dialogue in an atmosphere of independence and
seriousness.
We hail the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Kamel Morjane, and the entire United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for their intensive efforts to address the conflict in
that country. We hope that today’s meeting will contribute
to the establishment of a dialogue among the parties to
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the Great Lakes region with a view to reaching a
common understanding of what is needed to put an end
to the conflict.
The stability, peace and security of the region cannot
be achieved overnight; they require time, political will,
patience and mutual trust among all the parties, as well as
genuine implementation of what has been agreed upon.
The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is related to the situation in the Great Lakes region
and to developments on the other negotiating tracks. We
must therefore think of the common, fundamental regional
issues that we ought to consider in a broader framework
and to which we must find a comprehensive solution.
Tunisia has for many years followed developments
in the Great Lakes region, and has sought to bring about
rapprochement in that region; indeed, President Zine El
Abidine ben Ali hosted a second summit meeting of
leaders of the Great Lakes region in March 1996. Tunisia
calls for the convening of an international conference on
the Great Lakes region under the joint auspices of the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity.
The President: I thank the representative of Tunisia
for the kind words he addressed to me.

19

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The last speaker for today is the representative of
Argentina, who will assume the presidency of the Security
Council a week from tomorrow.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to express our pleasure that heads of State of the
African countries concerned with the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been present at this
meeting, along with the representative of the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
Their participation in this debate is an indication that the
present conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has the greatest potential for destabilization of any since the
end of the decolonization process. The persistence of that
conflict has an impact on peace and security in the Great
Lakes region, limits economic and social development
there, and above all thwarts the expectation of the more
than 50 million civilians affected by the war that they will
be able to live in dignity.
We believe that resolution 1234 (1999), which the
Security Council adopted unanimously, and the Lusaka
Agreement, which was signed by all the parties, constitute
the proper political and legal conceptual framework for
putting an end to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. But there has not been enough political will to
implement its provisions. The ceasefire has been frequently
violated since the Agreement was signed in July 1999, and
the redeployment of forces stipulated in the Agreement has
not taken place. The situation grows increasingly fragile. As
the Secretary-General has noted in paragraph 51 of his
report, contained in document S/2000/30 of 17 January
2000, there is no military solution to the conflict. The
present situation on the ground demonstrates this very
clearly.
Unquestionably, the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is essentially political in nature. But
we believe it cannot be analysed or effectively resolved
without consideration of other key principles of
international law such as respect for the territorial integrity
and political independence of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, non-interference in its internal affairs, the
withdrawal of all foreign forces that are on its territory
without its explicit consent, the inalienable right to
individual or collective self-defence, and the illegality of
the acquisition of territory by force. To these, let me add
another principal that has a long history both in Latin
America and in Africa: the inviolability of boundaries.
That said, it is clear that there will be no lasting
solution unless due account is taken of the legitimate

20

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
security concerns of all countries neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular Rwanda
and Uganda, and unless a system of explicit and objective
guarantees is agreed upon. In that context, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the
various militias based mainly in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — generically known
as “negative forces” — is an essential and complex
element that must be carefully and wisely studied.
In addition to the external dimension to which I have
referred, the conflict has an internal dimension to which
most other participants have alluded today, and which is
recognized in the Lusaka Agreement: the inter-Congolese
dialogue with the ultimate goal of establishing a
democratic constitutional structure in which all sectors of
Congolese society will be represented. Here, the
appointment of the former President of Botswana, Sir
Ketumile Masire, as facilitator, with the assent of all
parties, is a first step towards national reconciliation.
We believe that the United Nations has a role to
play and a historical responsibility to shoulder in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We agree with the
Secretary-General, who said in his recent report that the
United Nations presence should come about gradually and
that the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be expanded.
At the same time, we wish to be clear on something
that is of particular concern to us: all the parties
concerned must give firm guarantees of the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel. We know that we cannot demand absolute
guarantees; that would place a nearly impossible condition
on the deployment of United Nations forces in a conflict
zone. But we require from the parties involved an
unambiguous commitment to the ceasefire and to the
granting of reasonable security guarantees, something to
which all the parties have made a commitment.
Let me repeat today in this open meeting what we
have said in the past, and what we reaffirmed on
Wednesday 19 January during the debate on the situation
in Burundi, in the presence of President Nelson Mandela:
there will be no stable solution in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo without the promotion and
consolidation of democratic institutions and good
governance in all the countries of the Great Lakes region,
and unless we recognize that the problems there are not
solely military in nature or security-related. They are also,
and in large part, problems of development. Thus, we

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
repeat again our support for the French idea — eloquently
reiterated today by the French Minister Delegate for
Cooperation and Francophonie — that, when the proper
circumstances exist, a general conference on the Great
Lakes should be convened under the joint auspices of the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity to
address the situation in that region as a whole.
As you observed, Mr. President, my country will
assume the presidency of the Security Council next month.
We stand ready to continue to work on this issue with the
Council and with other interested States, so that these
deliberations may bear fruit in the form of a Security
Council resolution that will facilitate the resolution of this
tragic conflict.

4092nd meeting (Resumption 1)
24 January 2000
The President: I thank the representative of
Argentina, and we look forward to turning the gavel over
to him a week from tomorrow — I need some rest.
Several of the speakers inscribed on the list have
already notified us that they would like the presidency of
the Security Council to circulate their statements in
writing. This includes both members of the Security
Council and non-members; we will do so as requested.
We will meet in informal session tomorrow morning to
discuss the presidential statement in draft, at 9 a.m. Our
goal will be to move as quickly as possible on it. We
welcome the views of all members of the Security
Council and other concerned parties through procedures
that have already been established for individual input.
This has been, obviously, a remarkable day and a
promising day — as the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity said, a momentous day —
but the proof of the pudding will be in what we can
produce in the way of a presidential statement and,
ultimately, a Security Council resolution to respond to the
statements made and desires expressed so eloquently by
the heads of delegations and Presidents who assembled
here today.
I apologize to those who have not had a chance to
talk today. We will look forward to learning their views
in other forums as quickly as possible, and, if necessary,
we will reconvene.
The meeting was suspended at 5.20 p.m.

21
