S/PV.8670

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8670th meeting

Wednesday, 20 November 2019, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Allen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (S/2019/868)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-37572 (E)
*1937572*

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.

measures that could be envisaged in that regard. I have
just returned from the Dakar International Forum on
Peace and Security, during which the issue of increasing
the strength of the Joint Force and improving its
relations with MINUSMA was widely discussed. I will
return to that point later in my briefing.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(S/2019/868)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Burkina Faso to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Department of
Peace Operations; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations; Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa, European External Action Service;
and Ms. Assitan Diallo, Association of African Women
for Research and Development.
Mr. Vervaeke and Ms. Diallo are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Brussels and
Bamako, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/868, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to update
the Security Council on the activities of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
including the international support it enjoys, especially
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as well
as the challenges facing the Force and the possible
2/21

20/11/2019

The security situation in the Sahel continued to
deteriorate over the past six months. Attacks attributed
to or claimed by terrorist groups against security forces
and civilian populations increased, as did violent
incidents involving members of various communities.
On 6 November, in Boungou, north-eastern Burkina
Faso, approximately 40 civilians and soldiers were
killed in an attack by terrorist groups. Nearly 100
elements of the security forces of Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger lost their lives in a series of attacks
targeting the Liptako-Gourma triangle over the past
10 days. And, on 18 November, 24 soldiers belonging
to the Malian armed forces died in a counter-terrorist
operation near Tabankort in northern Mali, close to the
Nigerian border.
In total, since the beginning of this year, security
incidents have tripled in the region as compared to last
year, particularly in Burkina Faso and the Niger. Four
hundred and eighty-nine incidents were recorded in
Burkina Faso this year, as compared to 151 last year.
Two-hundred and eighteen have occurred in the Niger
this year, versus 69 at the same time last year. In
addition, violence caused by terrorist groups in the
Sahel is now spreading to countries on the West African
coast and along a Sahelo-Sahara strip and virtually links
the Joint Force’s areas of operation with those of the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin.
That fact was recently noted by many representatives
of the countries of the subregion in Dakar, who warned
against the risk of collapse of the security cordon in
the region. In that connection, the Heads of State of
Mauritania and Senegal have renewed calls for a robust
mandate for the Joint Force.
(spoke in English)
The situation in the Sahel is of serious concern, and
urgent action is needed. It is therefore encouraging that
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has increased its operational
tempo. I welcome the commitment and determination
of the G-5 Sahel countries to overcome the many
challenges they face in operationalizing the Joint
Force. Since the issuance of the Secretary-General’s
report before the Council (S/2019/868), the Joint Force
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

conducted an additional operation in collaboration
with the French forces. The operation took place in the
border area between Mali and Burkina Faso from 1 to
17 November. It involved 1,400 foreign troops — from
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger — working alongside
the French forces, and resulted in the neutralization
of 24 suspected terrorists and the seizure of weapons,
ammunition, 100 telephones and 64 vehicles.
The terrorist attacks on the Joint Force base in
Boulikessi, in the Mopti region of central Mali, and
on the Malian armed forces post in Mondoro, on
3 September, which resulted in the killing of dozens
of soldiers, was a painful reminder of the dangerous
environment in which the Joint Force and other security
forces are operating in the Sahel. I would like to pay
tribute to the courage and dedication of the personnel
operating under the Joint Force in the fight against
terrorism, as well as to remember those who have paid
the ultimate price for their countries.
The Joint Force remains a critical part of a series of
regional and international security responses to address
extremist groups in the Sahel along with other crossborder challenges, including trafficking — in persons,
illicit goods, weapons and drugs — migration and
displacement. However, the Joint Force alone cannot
secure the Sahel. More needs to be done to prevent
further deterioration of the situation. To that end, I
welcome the recent encouraging international and
regional initiatives to respond to the expanding threat
posed by terrorist armed groups in the Sahel. One such
initiative is a new partnership for security and stability
in the Sahel, announced in August by the Chancellor of
Germany, Angela Merkel, and the President of France,
Emmanuel Macron, on the margins of the Group of
Seven Summit held in Biarritz, France. The initiative is
aimed at reinforcing troop and police forces from G-5
Sahel countries at the national level, which will play an
instrumental role in combating terrorism.
Another important initiative to combat growing
insecurity and terrorism was announced by the leaders
of the Economic Community of West African States
meeting in Ouagadougou on 14 September. Their pledge
of $1 billion to fight terrorism and extremism over the
next five years is a sign of the renewed commitment
to take ownership and find solutions to the challenges
facing their countries. In parallel, it will remain critical
to continue supporting the efforts by the Joint Force, as
well as mobilizing external partners to that end.

S/PV. 8670

Resolution 2480 (2019), adopted on 28 June, lifted
geographical restrictions on the provision of water,
rations and fuel to all battalions of the Joint Force.
MINUSMA has taken swift action to provide the
required support. On 3 October, the Joint Force requested
429,000 litres of fuel and oil and 35,000 rations for all
its battalions in all five countries. In response, after
completing a risk assessment under the United Nations
human rights due-diligence policy, MINUSMA began
delivering the requested items. So far, it has delivered
60,000 litres of fuel and 4,500 rations to designated
collection points in Mali. MINUSMA stands ready to
deliver the rest of the support as soon as the contingents
confirm their readiness to receive the items.
The delivery of life-support consumables to
all contingents operating under the Joint Force
has the potential to help the Joint Force enhance
performance and operate more effectively. However,
more equipment, capabilities, such as air assets, and
training will be needed for the Joint Force to make
a difference on the ground. In that regard, I wish to
recall that the provision of support to the Joint Force
by MINUSMA, as mandated in resolutions 2391 (2017)
and 2480 (2019), was and should remain one of several
assistance mechanisms for enhancing the G-5 Joint
Force’s capacity.
In addition, I would like to welcome the efforts
of the Joint Force to implement the human rights
and international law compliance framework, with
support from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other partners. It
is of critical importance that the Joint Force and the
member States of the G-5 Sahel continue to take all the
necessary measures to ensure that the protection and
security of the civilian population remain at the centre
of their security efforts, both under the Joint Force and
at the national level.
Furthermore, we call on the Joint Force and G-5
Sahel countries to ensure that allegations of human
rights violations involving Joint Force contingents
are fully investigated, as they not only undermine the
population’s trust but also the image and reputation
of the Joint Force and that of national security forces
and, ultimately, the very purpose of such military
operations. I am pleased to note the efforts undertaken
to operationalize the police component of the Joint
Force in operations related to fighting terrorism and
transnational organized crime. The police component
has an integral role to play in implementing the

19-375723/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

Joint Force compliance framework and investigating
allegations of human rights violations by members of
the Joint Force.
(spoke in French)
Terrorism today is a shared problem, a problem for
all. No country can face it alone. In that connection,
I would recall that most G-5 Sahel countries already
spend almost 20 per cent of their national budgets
on defence and security, which, however essential
to addressing the root causes of insecurity, means a
decline in investment in human security.
The international community must therefore
contribute to the effort to fight extremism in the Sahel.
It must support the Joint Force so that it can fully play its
role and achieve more tangible results on the ground. It
is important that funding promises be kept. I would like
to acknowledge the contribution made in that regard by
the European Union and other international partners,
whose support for the Joint Force is crucial and vital.
Once again, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for
predictable and sustainable funding for the Joint Force.
Security initiatives will bear fruit only if
satisfactory responses are delivered on issues related
to underdevelopment, poverty, governance, the lack
of access to basic services, systematic exclusion and
the effects of climate change. We must offer people,
especially youth, opportunities for the future. Those
prospects must go beyond daily needs, to ensure
development, promote gender equality and facilitate
access to economic opportunities and social services.
That is why I call on all partners to ensure the rapid
disbursement of the pledged funds and to support
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. Investing in sustainable and
inclusive development efforts is the most effective way
to address the root causes of conflict, violent extremism
and terrorism.
Lastly, I call on the Governments of the region to
go beyond security response and continue to establish
mechanisms and implement reforms to bolster
national unity and cohesion. That must be the thrust
of the partnership to be shored up in the fight against
terrorism, insecurity and inequality. Together, we must
mobilize more, as a matter of urgency, for the Sahel.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso.
4/21

20/11/2019

Mr. Barry (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
behalf of all my colleagues in the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting us to take part in
this meeting on the consideration of the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
(S/2019/868). Rest assured of the full support of the G-5
Sahel countries.
Through Ms. Keita, I would like to commend the
Secretary-General for the quality of his report, which
was just presented to us. We take due note of the
relevant observations and recommendations included
in the report, which illustrate the grim reality on the
ground as well as the commitment of the United Nations
to remain alongside the Sahel region, one that has been
assailed by ongoing terrorist attacks. Together with the
United Nations, many multilateral and bilateral partners
support the efforts of Member States to operationalize
the Joint Force on the ground. First and foremost, I
would like to mention the European Union, whose
financial support makes it possible to implement the
technical agreement with the United Nations in terms
of logistics and supplies for the Force.
As the report rightly points out, the situation in
the G-5 Sahel region is most worrisome. The heavy
human toll during the reporting period has now been
surpassed. The security situation in the G-5 Sahel
region has deteriorated significantly in recent months.
Attacks and ambushes have proliferated and claimed
more lives in less time than in the past. The enemy has
become more active, mainly in Burkina Faso, Mali,
the Niger and Chad, while the Joint Force, which is
still scaling up, continues to grapple with recurrent
functional obstacles. In concrete terms, armed terrorist
groups have redoubled their activities against the
security and defence forces, the civilian population and
symbols of the State, especially in Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger.
The numerous improvised explosive device attacks
recorded in the area for some time now serve to confirm
that those armed terrorist groups are experienced
in the manufacture and use of improvised ex-plosive
devices. That also points to their strong determination
to exert enormous pressure on our forces. Attacks on,
and the destruction of, public buildings ultimately aim
to prevent any presence of the State and its entities in
various areas. That is already the case with whole areas
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

that do not have direct administrative authority, security
nearby or schools and health centres. Terrorists aim to
control and exploit those areas and communities for their
benefit in order to pursue their illegal activities, while
maintaining a stranglehold over the local populations.
Their dream to establish an actual haven or caliphate
in the Liptako-Gourma region — the border areas of
Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger — is a timelier issue
than ever.
In the wake of the complex attacks on positions
in Koutoukou in Burkina Faso, and Boulikessi and
Mondoro in Mali, it is reasonable to believe that there
are genuine operational and logistical ties among
the various armed terrorist groups in the Sahel that
are affiliated with Al-Qaida and the Islamic State.
Undoubtedly, those terrorist operations are becoming
increasingly numerous and meticulously prepared.
The last few weeks have been particularly trying
for Mali and Burkina Faso, notably following the heavy
losses suffered by the Malian army in Indelimane at
the beginning of this month and again the day before
yesterday south of Ménaka. On the Burkinabe side, we
are still recovering from the shock of the cowardly and
barbaric murder of the Deputy Mayor of Djibo earlier
this month and a few days later from the particularly
bloody attack on a convoy of workers from the
SEMAFO mining company in Boungou, in the eastern
part of the country.
That enemy pressure calls for greater efforts on the
part of our States and their respective armies. As for
the Joint Force, in spite of the difficulties encountered,
it has been able to carry out a number of operations to
mark its presence and commitment. There were eight
such operations during the first half of 2019, which
focused on three zones. The activities planned for the
third quarter of the year were well carried out. For
the final quarter of the year, despite the difficulties
associated with relief operations and the rainy season
in some areas, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has committed
to three joint operations with national armies and
partner forces.
In that context, a large-scale operation called
Operation Amane 2 took place from 1 to 10 October
in the central zone. It was part of the overall aim to
deter, break up and interfere with the logistical flow
of organized criminal groups and armed terrorist
groups in the Libyan border area between Chad and
the Niger. During that operation, different missions

S/PV. 8670

and procedures were implemented, including
reconnaissance, zone control, checkpoint, interception,
neutralization, disruption, compilation, escort, battle
rations release and air transport.
In addition, during the first two weeks of November,
the Joint Force conducted a major operation supported
by Operation Barkhane, jointly with the armies of
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, to track down
armed terrorist groups in Gourma and challenge their
refuge, transit and storage areas. That major operation
mobilized more than 1,400 men and considerable
ground and air resources in the area of Gourma, as well
as in part of the Gao and Timbuktu regions and even a
little in central Mali.
Looking forward, a campaign plan covering a longer
period between one to two years is being considered
and will be the subject of planning in the coming weeks.
The objective is to harmonize the future operations
of the Joint Force with the various efforts undertaken
by the national armed forces and the partners of the
Force, Operation Barkhane and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
With regard to the partnership with MINUSMA, the
additional support secured by resolution 2480 (2019),
which was unable to be previously established, is now
being resolved with some practical implementation
measures being rolled out. However, it is clear that
the implementation of the amendment to the technical
agreement, whose signing is pending, could encounter
significant difficulties in terms of supplies on the
ground due to the distance of some areas of operations
from MINUSMA bases.
Despite the progress made by the Joint Force in
an increasingly difficult security context, significant
constraints remain and merit the attention of the Council.
In terms of the Force’s equipment, the strong
international commitment to the Force since its
establishment clearly made it possible at the time
to announce significant international assistance to
support national efforts. Indeed, €414 million of the
€423 million expected were announced at the donor
conference held in Brussels in February 2018. However,
the implementation of the equipment to be financed by
those various pledges is taking time to materialize on
the ground. That can be seen from what I am about
to say.

19-375725/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

For example, of the 40 or so requests submitted to
our partners, only 10 have been approved by them and
only 4 of the 10 have been implemented or are in the
process of being implemented. In general, therefore,
for a majority of the battalions, the level of funding
is still low with regard to material equipment. The
rolling military munitions, for instance, are still in the
process of being delivered. In addition, in the area of
logistics, some capacities remain largely dependent on
the partners present in the area of operation.
It is also necessary to mention the situation of
the police component, which exists but is difficult to
deploy because of a lack of equipment, especially in
terms of specialized investigation units. Fortunately,
the implementation of the compliance framework has
enabled significant progress thanks to the support of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and of some technical and financial
partners. That made it possible, on the one hand, to
make a genuine start in the judicialization of actions
particularly by some deployed provost corps and, on
the other hand, to take better account of the rules of
conduct and engagement of soldiers.
In operational terms, the Force does not have its
own air assets, although the current counter-terrorism
efforts cannot be carried out effectively without the air
component, which the military calls the third pillar. We
must therefore seek alternatives to make the Force fully
operational in the field.
In addition, with regard to the intelligence system,
which is another major weakness of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, requests have been made for the acquisition of
sensors and surveillance equipment but these have not
yet been met.
Despite the strong willingness to act on the ground
against a common enemy and the strong international
commitment, all of which raises a strong expectation
of results in a context where the affected populations
have even greater demands, with increasing anger
among the people, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force still faces
significant challenges.
However, the Force should not to be overlooked
in the overall fight against terrorism and organized
crime, which is rampant in the Sahel-Saharan region, as
shown by the few successes achieved during the latest
operations. It can even be said to be the only alternative
currently available in the fight against terrorism and
cross-border crime in that common space. However, as
6/21

20/11/2019

the security situation in the area is constantly changing,
there is clearly an urgent need for the coordination and
pooling of capacities by the States members of the G-5
Sahel, as well as with regard to other initiatives of the
entire subregion and the international community,
which remain crucial for the further operationalization
of the Force.
The commitment of all stakeholders is necessary
in the fight against terrorism. The President of Burkina
Faso and current Chair of the G-5 Sahel, His Excellency
Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, and his peers from other
States welcome the outcomes of the Extraordinary
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), held in Ouagadougou on 14 September and
which was broadened to the G-5 Sahel and focused on
the fight against terrorism in West Africa and the Sahel.
The Summit adopted a counter-terrorism action plan
that will be funded with $1 billion over four years. The
funding by the 15 ECOWAS member States reflects the
seriousness with which the terrorist threat is viewed in
the Sahel and throughout West Africa.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the appeal made by Mr. Kaboré to all States to join
the Partnership for Stability and Security in the Sahel
initiative, launched at the Group of Seven Summit in
Biarritz last August. This initiative will establish an
international partnership for stability and security in
the Sahel. The international partnership should lead
to a much stronger commitment by the international
community, with greater mobilization in this fight
against the terrorist scourge.
The war on terrorism is a global challenge, a concern
that affects the entire international community. It is a
matter of international peace and security, and we must
all learn from it. Particularly in the case of the Sahel,
the reality that is clearly seen on the ground cannot
be addresses simply with more meetings and pledges
without concrete and decisive results in practice.
Today, everything has already been said and
written about the situation in the G-5 Sahel region.
The populations are impatient. The humanitarian
consequences of terrorism are tragic in our countries and
for our populations, with more than 1 million internally
displaced persons in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger.
The populations are therefore expecting action and
there are increasing risks of the destabilization of our
States. We must therefore act rapidly. The situation is
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

deteriorating quite quickly. We must not wait until we
return here in six months’ time to assess how much
worse the situation has become. I reiterate that the
G-5 Sahel must be supported in having operational
capabilities on the ground.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our
countries’ sincere thanks to all partners that have
supported, and continue to support, the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force bilaterally and multilaterally.
Just as each of our countries alone cannot overcome
the terrorist threat, the G-5 Sahel cannot effectively
combat the phenomenon without partner forces such
as Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA. But for
MINUSMA to be effective, it needs a strong mandate.
That is why I would like to reiterate the appeal made
by the ECOWAS Heads of State at the Ouagadougou
Extraordinary Summit and the G-5 Sahel to the General
Assembly for a robust and more proactive mandate for
MINUSMA to enable it to provide greater security and
stability to Mali and to participate actively in the fight
against terrorism in the Sahel. I also reiterate their
appeal to the Security Council for a mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force because, for us, terrorism is a
threat to international peace and security and the Joint
Force needs ongoing and predictable funding.
Every day, every forum is an opportunity for us to
sound the alarm. That is what we are doing now today
as a warning because it will be too late after that.
The President: I would like to remind colleagues
and briefers that, at the request of the African
members of the Council, consultations will take place
immediately following this briefing. I therefore request
all briefers to keep their remarks as short as possible.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: On behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and to express our gratitude for the
invitation to brief the Security Council on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
I would also like to thank His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Burkina Faso, and Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa and the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. I also look

S/PV. 8670

forward to hearing from the two additional briefers,
Mr. Vervaeke and Ms. Assitan Diallo.
As requested, I will try and keep my remarks as
brief as possible. We have heard from both briefers
today about the increasing deterioration of security
in the Sahelo-Saharan region. That continues to be of
great concern to the African Union.
We have heard that there has been a sharp increase
in terrorist attacks in Mali, both in the north and in the
centre of the country, targeting mainly the Malian armed
forces and their posts and camps. Dozens of people,
including civilians, have been killed in those attacks.
The latest attack, on 18 November in Tabankort, in
the Gao region, during a joint operation by the Malian
and Nigerian armies to secure the common borders,
killed 13 Malian soldiers and wounded 29 others, and
also caused extensive material damage. We have also
heard that the Niger continues to face terrorist attacks
in its border areas, particularly on its border with Mali,
and also insurgent attacks from Boko Haram in the
southern part of the country, particularly in the Diffa
region. We have also heard that in Burkina Faso there
is clearly a fury of terrorist attacks. We are witnessing
an extension of those attacks, particularly in the central
and eastern parts of the north. Sometimes the attacks
target civilian groups, but other times they can also
target places of worship and schools. And we have also
witnessed in recent weeks the great losses suffered by
defence and security forces. Chad is also not spared in
that context. It is also facing insecurity due to activities
linked to terrorist groups, particularly Boko Haram.
We have seen attacks, particularly in the north, earlier
this year in January and February.
Once again, the African Union condemns these
heinous attacks and expresses its solidarity with
the countries of the region. In particular, we express
solidarity with the G-5 Sahel countries and, of course,
welcome the establishment of its Joint Force. That
decision, which entails a great deal of responsibility,
is very much in line with the philosophy of the African
Peace and Security Architecture. In that regard, during
its recent meeting on 9 April, the African Union Peace
and Security Council renewed the mandate of the
Joint Force.
More than ever before, the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel requires adequate resources in order to be in
an offensive position. This is urgent and of absolute
necessity moving forward. I take this opportunity to

19-375727/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

recall the persistent request from the Heads of State
of the G-5 Sahel for direct funding from the United
Nations to the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and for
the Joint Force to operate under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, as recommended by
the Secretary-General. Moreover, it should be recalled
that the international community’s efforts should be
part of a global vision, taking into account the other
challenges faced by the Sahel region, such as in the
areas of governance, development and climate change.
The African Union aligns itself with that vision, which
we believe that will bring more hope to the people. I
must also recognize the efforts of the member States
of the Economic Community of West African States,
which decided earlier this year at their Extraordinary
Summit held on 14 September to mobilize support for
the Sahel countries. The African Union supports that
initiative and calls upon the international community
for substantial assistance.
On the political level, the African Union also
remains committed to the peace process in Mali and
Libya and will continue its efforts to resolve the crisis
in those countries.
In the area of development, the African Union is
supporting the countries of the Lake Chad basin as part
of its regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery
and resilience in the areas affected by Boko Haram. The
African Union continues to provide support to the G-5
Sahel by advocating for the mobilization of resources
pledged at the Partners and Donors Coordination
Conference that the G-5 Sahel held on 6 December
2018 in Nouakchott to finance its priority investment
programme. In addition, the African Union recently
held a regional conference in Niamey on the issue of
climate change in the Sahel and adopted pertinent
resolutions in that regard.
As I conclude my remarks, I would like to stress
that the support of the countries in the region as well as
that of the African Union, the United Nations and the
entire international community, is an absolute priority
for winning the fight against terrorism in the region. As
the Secretary-General rightly stated in his report,
“[t]errorism is a global issue and the entire
international community has a responsibility to
contribute.” (S/2019/868, para. 38)
The President: I thank Ms. Mohammed for
her briefing.
8/21

20/11/2019

I now give the floor to Mr. Vervaeke.
Mr. Vervaeke (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the European Union’s action in
support of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
and its Joint Force — part of a global approach that
combines political dialogue and support in the areas of
security, development aid and humanitarian assistance.
In terms of its efforts in Africa, the European
Union has been most actively providing support to the
countries of the G-5 Sahel region. Today’s meeting
takes place in the context of increasing deterioration
in the security situation, characterized by increasingly
targeted and sophisticated attacks. We pay tribute to
the victims and to the sacrifices that the countries
of the region have made. In that regard, during the
ministerial meeting that the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel held in July in Ouagadougou, chaired by
High Representative Federica Mogherini and Minister
for Foreign Affairs Alpha Barry, whose presence I
welcome here today, together we decided to strengthen
our approach to supporting the G-5 Sahel towards a
responsible and accountable partnership.
In that spirit a mutual commitment, the European
Union decided to renew its support to the Joint Force
by pledging to it an additional €138 million, which
covers the operationalization of the Joint Force,
the implementation of its human rights compliance
framework and the development of its police component.
Progress is expected, in particular with regard to the
work of the Joint Force and its functioning — allow me
also to commend the success of the Force’s most recent
operation — and the strengthening of the coordination
and leadership role of the permanent secretariat of the
G-5 Sahel, which includes the G-5 Sahel’s development
of an integrated strategic framework for security and
development. That joint document will focus on the
stabilization of the most vulnerable priority areas and
will be adopted during the next G-5 Sahel summit. It
will enable the European Union to provide its support in
a more efficient manner. Equally important is the need
for the Joint Force and its member States to effectively
implement the compliance framework on human rights
and international humanitarian law.
Under this new configuration, the European Union
and the support instruments that it is implementing are
adapted to the security situation on the ground. That
applies to our now-permanent political dialogue with the
19-37572

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2019

G-5 Sahel; the advisory and coordination cell that was
relocated to Nouakchott to provide permanent support
to the structures of the G-5 Sahel; the coordination hub,
whose functions are currently being transferred to the
G-5 in accordance with the principle of ownership; and
the mechanisms of our military and civilian advisory
and training missions in the Niger and Mali. In that
regard, actions are under way to enable our missions to
better support the Malian authorities in their efforts in
the centre of the country.
Beyond its efforts to strengthen the autonomy of
the G-5 Sahel, the European Union also supports the
mobilization of regional and international partners to
promote the stabilization of the Sahel region. To that
end, the European Union has decided to provide direct
support to the efforts of the partnership for security and
stability in the Sahel, an initiative launched by France
and Germany within the framework of the Group of
Seven. That is also why the European Union supports
the commitment of the Economic Community of West
African States to regional security and the action plan
it is set to adopt at its next summit. The European
Union also reiterates its commitment to working
closely with the United Nations and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.
In conclusion, in order to achieve the dual objective
of empowering partners and mobilizing regional and
international actors, the support and leverage of the
Security Council are more essential than ever. For the
European Union, increasing the capabilities of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force will continue to remain a priority
issue as we support the G-5 Sahel during this crucial
time. The countries of the Sahel can count on the full
mobilization and solidarity of the European Union.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Vervaeke

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Diallo.
Ms. Diallo (spoke in French): My name is
Assitan Diallo. I am President of the Association of
African Women for Research and Development, a
non-governmental organization working to promote
women’s rights in Mali. I address the Security Council
today from a country that has suffered from bloody
conflict since 2012, but has been ravaged by violence
and instability for almost a decade. As I have learned
from my own work, it is women and young people who
pay the highest price when it comes to war.

S/PV. 8670

My statement today will focus on three key issues:
first, access to justice for survivors of gender-based
violence; secondly, the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of peace and
security; and, thirdly, ensuring that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) are able to respond to the security needs of
our communities.
As has been well documented, gang rape and
early and forced marriage, as well as the abduction of
women and girls to serve as sexual slaves, are part of
the broad panorama of gender-based violence in Mali.
Despite the overwhelming evidence available, none of
the key players in this regard — neither the authorities,
nor the armed groups that signed the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali in Bamako in 2015,
nor the international community — have done enough
to ensure justice for those women and young people,
who face such abuses on a daily basis. The insecurity
that prevails in areas such as northern and central
Mali is currently preventing judicial authorities from
returning there, where some have been abducted,
tortured or killed. In addition, armed groups seek to
undermine basic human rights obligations by exploiting
religious laws at the local level, thereby undermining
State secularism and jeopardizing the provision of real
justice to survivors of gender-based violence.
There can be no peace or development in Mali
without gender equality. Despite the legal requirement
to ensure a 30 per cent representation of women
in all processes and institutions supporting the
implementation of the Bamako Agreement, this quota
is far from being respected. Similarly, the processes
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform must be gender-sensitive and
include an equal representation of women to guarantee
that their needs and experiences are truly taken into
account. The current underrepresentation of women
in the G-5 Sahel’s defence and security structures
prevents Malian women from fully contributing to
peace and security in the region. Finally, the inclusion
and active engagement of women — especially young
women — is particularly important in countering the
risk of marginalized and disenchanted youth turning
to violence.
There is widespread frustration due to MINUSMA’s
inability to effectively protect civilians, as well as
a general sense of insecurity, despite the presence of

19-375729/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

United Nations and regional forces. Youth attacks on the
MINUSMA camps in Gao and the categorical refusal of
a Bamako district to allow the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
to establish a headquarters there — out of fear that
they would become targets of violence — demonstrate
the lack of trust that the local populations have in
international forces. It is clear that MINUSMA’s
presence does not make people feel secure. In addition,
MINUSMA, like the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, is mandated
to mainstream gender across all aspects of its work.
MINUSMA still needs to do more to address the gender
dimensions of security, while the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
must ensure that its gender unit is capable of robustly
defending women’s rights across the Sahel region.
Marginalization, inequality and poverty are the
root causes of the current conflict and compound the
pervasive insecurity gripping Mali. In order to address
these challenges, MINUSMA needs to provide stronger
support to the Government in order to enable it to
deliver basic public services to communities in need
and to ensure long-term security. That requires ongoing
political dialogue with armed groups and the active
participation of civil society, as well as the support of
the United Nations and other international actors. While
the neutrality of MINUSMA, which is at the heart of
its mandate, is crucial, most Malians also want to see
MINUSMA assume its role of protecting civilians and
guaranteeing their security in an effective manner.
Finally, as has been noted in the reports of the
Secretary-General and highlighted by other speakers
before the Council, the militarization of the Sahel is
not helping to establish peace in the region — and it
certainly cannot occur to the detriment of the security
of local populations, who are all too often trapped in
the middle of such operations. That only fuels cycles
of violence and mistrust, while making dialogue
more difficult.
I shall share all of my recommendations with the
Council in writing, but I would like to highlight just
one of them here today. I call on the Security Council
to hold the leadership of MINUSMA and the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force accountable for the protection of civilians
and gender mainstreaming across all their operations.
The solution to the complex dynamics of the
conflict in Mali will not be found on the battlefield, but
must emerge from dialogue and genuine regard for the
concerns of ordinary people. I urge Security Council
members to use their power to make that happen.
10/21

20/11/2019

The President: I thank Ms. Diallo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements. I remind all members that
we have to juggle briefings, consultations and austerity.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
situation in the Sahel remains very precarious, with the
armies of the region are on the front line. The fighting
that took place on Monday at the border between Mali
and the Niger in an operation involving the armies of
both countries attests to the persistent capacities of
terrorist groups to inflict damage. The primary victims
of terrorism are the people of the Sahel themselves.
Since the beginning of the year, 1,500 people have
reportedly fallen victim to terrorism in Mali and
Burkina Faso.
The Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint
Force is the best tool available to deal with the spread
of the terrorist threat. France welcomes the gains made
in its operationalization. The Joint Force has conducted
11 operations since the beginning of the year. The most
recent, Operation Bourgou IV, culminated last week
and mobilized 1,400 men from the armies of Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger, with the support of forces
from the French-led Operation Barkhane. The results
are clear: 25 terrorists were neutralized or captured;
several vehicles were recovered or destroyed, including
64 motorcycles; a workshop for the manufacture of
improvised explosive devices was dismantled; and
weapons, ammunition and more than a 100 telephones
were seized. Progress has also been made within the
human rights compliance framework, which is essential
to ensuring that the Joint Force is more effective and
does a better job of protecting civilians, especially
society’s most vulnerable members, such as women
and children.
If the Joint Force is to succeed, it needs a sustained
commitment based first and foremost on the engagement
of the G-5 countries themselves, but also, crucially, that
of international partners. At the donor conference held
in Brussels in February 2018, €414 million was pledged
to the Joint Force, with the European Union, its member
States and the United States being the main donors. We
estimate that half of that support has been disbursed so
far. The Joint Force battalions have received a number of
vehicles as well as equipment for countering improvised
explosive devices. France encourages donors that have
yet to honour their commitments to do so as soon as
possible. I also welcome the fact that the United Nations
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali has implemented logistical support for all of
the Joint Force contingents. Resolution 2480 (2019)
broadens that support to cover contingents deployed
outside the borders of Mali, and we can see how valuable
that is to the Joint Force. France supports the G-5
countries’ requests for increased multilateral support.
However, those essential efforts are not enough, as
terrorism is now spreading throughout the subregion.
France and Germany’s initiative of a Partnership
for Security and Stability in the Sahel is intended
to strengthen the Joint Force, while broadening its
scope to include the countries of the region and other
sectors such as internal security and justice systems.
At the Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on 14 September, ECOWAS
committed to combating terrorism more effectively. In
Mali, starting in 2020, a European special forces unit
named Takuba will also be deployed as part of Operation
Barkhane to support the Malian armed forces on their
path to autonomy and resilience.
It will be impossible to achieve sustainable security
for the Sahel without development, and France calls for
redoubling efforts to that end. We are doing our part
in that regard by allocating €522 million in funding to
the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme for 2019
and 2020. We must do everything we can to meet the
growing humanitarian needs in the region, particularly
in Burkina Faso, and to ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for those who need assistance. The
crisis in the Sahel is not just about development. The
urgent humanitarian situation must compel all of us to
do more.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the presence at today’s meeting
of Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, and we thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, and the
other briefers for their reports.
We concur with today’s alarming assessments
of the situation in the Sahel. The security threats in
that part of Africa have reached an unprecedented
level. The geographic area for terrorist activity, drug
trafficking and organized crime is expanding, and
extremist ideology continues to win over new recruits.
Sadly, there are tragic reports almost every week
of the deaths of dozens of servicemen or civilians in

S/PV. 8670

one country or another in the region at the hands of
underground groups. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral notes (S/2019/868), the threat is now looming
over the States along the Gulf of Guinea as well. The
roots of these problems are well known. In the Sahel,
we are reaping the fruit of the collapse of statehood in
Libya that resulted from a violent foreign intervention.
We believe that if the situation in that country is not
normalized — and many of our interlocutors talked to
us about this during the recent Council mission to Mali
and Burkina Faso — it will be virtually impossible to
stabilize the region sustainably.
We support the efforts of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) to combat terrorism
and organized crime. It appears that they have already
become an important part of achieving regional
stability in a relatively short period of time. We are
pleased with the information on the four Joint Force
operations carried out in all its areas of responsibility
during the reporting period. We are receiving reports on
the success of the Sahel units’ latest counter-terrorism
operation, which ended on 17 November. We welcome
the agreement on the legal status of the presence of
the Joint Forces on the territory of member States of
the Group of Five and the protocol on cooperation in
the area of intelligence. Needless to say, there is still
a great deal to be done. It is particularly worrying that
the issue of selecting a permanent location for the Joint
Force’s headquarters has not yet been resolved. It will
be vital to ramp up the provision of technical and other
equipment for its units and the level of training of its
military personnel as quickly as possible.
Of course, the full operationalization of the Joint
Force depends on ensuring that it receives stable and
predictable funding. We have seen that the funds
pledged by foreign donors are gradually reaching the
region. However, far from all of the commitments in
that regard have been fulfilled. We support the help
that the Joint Force is getting from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and through the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
We believe firmly in the importance of further
coordinated steps on the part both of Africans and the
international community to combat terrorism in the
Sahel-Saharan region. It is clear that military measures
alone cannot eradicate this evil. It is essential to work to
effectively counter the expansion of extremist ideology,

19-3757211/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

solve acute socioeconomic problems, strengthen State
institutions and foster a culture of respect for human
rights. In that regard, we support the decision adopted in
Niamey at the Extraordinary Summit of the Economic
Community of West African States to allocate $1 billion
towards those goals.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Russia is
closely following the development of the situation in the
region. We are already providing a number of countries
with relevant military and technical assistance and
training for military and police personnel. In general,
we hope that the armed forces of the States of the Group
of Five for the Sahel will become an effective tool for
restoring and maintaining peace in West Africa in the
near future.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the presentations provided by the briefers
and especially for the participation of Mr. Alpha
Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Burkina Faso.
Peru has been following with concern the fragile
humanitarian situation and continuing deterioration
of security in the region, the result of brutal terrorist
attacks and intracommunal violence that in many cases
are driven by organized crime and whose destabilizing
consequences risk spreading to States in West Africa.
We would like to offer our condolences in that regard to
the Governments and peoples of Mali and Burkina Faso
for the deaths and other victims that have resulted from
the reprehensible actions of such groups. In that context,
we continue to consider the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5) as a crucial actor in confronting
those global scourges. It will be vital to provide it with
adequate equipment, training and predictable funding,
and, at the same time to strengthen the operational
capabilities of its various components, including its
investigative units. In particular, we highlight its efforts
to ensure that its activities are conducted in full respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
We especially welcome the firm decision taken
in September by the Heads of State of the Economic
Community of West African States in September to
establish a united front prioritizing the fight against
terrorism, based on developing a comprehensive plan
of action and ensuring significant funding for its
implementation. As has been said, while a military
response is necessary to combat insecurity in the region,
it must be complemented by measures to promote
12/21

20/11/2019

development and address its underlying problems,
such as poverty, the weak presence of the State, the
marginalization of some populations and the effects of
climate change.
We therefore stress the importance of international
support for the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, as an appropriate comprehensive framework
for promoting the needs and priorities of the countries
of the region. We also welcome the Franco-German
partnership for security and stability in the Sahel.
All of these efforts must be complemented by
measures to empower women and programmes aimed
at generating greater employment opportunities,
particularly for young people in the region, in order
to prevent them from being co-opted by criminal and
extremist groups as the only alternative for survival.
From a regional and subregional perspective, we
believe it important that the efforts, initiatives and
cooperation mechanisms deployed on the ground,
including responses to the humanitarian situation,
maintain political and operational coherence in
order to address security and development priorities
and to comply with the provisions of relevant
Council resolutions.
I conclude by expressing Peru’s commitment to
the efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries, in coordination
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the African Union and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, among
other United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as
other actors committed to the shared objective of
achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): This
briefing gives me the opportunity to speak on behalf
of the African members of the Council — Equatorial
Guinea, South Africa and Côte d’Ivoire — to express
our views on the topic of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) and issues related to peace and security in
the Sahel region and West Africa.
Before I do so, I would like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso, whose country holds the
presidency of the G-5 Sahel, and to thank him for his
illuminating briefing.
On behalf of the three African members of the
Council, I would also like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa; Mr. Koen
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of the European
External Action Service; Ambassador Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations; and Ms. Assitan Diallo, President
of the Association of African Women for Research and
Development, for their detailed briefings,
The three African Council members are seriously
concerned about the continuing deterioration of the
security situation in the Sahel. Indeed, the persistent
destabilizing acts perpetrated by terrorist groups in Mali
and Burkina Faso are compounded by the exacerbation
of intercommunal violence and the undeniable threats
it poses to coastal West African States. Sad and
tragic illustrations of that can be seen in the attacks
perpetrated on 30 September and 1 October in central
Mali, as well as those carried out against the Burkinabe
army in the Koutougou incident on 19 August, which
resulted in several dozen dead or disappeared. The
three African members of the Council condemn those
heinous attacks in the strongest terms and pay tribute
to all who have died and express their sympathy and
unflagging support for the Governments and brotherly
peoples of Mali and Burkina Faso.
Faced with ever-changing security threats, these
two countries devote about 25 per cent of their budget
on military expenditures, despite the difficult economic
situation. Mali and Burkina Faso now serve as the
ultimate dam which, in the event of a breach, would
allow the terrorist and jihadist outpouring, better armed
and endowed with resources derived from drug and
human trafficking, to engulf the entire West African
subregion. That is evidenced by the kidnapping, in May,
of two tourists on the border between Mali and Benin.
Despite this bleak picture, the African countries
elected to the Council remain optimistic, noting the
encouraging progress made in the operationalization
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, with the support of the
G-5 trust fund. Efforts to further support the Force are
further testimony to the resolve of member States to
address the challenges they face. The situation in the
Sahel fully justifies the presence of the Joint Force in
the fight against terrorism, transnational organized
crime and trafficking in human beings, as well as in
its contribution to the establishment of a regional
environment conducive to peace and development.
In that regard, it is imperative that the support of
the international community and the Security Council
be harmonized with the efforts and determination of

S/PV. 8670

member States, which has been amply demonstrated.
We stress the importance of international support
in reducing the current financial deficits that are
limiting the capacities of the G-5 Sahel member States.
Those deficits hinder the full operationalization of
the Joint Force and hamper their ability to assume
their sovereign responsibilities to ensure basic social
services. That is why, while we fully appreciate the
financial support provided to date by international
partners, the three African Council members urge them
to adapt their financial contributions to the scale of the
current challenges.
The three African Council member States are also
concerned about the spread of this instability to other
West African countries. We therefore welcome the
decision taken by the Heads of State and Government of
the Economic Community of West African States at their
recent extraordinary summit, held in Ouagadougou on
14 September, to mobilize $1 billion to fight terrorism
in the subregion.
The three African members of the Council fully
support the unique partnership between the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, aimed at restoring peace and stability in Mali
and the wider Sahel region. As recognized by the
Council, this partnership offers a model for constructive
cooperation between a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and an African peace operation.
Despite the ongoing assistance MINUSMA
provides the Joint Force, we reiterate our call for
predictable and sustained funding to allow the Joint
Force to effectively carry out its mandate. The United
Nations must pay close attention to that requirement at
a time when terrorist groups have substantial financial
and material resources.
While we deplore the continuing violence in a region
that is so dear to us, we also commend local authorities
on their readiness to further promote frameworks for
dialogue within affected communities in order to create
the conditions for a peaceful resolution of their disputes
and to bolster mutual trust, unity and social cohesion.
The increase in the number of internally displaced
persons, the worrisome deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance are all major sources of concern that must be
addressed. We note with satisfaction the efforts made
by the G-5 Sahel to implement the human rights and

19-3757213/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

international humanitarian law compliance framework,
as international support for the Joint Force remains
dependent on respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights. That is why we believe that the
measures taken to adequately train troops will improve
civilian security and mitigate the risk of human
rights violations.
In conclusion, the African members of the Council
reiterate their urgent appeal to all development partners
to follow in the footsteps of the African Development
Bank and to support its Desert to Power initiative,
endorsed by the G-5 Sahel.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by welcoming
His Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso. I thank him and all the briefers
for their comprehensive and informative presentations.
We remain deeply concerned about the security
situation in the Sahel. According to the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/868), attacks by
terrorist groups and intercommunal violence continue
to increase. The humanitarian situation across the
Sahel also continues to deteriorate. That requires closer
collaboration in combating the threat and addressing
the underlying causes of instability. In that regard,
allow me to reiterate three points.
First, Indonesia supports the initiative of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries in
addressing the security and development challenges
confronting them. The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is one
such initiative. We welcome the progress made in the
operationalization of the Joint Force, including the
conduct of recent operations. The operationalization of its
police and civilian components and the implementation
of the human rights and international humanitarian
law compliance framework are commendable. That
will serve to improve accountability and coherence
with national justice systems, so that the Joint Force
may enjoy greater levels of trust and support from the
population. We note with concern that the Joint Force
continues to face training, capability and equipment
shortfalls. The multiple relocations of the headquarters
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force are also an impediment that
we hope to see resolved in due course, by identifying
and establishing a permanent location.
Secondly, we welcome the support of regional and
international partners of the Joint Force, including the
pledge made by the Heads of States of the Economic
Community of West African States to mobilize
14/21

20/11/2019

$1 billion for counter-terrorism efforts. We note that
some of the pledges are yet to be disbursed and realized.
We concur with the Secretary-General that it is urgent
that partners ensure the realization of their pledges. We
are pleased to note that arrangements are being made
with regard to the extension of the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to all contingents of the Joint Force. It
is important to ensure that such assistance is delivered
in a safe and timely manner. We hope that that support,
along with that of others, will enhance the capability of
the Joint Force.
Thirdly, as terrorist groups continue to increase
their area of influence, greater coordination is needed
among national and international forces operating in
the Sahel. We welcome the joint operations conducted
by the Joint Force, as well as the intelligence exchange
protocol to enhance operations. We also believe that
information-sharing should be enhanced, including with
regard to the activities undertaken by the Joint Force.
Before I conclude, let me reiterate that all security
initiatives should be complemented by broader efforts,
including in the areas of socioeconomic development
and capacity-building. Enhancing States’ capacity
and ability to deliver basic services, alleviate poverty,
create opportunities for young people and combat
climate change should be prioritized. We support the
joint efforts being made by regional and international
actors in the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Indonesia stands
ready to contribute and work together with a view to
achieving lasting peace and stability in the Sahel.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me extend
a particularly warm welcome to His Excellency the
Foreign Minister of Burkina Faso and thank him for
his briefing, and thank all of the other briefers for their
insightful presentations and information.
Germany attaches great importance to peace and
stability in the Sahel. Unfortunately, as we have been
repeatedly reminded today, the security situation
continues to deteriorate, and that worrisome trend is
also reflected in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2019/868), along with indications that the violence
may spread to the coastal States of West Africa and
the Gulf of Guinea. Unfortunately, the humanitarian
situation is worsening as well. That is why the
international community urgently needs to do more to
help stabilize the Sahel.
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Several briefers have referred to the initiative
known as the partnership for security and stability
in the Sahel — an initiative launched by France and
Germany during the previous Group of Seven Summit
in Biarritz and presented to the General Assembly here
in New York in September. The partnership seeks to
enhance the support already provided to the Sahel by
focusing on all relevant security actors. It seeks to
improve coordination among the many donors and to
support the reform efforts of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries in their security sectors.
Broad international participation, including that of
members of the Council, would be greatly appreciated.
Owing to the pressing challenges outlined once
again in today’s briefings, we see the need for more
rapid progress with regard to the operationalization
of the Joint Force and the political integration of the
G-5 Sahel as a regional organization. Germany is ready
to consider ways to assist and attain those goals and
to increase United Nations support for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force.
I would like to focus on four points that are a little
more specific in that regard.
First of all, Germany is a strong partner of the G-5
Sahel and has contributed about €28 million in support
of the Joint Force so far. The Joint Force now needs
to quickly increase its operational capabilities. One
such example is that the G-5 Sahel headquarters in
Bamako, which has been fully equipped and financed
by the European Union, needs to be used as soon as
possible. Making the G-5 Sahel Joint Force even more
operational obviously requires a joint effort. In that
regard, we would like to see stronger engagement from
all G-5 Sahel countries, and we call on all international
partners that have pledged their support to increase the
predictability of their funding for the Joint Force.
Secondly, Germany is certain that the Joint Force
has the potential to contribute to increasing security
in the Sahel. But we must realize and take note of
the fact that we are not quite there yet, and we need
to see considerably greater operational capabilities,
ownership and commitment from the G-5 Sahel
countries themselves in order to make the Force a
success. Unfortunately, the security situation in the
Sahel has markedly deteriorated in recent months,
as we have been reminded today by the briefers. The
Joint Force itself has repeatedly come under attack,
very prominently in October and again in November.

S/PV. 8670

That is why we are convinced that there is a continuing
need for an international security presence in the Sahel
region for the time being. That includes the presence
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, which should be equipped
with the resources necessary to be able to implement its
current mandate in central Mali.
Thirdly, several briefers referred to the human
rights component of fighting terrorism. Germany
strongly believes that safeguarding human rights and
building inclusive societies are in fact prerequisites
to successfully countering terrorism and extremism.
Therefore, there cannot be any compromises when it
comes to respect for human rights. We fully support
the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework of the Joint Force and thank the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for its dedicated work on that issue.
Fourthly and finally, Germany is equally
convinced that an isolated military approach to fighting
terrorism and insecurity will not be successful. Human
security needs to be increased through civilian police
capabilities that remain engaged in order to ensure a
locally accepted State presence after the acute threat of
terrorism has subsided. We therefore support securityrelated stabilization measures to strengthen domestic
security, such as police cooperation and training in the
context of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. That stabilization
approach also includes measures to build trust between
security forces and the population. In the long run, the
fight against extremism and terrorism and their root
causes requires an integrated approach consisting of
security measures, immediate stabilization efforts and
long-term development programmes in order to build
capabilities and resilience.
In conclusion, we need to strengthen the United
Nations country teams and make use of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and its
good offices. We would also like to encourage the
Peacebuilding Commission, given its track record of
working with the Sahel and West Africa, to provide
concrete input on questions of peacebuilding in
the region.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank all of today’s briefers
and extend a warm welcome to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso, His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry.

19-3757215/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

I wish to begin my statement by conveying our
deepest sympathy to the families of those who were
killed and to the authorities of Mali, Burkina Faso
and the Niger following the recent terrorist attacks
that claimed the lives of dozens of members of those
countries’ security forces, including the attack on
Monday, with reports suggesting the lamentable loss
of 24 soldiers of the Malian armed forces, as well as
the continuing loss of innocent civilian lives as a result
of the intercommunal violence and terrorism that are
plaguing the Sahel subregion. We fully condemn those
attacks and acts of irrational violence.
We remain extremely concerned about the
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situation
in the Sahel, fuelled by the spread of terrorism and
the increase in intercommunal violence, with the
mounting latent risk that the situation may spread to
other countries in the region, threatening the stability
of the whole of West Africa. It is therefore essential
to redouble our efforts and act firmly to contain and
respond to the threat, adopting a comprehensive
approach that takes the political dimension, security
and development into account. We recognize that this
task is not an easy one owing to the complexity of the
security situation prevailing in the Sahel, particularly
in Mali, where terrorist groups are taking advantage
of the vacuum created by States’ limited capacity to
ensure security, justice, governance and economic
opportunities for their mostly young population.
In the light of the situation, we stress the importance
of continuing to decisively support Sahel countries,
including the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), in their domestic struggle to achieve
the peace, security and political and economic stability
to which their citizens are entitled. In that connection,
recognizing that the solution cannot be exclusively
military, I wish to highlight some elements that we
believe are priorities at this critical juncture.
First, we urge the Government of Mali, signatory
armed groups, civil society in general, including
women, youth and religious leaders, to pursue efforts
towards common empowerment and to resolve their
differences through a national inclusion dialogue with
a view to effectively implementing the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali without further delay.
In that regard, we commend the work and role played
by civil society organizations, such as that represented
by Ms. Diallo.
16/21

20/11/2019

Secondly, the offensive against the violence
committed by armed groups and terrorists and the
transnational organized crime prevailing in the Sahel
must be strengthened, and the international community
must continue to support national security forces and
the Joint Force, whose operations are essential and
complementary to those of other actors present in
the region. In that respect, we call for continued and
improved cooperation among the various security
forces operating on the ground.
Finally, we call for continued progress on the
operationalization of the Joint Force, including
the conduct of a number of operations in the three
demarcated border areas, the implementation of the
human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework in order to improve the security
of the population in the course of military operations,
and the deployment of the police component, whose
coordination with the justice systems in the G-5 Sahel
countries will be essential to combatting impunity and
bringing to justice those responsible for crimes.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
delegation of China welcomes the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso, and thanks him for his
briefing. We thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita,
Ambassador Mohammed and Managing Director
Vervaeke for their briefings. We also listened attentively
to Ms. Diallo’s statement.
At present, the Sahel region is grappling with
multiple challenges, including a fragile security
environment, the spread of terrorism and rising
transnational organized crime, which need to be
addressed in a holistic manner. The international
community should continue to provide support to the
countries of the region, and especially to the efforts
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to
independently tackle regional security challenges.
We need to increase support for the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel, which is facing a deteriorating regional
security environment and gaps in operational capacity,
equipment, training and funding. As an important
mechanism for countries of the region to take the
initiative in responding to security challenges, the
Joint Force is making a critical contribution to peace
and security in Africa and beyond. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali should continue to provide support to the
Joint Force in keeping with relevant agreements. The
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

international community should continue to provide
support and assistance.
We need to push forward the political settlement
of regional hotspot issues. The security and stability of
the Sahel require an earnest effort to advance the peace
process in the countries concerned. The international
community should, on the basis of respect for their
sovereignty, actively support countries of the region
in advancing peace processes and promoting national
reconciliation so as to achieve the gradual de-escalation
and definitive settlement of relevant hotspot issues.
The Malian parties should be given continuous support
to carry out an inclusive dialogue and consultation
and accelerate the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Paying greater
attention to the settlement of external issues, such as
the crisis in Libya, can help reduce their impact on
the Sahel.
We need to give full play to the role of regional
mechanisms. China has consistently championed the
efforts of African countries to resolve African problems
in African ways and has supported African regional
and subregional organizations, such as the G-5 Sahel,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, in playing a lead role in dealing
with Sahel issues. The international community
should help the permanent secretariat of the G-5
Sahel to build capacity and strengthen communication
and coordination with countries of the region and
relevant regional and subregional organizations so that
national and regional strategies and the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel can work together as
an organic whole to create synergy, with each part fully
leveraging its respective advantages.
We need to address both the symptoms and the
root causes of the conflicts. The Sahel region is
plagued by poverty, unemployment, environmental
degradation and other problems. The international
community should help countries of the region meet
development challenges, assist the Secretary-General
in implementing the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and its Support Plan, and support the
Priority Investment Programme developed by Sahel
countries in line with the actual needs of the countries
of the region and their peoples. It should help the region
achieve sustainable development and deliver a peace
dividend in order to attain sustainable peace.

S/PV. 8670

China has always supported the efforts of African
countries, including those of the Sahel, in the pursuit
of peace and development. We support the actions
of the G-5 Sahel to assume ownership of security
responsibilities and meet regional security challenges.
China supports the United Nations in providing the
Joint Force with necessary financial support. Together
with the rest of the international community, China
stands ready to continue to contribute to the stability
and prosperity of the Sahel and the African continent
as a whole.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me first thank
our briefers for their informative presentations. We
especially appreciate the personal participation in the
meeting of His Excellency Minister Alpha Barry.
Our briefers today have confirmed the alarming
tone of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/868),
which points to a rapid increase in the number of
terrorist attacks and the number of victims, especially
in Mali and Burkina Faso. We strongly condemn those
attacks. Terrorist groups have strengthened their
position across the Sahel region, making many parts of
it unstable. As we are well aware, the lack of stability,
poverty, impunity and limited State presence are the
main causes of the growing scale of terrorism. It is
crucial to focus on those challenges in parallel with an
effective security strategy.
We believe that the new international initiatives
focused on the Sahel region that have been undertaken
in recent months, such as the partnership for security
and stability in the Sahel, announced by France and
Germany in August, and the Economic Community
of West African States Summit on Terrorism, held in
Burkina Faso in September, will further strengthen
international support to the region, with the United
Nations playing a leading role.
Poland appreciates the cooperation with partners
such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Thanks to the
involvement of those important actors, the justice
system has been strengthened, contributing to the
advancement of the implementation of the human
rights, international humanitarian law and refugee law
compliance framework.
The report of the Secretary-General has proven that
comprehensive cooperation and joining forces offer an
effective way to address the root causes of conflict,

19-3757217/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

violent extremism and terrorism. We are glad to see a
positive example of such collaboration in Mauritania,
which hosts the permanent secretariat of the G-5 Sahel
and the G-5 Sahel Defence College. The efforts made to
increase the capacity of Mauritanian soldiers operating
under joint forces are admirable. We also welcome the
information on progress in training specialized police
units to fight terrorism and international organized
crime, including 22 newly deployed officers in Burkina
Faso and 15 in the Niger.
We are deeply concerned by the information coming
from the Mopti region about members of the Malian
armed forces, operating under the Joint Force, who
may have committed serious human rights violations.
It is very important that a timely investigation into
the allegations against Joint Force units be conducted,
as that will strengthen transparency regarding the
human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework.
Let me conclude by confirming our strong support
for the mandate of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We hope that
all necessary steps will be taken to further operationalize
its police component, which will be a critical part of the
Force. Let me also express our deep gratitude to the
personnel of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force for their brave
service under very challenging circumstances.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Allow me at the outset to thank the various
briefers. I would especially like to welcome the presence
of Minister Barry, whose country holds the presidency
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
In a context of extreme fragility, the initiative of the
G-5 countries to join forces for peace and development
in the Sahel deserves our support. Belgium shares
and supports the objective of strengthening crossborder security cooperation through the creation of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, and more broadly that of
strengthening the security sector of the five member
States. For several years, my country has been involved
in such efforts. For instance, Belgium supports the
Nigerian army and provides technical advisers to the
European Union (EU) Training Mission in Mali and
the EU capacity-building mission Sahel Mali. In that
same spirit, Belgium supports the objectives of the
partnership for security and stability in the Sahel.
Belgium
welcomes
two
recent
positive
developments: the relaunch of operations of the Joint
Force and the support for the Joint Force from the United
18/21

20/11/2019

Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We strongly encourage
the G-5 Sahel to maintain its operations over the long
term and gradually to increase its ambition as the
national defence and security forces grow stronger.
With regard to MINUSMA’s logistical support, I recall
that Belgium committed €1 million in 2018 to meet
that objective.
Certainly, some equipment promised to the Force
has not yet been delivered, which has had an impact on
operational planning. However, there is no shortage of
work in progress, and some progress is possible without
additional resources. The functioning of the permanent
secretariat, the development of the police component,
the establishment of the headquarters, the drafting of an
updated concept of operations and the establishment of
an international coordination mechanism are examples
of areas where the G-5 Sahel can broadly pursue its
operationalization from this point forward. Moreover, I
call on all G-5 States to cooperate fully with the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in the full
and speedy implementation of the human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework.
Let me conclude on a very important point.
Belgium deplores the worrisome developments in
the security and humanitarian situation in part of the
Sahel. Unfortunately, there have been countless attacks
on uniformed personnel, as well as civilian massacres.
However, as in any crisis, the solution is above all
political, and there are many measures that can be taken.
We must of course provide a firm security response by
dismantling terrorist networks, draining their sources
of funding and thwarting their deadly narrative. But
it is also necessary to meet people’s aspirations in
terms of development, the delivery of basic services,
anti-corruption and justice, to ensure respect for human
rights, combat all forms of the stigmatization of certain
ethnic groups or communities and also fight impunity.
It is therefore truly a global effort of governance and
prevention that must be carried out in those territories
so that the people can lead a normal, peaceful and
dignified life.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin, Mr. President, by welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Barry’s among us. We thank him for
his briefing and the other briefers for their statements.
We were pleased to hear a variety of speakers shedding
light on the overall situation in the Sahel, specifically
the challenges facing that region, including the
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

humanitarian situation, in which 12 million people are
in need of humanitarian and security relief owing to the
activities of terrorists, which target not only civilians
but military personnel in Mali and Burkina Faso.
I would like to address three points today: the
efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), regional cooperation and the steps
to be taken.
In our view, there is no doubt that the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force plays a critical role in countering security
challenges in the Sahel region. We commend the
efforts of all members of the Force to operationalize
it. The Force has undertaken five operations since
May, notwithstanding the administrative and financial
challenges that it has encountered. We stand ready to
consider the methods and tools at the disposal of the
Security Council to buttress the efforts of the Force and
ensure its administrative and financial stability over
the long term.
We also welcome the measures adopted by the
new Force Commander, General Oumarou Namata,
specifically through the plan of action for the upcoming
period. We are also eagerly awaiting the 2020 action
plan, and wish him and the Force success in its current
operations, all the more so given that the security
situation continues to unravel throughout the region, in
Mali, Chad and Burkina Faso, and to extend into the
coastal States.
In that regard, I cannot fail to commend the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in
delivering the necessary support for the Joint Force.
We further welcome the efforts of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to enhance
compliance with principles of human rights in the
region. We also stress the importance of honouring the
pledges to the Joint Force to ensure that it can fully
shoulder its responsibility with the necessary resources,
without being stymied by financial shortfalls.
I would like to address the need to step up
international and regional cooperation to counter shared
challenges facing the States of the Sahel region, of which
there are multitude. Information-sharing mechanisms
and best practices must be enhanced, especially given
that terrorist groups have cross-border networks
through which they accrue revenue by trafficking in
illicit goods in order to bankroll their activities.

S/PV. 8670

Regional initiatives are important and positive,
such as the Economic Community of West African
States Extraordinary Summit on Terrorism, held
in September. That is an important step forward to
coordinate regional efforts. We believe that such
cooperation will enhance the efforts of the Joint
Force and other regional initiatives, such as the Accra
initiative and the Joint Force initiative.
We encourage the Joint Force to strengthen
information-sharing mechanisms with United Nations
bodies, specifically MINUSMA, which has provided
support to the Force. We believe that ongoing cooperation
between the Joint Force and MINUSMA will facilitate
such support, especially given that MINUSMA is
conducting a risk assessment and ensuring compliance
with human rights principles prior to providing the
requested assistance. To that end, a mechanism could
be adopted to improve coordination between the United
Nations and the Joint Force.
To conclude, many issues need to be dealt with in
order to achieve stability in the region, including in the
military and development areas. Progress must also be
made in the political process in Mali, and the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation must be implemented. We
believe that such implementation is necessary for the
region as a whole. We must closely monitor the situation
during the upcoming period and look into all means at
the disposal of the Council to ensure regional stability.
In terms of addressing the root causes of instability,
there is a need to achieve development throughout the
region, focus on strengthening governance, counter
poverty, open up economic opportunities for the people
and put an end to threats related to climate change.
We need to see progress on that track as well as at the
military level over the coming period.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I thank the
briefers for their remarks today. The situation in the
Sahel demands that the international community focus
its efforts in an intelligent, deliberate and collaborative
way. Today’s briefing is a step in that direction.
We are concerned that the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is struggling to become
fully operational, and we call on all donors to deliver on
their bilateral pledges to the Joint Force.
The United States is doing its part to strengthen
the Sahel. In fiscal year 2018, the State Department
provided $111 million in direct security assistance to

19-3757219/21

S/PV.8670

Peace and security in Africa

the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and another $200 million to
the national forces of the G-5 members. The United
States Agency for International Development provided
a total of $249 million in bilateral and regional
development funding as well as nearly $235 million in
humanitarian assistance.
But local and regional Governments of the Sahel must
also do their part to support efforts by the international
community. The Governments of the G-5 member
States should be leading this process. Regrettably, that
has not been the case in Mali, which is the epicentre
of instability in the region. We are disappointed at the
nearly total lack of progress by the Government of Mali
and the signatory armed groups in implementing the
substantive provisions of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process. More must be done. We call for the signatories
and the Governments in the region to breathe new life
into the Algiers Agreement and to put the needs of the
people first.
Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law are also critical components in
building the foundations for a stable Sahel. To this
end, the Joint Force must continue to strictly adhere
to the compliance framework to prevent, investigate,
address and report allegations of violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Government
forces, too, must abide by international humanitarian
law. We call on the Governments of Mali and Burkina
Faso to fully investigate reports that their security
forces committed human rights violations, including
allegations of extrajudicial killings, and to hold those
responsible accountable. United States Government
assistance efforts may be significantly restricted by
legislation if these critical human rights concerns are
not addressed.
Turning to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), we thank President Kaboré
for having convened the members of ECOWAS last
September to discuss terrorism. The summit united
the region and international partners, and ECOWAS’s
$1 billion pledge to fight terrorism and address violent
extremism is an important step towards applying
regional solutions to the Sahel’s security challenges.
We also welcome the joint French and German
initiative — the partnership for security and stability
in the Sahel — and the ongoing efforts by the European
20/21

20/11/2019

Union to fill the gaps in its bilateral assistance. We look
forward to partnering together as the initiative develops.
Finally, we continue to hear calls to provide
additional United Nations direct assistance to the Joint
Force. We need to move past these requests and focus
on calling on the Joint Force to fully leverage already
existing mechanisms and to ask partners to honour the
pledges that they have made to the Joint Force, as well
as to support to the individual G-5-member militaries
that supply forces to the Joint Force.
The G-5 Sahel States must make progress
towards effective governance, respect for human
rights, accountability and inclusiveness, including the
meaningful participation of women, young people and
marginalized groups. Our collective efforts to stabilize
the region depend on this progress, and our combined
endeavours can achieve durable peace and stability and
unleash the potential of this vital region and its people.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
We share the concerns set out today by our
briefers — I am grateful to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso for his briefing — and set out
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/868) about
the continued deterioration of the security situation
across the Sahel and the fact that violence appears to be
spreading southwards to coastal West African States.
We commend and support the continued efforts of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) and the broader
region to combat instability. In particular, we welcome
the G-5 Joint Force’s recent operations in the Gourma
region and the important commitment made by the G-5
and wider West African States at September’s summit
of the Economic Community of West African States to
fight this growing insecurity.
The United Kingdom is scaling up its own efforts
in the region to address instability, including through
our deployment to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (MINUSMA) next year, but it is vital that
countries in the region play the leading role. In this
regard, I underline three points.
First, there is a need for continued close cooperation
with other actors in the region. It is only through strong
partnership with MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane
that the Force will be able to deliver effect.
19-37572

20/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, the G-5 should respond to current
dynamics by focusing efforts on the tri-border region
of Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso.
Thirdly, I stress the importance of full compliance
with human rights and international humanitarian law.
The United Kingdom reiterates the SecretaryGeneral’s calls on the Burkina Faso authorities to
investigate allegations of violations committed by
Joint Force personnel and urges the Malian authorities
to conclude their investigations into allegations
within their contingent. The steps already taken to
operationalize the human rights compliance framework
are welcome, and full implementation and adherence
to the framework is vital to ensure the integrity and
longevity of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

S/PV. 8670

The United Kingdom calls on all stakeholders to
meet the commitments made to the G-5 Sahel. The
United Kingdom notes that it contributed more than
$20 million through European Union and bilateral
funds to the G-5 Sahel Force in this financial year,
and that is against the backdrop of a United Kingdom
contribution of $116 million in bilateral development
funding, in addition to what is provided through
multilateral organizations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

19-3757221/21
