Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

delegation's credentials, feels that it is not in a position to
make any proposal on the matter [para. 327].
B. ROLE OF TIIE SECRETARY-GENERAL
117. The Special Committee is of the opinion that the
Secretary-General should play an active role in making suggestions with regard to the organization of sessions, it being
understood that the final decision on the recommendations he
makes lies with the General Assembly [para. 331].

C.

SECRETARIAT

118. The Special Committee considers that the question of
the reorganization of the Secretariat, however valid it might
be, does not come within its terms of reference. It is of the
opinion, therefore, that it should not make any recommendation on the matter [para. 333].

D.

GUIDANCE REGARDING GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROCEDURE AND
ASSISTANCE TO PRESIDING OFFICERS

1. Preparation of a manual on procedure
119. The Special Committee recommends that the General
Assembly should consider requesting the Secretary-General to
prepare a systematic and comprehensive compilation of the
conclusions which the Assembly may adopt on the basis of
the reports of the Special Committee and of the Joint Inspection Unit, this compilation to form an annex to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly [para. 339].
2. Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs

15

with the delegations directly concerned and expediting the
progress of the General Assembly [paras. 347 and 348].
E.

STUDIES OF TifE RULES OF PROCEDURE

126. The Special Committee did not consider that it
should retain the suggestions concerning the insertion in the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly of provisions
similar to those in the rules of procedure of the Economic
and Social Council [para. 352].
127. The Special Committee took note of the proposal
concerning a comparative study of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly and those of the governing bodies of
the specialized agencies and suggests that the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research should consider undertaking such a project [para. 353].
128. Lastly, the Special Committee recommends to the
General Assembly that the Secretariat should be instructed
to undertake a comparative study of the versions of the
General Assembly's rules of procedure in the various official
languages in order to ensure their concordance [para. 354].
F.

SPECIAL TRAINING PROGRAMME

129. The Special Committee, aware of the training problems
facing delegations, particularly as regards newly arrived representatives, suggests that the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research should consider ways of helping to solve these
problems [para. 356].
G.

REGIONAL GROUPS

120. The Special Committee, recognizing the usefulness of
the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs, expresses
the hope that it will be brought up to date as quickly as
possible [para. 341].

130. The Special Committee endorses the suggestion that
the names of chairmen of the regional groups for the month
should be published in the Journal of the United Nation.,
and recommends that it should be left to the Secretariat to
decide how often it should be applied [paras. 357 and 358].

3. Preparation of a repertory of practice on the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly
121. The Special Committee did not consider that it should
endorse the proposal to issue a repertory of practice on the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly [para. 344].

2862 (XXVI). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly

4. Reminders of previous recommendations
122. It was suggested that at the beginning of the session
the President of the General Assembly should remind the
Assembly of, and particularly invite the attention of the
Chairmen of Main Committees to, the recommendations for
improving the methods of work which were specifically
approved in General Assembly resolution 1898 (XVIII). While
there was general agreement on the principle underlying that
suggestion, the Special Committee did not feel that it need
make any specific recommendation in that regard [paras. 345
and 346].
123. The Special Committee did not retain the suggestion
that the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Improvement
of the Methods of Work of the General Assembly•3 should
be reissued on account of the financial implications that such
a measure would entail [paras. 345 and 346].

5. Assistance in procedural matters
124. The Special Committee noted that it was not possible
to assign a member of the Office of Legal Affairs continuously
to each of the Main Committees but that legal advice was
always furnished, either orally or in writing, when requested
[para. 348].
125. The Special Committee did not consider that it
should make any recommendation on the proposal that the
President of the General Assembly and the Chairmen of
Main Committees should enlist several assistants under them,
both from the Secretariat and, wherever possible, from the
delegations themselves, to whom they would allocate items
on the agenda for the purpose of closely following them up
43 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, document A/5423.

The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee,"
except with regard to the credentials of the representatives of South Africa.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2863 (XXVI). Co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the request by thirty-six African
Stat_es45 for the holding early in the year 1972, in an
African country member of the Organization of African
Unity, of meetings of the Security Council devoted
solely to the measures to be taken with a view to
implen_ienting the various resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly on decolonization,
the struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination
in Africa,
Taking note of the statement made by the Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity before the
General Assembly on 24 September 1971, 46
Recalling its resolutions 2011 (XX) of I 1 October
1965, 2193 (XXI) of 15 December 1966 and 2505
44 Ibid., Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/8625.
45 lbid., agenda item 100, documents A/8494 and Add.1.
4 6 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1938th
meetmg, paras. 2-57.
