S/2018/1068

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 28 November 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to the request of the Security Council in its resolution 2409 (2018), I
have the honour to submit the 30-day update, covering the period from 27 October to
26 November 2018, on political and technical progress towards the holding of
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 23 December 2018 and on
obstacles to the implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-20654 (E)

041218

*1820654*

S/2018/1068

Annex
Update of the Secretary-General on progress in the electoral
process and the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
26 November 2018
1.
The present update, which covers developments from 27 October to
26 November 2018, is submitted pursuant to resolution 2409 (2018), in which the
Security Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a written update every
30 days on political and technical progress towards the holding of elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 23 December 2018 and on obstacles t o the
implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016.

I. Key political developments related to the electoral process
and the implementation of the political agreement
2.
Political developments were characterized by continued progress in electoral
preparations.
3.
The Front commun pour le Congo platform held a major rally in Kinshasa on
27 October to present its presidential candidate, Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary. On
3 November, the Front commun pour le Congo presented its campaign team,
comprising several political, cultural, sports and religious figures, including the
current Prime Minister, Bruno Tshibala, the Vice Prime Minister in charge of the
Interior and Security, Henri Mova Sakanyi, and the Minister of Communication and
Media and Spokesperson of the Government, Lambert Mende. On 14 November, nine
presidential candidates and leaders of the opposition, including Adolphe Muzito,
Jean-Pierre Bemba, Marie-Josée Ifoku, Martin Fayulu and Moïse Katumbi, signed a
joint declaration petitioning the Independent National Electoral Commission to
invalidate the presidential candidacy of Mr. Ramazani Shadary as the candidate of the
Front commun pour le Congo platform for the alleged misuse of State resources in
support of the platform. Senior members of the ruling majority rejected the
allegations, noting that the resources of the Front commun pour le Congo were drawn
from political parties and individuals supporting the platform.
4.
The opposition pursued its efforts to agree on a common position on the use of
voting machines and on the voter register, and to rally behind a single presidential
candidate. In a joint statement of 2 November, 13 prominent members of the
opposition, including Freddy Matungulu, Marie-Josée Ifoku, Martin Fayulu,
Théodore Ngoy, Vital Kamerhe and other presidential candidates, reiterated their calls
upon the Independent National Electoral Commission to reconsider the decision on
the use of voting machines and to review the voter register. However, divergences
emerged between opposition parties regarding the use of voting machines, with the
Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social stating its intention to take part in the
elections “with or without the voting machines” to avoid further delays in holding the
elections. The Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social also did not participate
in demonstrations against the use of voting machines and regarding the voter register
that were organized across the country on 26 October. In response, Olivier Kamitatu,
the Chief of Staff under Moïse Katumbi of the Ensemble pour le changement
platform, and other key opposition figures urged opposition parties to refrain from
actions that could “break the unity of the political opposition”.
5.
Against this background, on 11 November, in Geneva, opposition leaders
Adolphe Muzito, Félix Tshisekedi, Freddy Matungulu, Jean-Pierre Bemba, Martin
2/7

18-20654

S/2018/1068

Fayulu, Moïse Katumbi and Vital Kamerhe signed an agreement forming a new
coalition named “Lamuka”. The coalition issued a declaration designating Martin
Fayulu as its common presidential candidate and affirming its intention to participate
in the 23 December elections, while rejecting the use of voting machines, demanding
a purge of the voter register and the implementation of confidence -building measures
for transparent, inclusive, credible and peaceful elections. On 12 November, however,
Mr. Tshisekedi and Mr. Kamerhe, citing the discontent expressed by their respective
political parties at the choice of Mr. Fayulu as the common candidate, pulled out of
the agreement. Mr. Fayulu returned to Kinshasa on 21 November and was welcomed
by hundreds of the coalition’s supporters. Meanwhile, civil society and faith-based
organizations continued to play an active role in the electoral process and used their
positions to promote consensus. Following a joint statement on 30 October by civil
society organizations, on 6 November the Comité laïc de coordination called for a
consensus to overcome the persistent divergences over the electoral process. The
message was echoed by the new Archbishop of Kinshasa, Fridolin Ambongo, who
opined that the use of the voting machines “should not block the electoral process”
and called for tripartite consultations between the opposition, the presidential
majority and the Independent National Electoral Commission to find a compromise.
There was no meeting between the 21 presidential candidates and the Commission
during the reporting period. Meanwhile, on 22 November, the 41 -member Catholic
Bishops Conference concluded its three-day extraordinary plenary assembly in
Kinshasa by issuing a message, signed by the 41 archbishops and bishops, in which
it noted the determination of the Commission to organize the combined presidential,
national legislative and provincial elections on 23 Decemb er 2018 and urged the
Congolese people to use the occasion to exercise their sovereign right as masters of
their destiny to choose leadership capable of addressing their well -being.
6.
On 22 November, the official one-month electoral campaign period started in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The campaign will end on 21 December 2018.
The President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila, launched the
campaign of Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary, presidential candidate of the Front
commun pour le Congo, at President Kabila’s private farm in Kingakati, near
Kinshasa. The event was attended by key members of the Front commun pour le
Congo platform. Similarly, the platform’s electoral campaign activities reportedly
started in Bukavu (South Kivu), Kalemie (Tanganyika), Lubumbashi (Haut-Katanga),
Kolwezi (Lualaba), Goma (North Kivu) and Kisangani (Tshopo). At the same time, a
low-key launch of the opposition’s campaign was noted across the country. On
23 November, in Nairobi, the leaders of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès
social and the Union pour la nation congolaise, Felix Tshisekedi and Vital Kamerhe,
announced that they had agreed on a coalition to take part in the coming elections,
with Mr. Tshisekedi as the presidential flag-bearer. They further announced that they
would be returning to Kinshasa on 27 November.

II. Key electoral developments related to the implementation of
the political agreement
A.

Electoral developments
7.
Preparations for the 23 December 2018 elections continued to achieve major
milestones. On 31 October, President Kabila chaired a meeting attended by senior
Government officials, the President of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, Corneille Nangaa, and my Special Representative, Leila Zerrougui, to
review progress in the electoral process. At the meeting, the Government announced
that $322.2 million of the $432 million budgeted for elections, had been disbursed to

18-20654

3/7

S/2018/1068

the Commission. On the same day, the Minister of Communication and Media and
Spokesperson of the Government, Lambert Mende, inaugurated a new radio station
operated by the Commission to raise awareness of the electoral process.
8.
On 29 October, at ceremonies held in Kinshasa, the Vice Prime Minister and
Minister of the Interior and Security, Henri Mova Sakanyi, announced the handover
of 150 trucks, 171 pickups, 20 aircraft and 1,800 motorcycles to the President of the
Independent National Electoral Commission for the distribution of electoral materials
throughout the country. According to the Commission, as at 12 November, most of
the electoral materials and 38 per cent of the 105,257 expected voting machines were
in the country, with the remainder of the voting machines having arrived at the ports
of Mombasa, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania.
9.
During the reporting period, the Independent National Electoral Commission
continued to train up to 500,000 electoral staff for the conduct of the polls at the
75,563 polling stations. The Commission also intensified civic and voter education
and held outreach events on the use of the voting machines. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) supported the work of the Commission to ensure that most
recommendations made by the Westminster Foundation for Democracy regarding the
use of voting machines were implemented and helped to identify alternative measures
when needed. The Commission stated that 15 out of 18 recomme ndations had been
implemented and that the outstanding recommendations were being addressed. On
21 November, the President of the Commission disclosed that, as at that date, the
Commission had deployed 70 per cent of electoral kits and materials to their f inal
destinations and that the remaining 30 per cent would reach their destinations by
7 December 2018 at the latest.
10. Regarding the security arrangements for presidential candidates, the Congolese
National Police announced on 2 November that 25 agents would be allocated to each
of the 21 presidential candidates for their protection, as stipulated by the electoral
law.
11. In the meantime, the United Nations police continued to provide training and
refresher training sessions for agents of the Congolese National Police throughout the
country. As at 9 November, 2,163 police officers, including 281 women, had attended
those sessions. The United Nations police also conducted sensitization activities on
the role of security forces during elections, targeting 675 police officers, including 51
women. At the same time, the MONUSCO force carried out tabletop exercises in
collaboration with the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
12. National civil society organizations announced plans to deploy tens of
thousands of long- and short-term observers to enhance the transparency and
credibility of the process. The Southern African Development Community (SADC)
also indicated that it would send an electoral observation mission, which is expected
to arrive in early December. Meanwhile, on 8 November, the Independent National
Electoral Commission began the accreditation process for witnesses of political
parties, electoral observers and journalists.
13. On 3 November, an SADC Electoral Advisory Council mission travelled to
Kinshasa, where it met with representatives of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral
Process and the Government, including with President Kabila and the Vice Pri me
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Léonard She Okitundu, who gave
assurances that the polls would be held in conformity with international standards and
SADC principles. The African Union also received an official invitation from the
Commission to dispatch electoral observers.

4/7

18-20654

S/2018/1068

14. In view of the Ebola outbreak and related concerns, the Ministry of Health and
the Independent National Electoral Commission are implementing measures to ensure
that elections can take place in the affected areas.

B.

Restrictions on political space and violence related to the
implementation of the political agreement in the electoral context
15. On 26 October, nationwide demonstrations were organized by opposition parties
to protest the use of voting machines and voter registration. The demonstrations
passed peacefully, but at least 51 people, including at least 5 women, were arrested
and subsequently released. Demonstrations were held in nine cities, including
Kinshasa and Goma, but they were banned by the authorities in seven others, mainly
for security reasons or as a result of the general ban on demonstrations.
16. New instances of restrictions of democratic space were documented, including
with regard to the freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly, while aut horizations
for legitimate political activities continued to be granted selectively. Among other
locations, restrictions of democratic space were noted in Haut -Katanga province,
where members of the Union nationale des fédéralistes du Congo opposition part y
were arbitrarily arrested by agents of the Congolese National Police on 2 November
while returning from a political meeting. On 13 November, in Kinshasa, 10 activists
of the Mouvement Lumumbiste Progressiste political party were beaten and
arbitrarily arrested by elements of the Republican Guard. On 18 November, 17
members of the Vigilance citoyenne citizens’ movement were released on bail
following their arrest on 1 November by agents of the Congolese National Police
during a sensitization campaign on the monitoring of the electoral process. They were
later transferred to the central prison of Makala, in Kinshasa, and charged with
incitement to civil disobedience.

C.

Confidence-building measures
17. There was no meaningful progress in the implementation of the confidencebuilding measures envisaged in the political agreement of 31 December 2016. In a
communiqué dated 30 October, the Association congolaise pour l ’accès à la justice
and other stakeholders deplored the non-implementation of the political agreement
and called for the release of political prisoners, including emblematic cases. In a
related development, on 7 November, the new Archbishop of Kinshasa, Fridolin
Ambongo, observed that no progress had been made in the emblematic cases,
including those of Eugène Diomi Ndongala and Jean-Claude Muyambo. The
Government, however, continued to claim that no political prisoners remained in
custody and asserted that some political actors were serving sentences for crimes for
which they had been convicted. According to the United Nations Joint Human Rights
Office, at least 130 political prisoners remained in detention, including civil society
activists and human rights defenders. On 3 November, the Minister of
Communication and Media and Spokesperson of the Government stated that none of
the prisoners in the emblematic cases would be released, as they are not referred to in
the political agreement of 31 December 2016. On 21 November, the National Council
for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process issued a statement in which
it, inter alia, urged the Government to pursue efforts to fully implement the
confidence-building measures provided for in the political agreement, including what
it referred to as political prisoners, prisoners of opinion and amnestied prisoners, as
well as members of citizens’ movements. The statement also called on the Conseil
Supérieur de l’Audiovisuel et de la Communication to ensure equal access to public
media by presidential candidates. Despite assurances made by the In dependent

18-20654

5/7

S/2018/1068

National Electoral Commission in early October to engage relevant authorities in
ensuring equal coverage of all candidates on public television, such steps have yet to
take place.

III. Good offices efforts for the implementation of the
political agreement
18. In pursuit of her good offices mandate, my Special Representative met President
Kabila and travelled to Zambia in early November to meet President Lungu in his
capacity as current Chair of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and S ecurity.
Discussions revolved around the security situation in the current electoral context and
other issues of common interest. In the same vein, she pursued consultations with key
presidential candidates, met the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Smaïl Chergui, who visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 8 to
10 November, and discussed the forthcoming deployment of electoral observers with
the SADC Electoral Advisory Council. Representatives of MONUSCO also met the
Ministers of Justice and Human Rights to advocate the implementation of confidence building measures.

IV. Observations
19. I welcome the continuing progress in the implementation of the electoral
calendar and the constructive engagement of all national stakehold ers in the process.
I note that, in the majority of cases, the opposition political parties have been able to
hold activities in major cities in a peaceful manner. I welcome this opening of political
space as well as the professional conduct of the security services and urge the
continuation of such progress.
20. In a similar vein, I welcome the preparations made by national and international
partners to observe the electoral process. I am encouraged by the commitment of
national actors to deploy observers throughout the country, and I am pleased to note
the related engagement of SADC and the African Union. I call on the authorities to
facilitate the prompt deployment of all observation missions with a view to enhancing
the transparency of the process.
21. However, authorizations for legitimate political activities continue to be granted
on a selective basis, and instances of intimidation of political activists, journalists and
human rights defenders persist. I thus reiterate my call on the national authori ties to
uphold the rights of the population of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
exercise their freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly in line with the
Constitution and existing legislation. Similarly, I urge the authorities to enable access
to public media for all political actors, with a view to creating a conducive
environment for credible and peaceful elections.
22. I also remain concerned by the level of distrust expressed by civil society and
opposition actors with regard to key elements of the electoral process, notably in
relation to the voting machines and the voter register, and regret that the technical
consultations between the Independent National Electoral Commission and
presidential candidates have not advanced. I firmly believe t hat common ground can
be found through dialogue and urge all national stakeholders to put partisan interests
aside and work towards promoting consensus. Specifically, I call upon the
Commission to take further action with a view to dispelling doubts about the integrity
of the polling and results tabulation processes.

6/7

18-20654

S/2018/1068

23. As the electoral process reaches its critical final phase and the electoral
campaigns have commenced, trust in the fairness and credibility of the process is a
key prerequisite for the acceptance of the results by political actors, civil society and
the public. A contested election outcome could undermine the trajectory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in consolidating peace and democratic governance
and carry significant regional ramifications. There is still scope for meaningful action
to build confidence in line with the provisions of the political agreement of
31 December 2016, which would contribute significantly to the credibility of
elections and thereby reduce the potential for post-electoral violence. Positive steps
in this direction would require sufficient political space for the unfolding of election
campaigns, equal access to media for all candidates and a consistent application of
measures to permit the peaceful political demonstrations that have taken place in
many key cities to continue throughout the country.
24. I call upon national stakeholders to seize this opportunity to bring the process
to a fruitful conclusion in line with the genuine aspirations of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to choose their leaders in credible, transparent and
peaceful elections, culminating in a peaceful and democratic transfer of power. I
encourage regional and international actors to continue to support the political and
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to remain engaged in
the post-electoral period. I reiterate the readiness of the United Nations to provide
technical and logistical support to the organization of the polls and to accompany the
people of the country at this historic juncture.

18-20654

7/7
